# 20140129_tealbook.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:43:03*
*Pages: 54, Tables: 4*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that
material was received on a confidential basis. Redacted material is indicated by
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content. All redacted
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of
Information Act.
Content last modified 01/10/2020.

--- Page 2 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR)
Report to the FOMC
on Economic Conditions
and Monetary Policy
Book B
Monetary Policy:
Strategies and Alternatives
January 23, 2014
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
by the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

--- Page 3 ---

Monetary Policy Strategies
The top panel of the first exhibit, “Policy Rules and the Staff Projection,”
provides near-term prescriptions for the federal funds rate from six policy rules: the
Taylor (1993) rule, the Taylor (1999) rule, the inertial Taylor (1999) rule, the outcome-
based rule, the first-difference rule, and the nominal income targeting rule. These
prescriptions take as given the staff’s baseline projections for real activity and inflation in
the near term. (Medium-term prescriptions derived from dynamic simulations of the
rules are discussed below.) As shown in the left-hand columns, four of the six rules
prescribe rates above the effective lower bound in the second quarter of this year,
compared with two at the time of the previous Tealbook. Of these, both the Taylor
(1999) and the outcome-based rules now prescribe, for the first time in recent history, a
federal funds rate just above ¼ percent, reflecting the staff’s estimate of stronger
economic growth in the second half of 2013 and a narrower projected path for the output
gap in the near term. As in December, the prescriptions for the federal funds rate of the
Taylor (1993) and the first-difference rules are also above the effective lower bound. The
Taylor (1993) rule calls for a federal funds rate of about 1¼ percent for the first quarter of
2014 and a touch below 1¾ percent for the second quarter. The first-difference rule
prescribes increasing the federal funds rate to about 1 percent over the same time frame.
The right-hand columns display the near-term prescriptions in the absence of the
lower-bound constraint on the federal funds rate.1 For the first two quarters of 2014, the
inertial Taylor (1999) rule prescribes federal funds rates near zero. In contrast, the
outcome-based rule, which also responds to past realizations of the federal funds rate and
the level of the output gap but puts considerable weight on the change in the output gap,
departs the lower bound in the second quarter of 2014. The non-inertial version of the
Taylor (1999) rule, which does not include an interest-rate smoothing term and thus
responds more strongly to the staff’s estimates of current inflation and the current output
gap, prescribes a moderately negative value for the federal funds rate in the first quarter
of 2014. However, the rule then specifies moving the federal funds rate to around
1 Four of these rules—the inertial Taylor (1999) rule, the outcome-based rule, the nominal income
targeting rule, and the first-difference rule—place substantial weight on the lagged federal funds rate.
Because the rule prescriptions are conditioned on the actual level of the nominal federal funds rate
observed last quarter, the unconstrained prescriptions shown in the table are indirectly affected by the
presence of the effective lower bound. The appendix provides further details on the rules employed.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 1 of 52

--- Page 4 ---

2 4.0
1 3.5
3.0
0
2.5
-1
2.0
-2
1.5
-3
1.0
-4
0.5
-5 0.0
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Policy Rules and the Staff Projection
Near-Term Prescriptions of Selected Policy Rules
Constrained Policy Unconstrained Policy
2014Q1 2014Q2 2014Q1 2014Q2
Taylor (1993) rule 1.21 1.70 1.21 1.70
Previous Tealbook 1.07 1.49 1.07 1.49
Taylor (1999) rule 0.13 0.39 −0.24 0.39
Previous Tealbook 0.13 0.13 −0.57 -0.06
Inertial Taylor (1999) rule 0.13 0.13 0.07 0.12
Previous Tealbook outlook 0.13 0.13 0.02 0.01
Outcome-based rule 0.13 0.31 0.12 0.31
Previous Tealbook outlook 0.13 0.14 0.08 0.14
First-difference rule 0.44 0.93 0.44 0.93
Previous Tealbook outlook 0.29 0.59 0.29 0.59
Nominal income targeting rule 0.13 0.13 −0.66 −1.14
Previous Tealbook outlook 0.13 0.13 −0.77 −1.37
Memo: Equilibrium and Actual Real Federal Funds Rates
Current Current Quarter Estimate Previous
Tealbook as of Previous Tealbook Tealbook
Tealbook-consistent FRB/US r* estimate −0.67 −1.07 −1.27
Actual real federal funds rate −0.99 −1.06
Key Elements of the Staff Projection
GDP Gap PCE Prices ex. Food and Energy
Percent Four-quarter percent change
2 4.0
Current Tealbook
Previous Tealbook
1 3.5
3.0
0
2.5
-1
2.0
-2
1.5
-3
1.0
-4
0.5
-5 0.0
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Estimates of r* may change at the beginning of a quarter even when the staff outlook is unchanged because the twelve-quarter horizon covered by
the calculation has rolled forward one quarter. Therefore, whenever the Tealbook is published early in the quarter, the memo includes a third column
labeled "Current Quarter Estimate as of Previous Tealbook."
Note: For rules that have the lagged policy rate as a right-hand-side variable, the lines denoted "Previous Tealbook Outlook" report rule prescriptions
based on the previous Tealbook’s staff outlook, but jumping off from the realized value for the policy rate last quarter.
Page 2 of 52

--- Page 5 ---

40 basis points in the second quarter of 2014 due to the staff’s projections of a narrowing
in the output gap and rising inflation in the near term. The nominal income targeting rule
calls for negative policy rates; this more-accommodative prescription compared with the
other rules emerges because this rule responds to the current estimate of the output gap
and to the cumulative shortfall of inflation from the Committee’s 2 percent objective
since the end of 2007.
The unconstrained near-term prescriptions for all of the rules shown are less
accommodative than in the December Tealbook because of the revisions to the staff’s
near-term estimates of the output gap. As shown in the lower left panel, despite an
increase in the staff’s estimate of the current level of potential output, the output gap
projections for the next few quarters are narrower than before, reflecting an upward
revision to the staff’s estimate of output growth in the second half of 2013. As shown in
the lower right panel, the staff’s projection for core PCE inflation is little changed in the
near term but is slightly higher in the medium term when compared with the previous
Tealbook, reflecting the reduction in resource slack.
The top panel of the first exhibit also reports the Tealbook-consistent estimate of
r*, a measure of the equilibrium real federal funds rate, generated using the FRB/US
model after adjusting it to replicate the staff’s baseline forecast. The estimated r*
corresponds to the real federal funds rate that would, if maintained, return output to
potential in 12 quarters. Reflecting the narrower output gap in the staff’s medium-term
projection, the r* estimate for the first quarter of 2014 is up 40 basis points compared
with the December estimate and, at –0.67 percent, is now slightly higher than the
estimated real federal funds rate for the first time since October 2008.
The second exhibit, “Policy Rule Simulations without Thresholds,” reports
dynamic simulations of the FRB/US model that incorporate the endogenous responses of
inflation and the output gap when the federal funds rate follows the paths prescribed by
the different policy rules, under the assumption that the federal funds rate is constrained
by the effective lower bound and without regard to the Committee’s thresholds related to
inflation and the unemployment rate.2 (Alternative policy rule simulations that
2 The policy rule simulations discussed here and below incorporate the macroeconomic effects of
the FOMC’s large-scale asset purchase programs. For the current program, the baseline forecast embeds
the assumption that purchases of longer-term Treasury securities and agency MBS continue to be reduced
gradually, end in the second half of 2014, and total about $1.5 trillion since the start of 2013.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 3 of 52

--- Page 6 ---

Policy Rule Simulations without Thresholds
Effective Nominal Federal Funds Rate Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent Percent
4 4
Taylor (1993) rule
6 Taylor (1999) rule 6
Inertial Taylor (1999) rule
3 3
Outcome-based rule
5 Nominal income targeting rule 5
First-difference rule
Tealbook baseline 2 2
4 4
1 1
3 3
0 0
2 2
-1 -1
1 1
0 0 -2 -2
-1 -1 -3 -3
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Unemployment Rate PCE Inflation
Percent Four-quarter average Percent
8 8 4.0 4.0
3.5 3.5
7 7 3.0 3.0
2.5 2.5
6 6 2.0 2.0
1.5 1.5
5 5 1.0 1.0
0.5 0.5
4 4 0.0 0.0
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Note: The policy rule simulations in this exhibit are based on rules that respond to core inflation. This choice
of rule specification was made in light of the tendency for current and near-term core inflation rates to outperform
headline inflation rates as predictors of the medium-term behavior of headline inflation.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 4 of 52

--- Page 7 ---

incorporate the thresholds are discussed below.) Each rule is applied from the first
quarter of 2014 onward, under the assumptions that financial market participants as well
as price- and wage-setters believe that the FOMC will follow that rule and that agents
fully understand and anticipate the implications of the rule for future real activity,
inflation, and interest rates.
The exhibit also displays the implications of following the baseline policy
assumption adopted in this Tealbook. This policy keeps the federal funds rate at the
assumed effective lower bound of 12½ basis points until three quarters after the
unemployment rate first moves below 6½ percent, as long as average inflation five to
eight quarters ahead is projected to be less than 2½ percent. Thereafter, the federal funds
rate follows the prescriptions of the inertial Taylor (1999) rule. The three-quarter lag
between crossing the unemployment rate threshold and switching to the inertial Taylor
(1999) rule is intended to reflect the guidance in the FOMC’s December postmeeting
statement that the Committee did not anticipate raising its target for the federal funds rate
until “well after” the unemployment threshold was crossed, especially if inflation
remained subdued. This modification to the baseline policy assumption implies a
departure from the effective lower bound in the second quarter of 2015, the same quarter
as in the December Tealbook, despite the upgrade to the staff outlook for the
unemployment rate. The federal funds rate then steadily increases about ¼ percentage
point per quarter over the next few years, reaching 4.1percent by the end of 2018. The
unemployment rate reaches the staff’s estimate of the long-term natural rate of
unemployment of 5.2 percent by the end of 2016. Headline inflation rises gradually,
reaching 2 percent by the first half of 2019.
Without thresholds, most of the policy rules call for policy tightening to begin
earlier than under the Tealbook baseline. Four of the rules put the real federal funds rate
appreciably above the path implied by the baseline forecast, leading to higher
unemployment and lower inflation than in the baseline through most of the decade. The
prescriptions of the inertial Taylor (1999) rule are nearly identical to the baseline after
2015. Only the nominal income targeting rule prescribes a later tightening than that in
the Tealbook baseline. This rule keeps the federal funds rate at the effective lower bound
until the fourth quarter of 2015 and generates a real federal funds rate persistently below
the baseline for the rest of the decade, thereby inducing stronger future real activity and
higher future inflation.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 5 of 52

--- Page 8 ---

Policy Rule Simulations with Current Thresholds and Forward Guidance
Effective Nominal Federal Funds Rate Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent Percent
4 4
Taylor (1993) rule
6 Taylor (1999) rule 6
Outcome-based rule
3 3
Nominal income targeting rule
5 First-difference rule 5
Tealbook baseline
2 2
4 4
1 1
3 3
0 0
2 2
-1 -1
1 1
0 0 -2 -2
-1 -1 -3 -3
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Unemployment Rate PCE Inflation
Percent Four-quarter average Percent
8 8 4.0 4.0
3.5 3.5
7 7 3.0 3.0
2.5 2.5
6 6 2.0 2.0
1.5 1.5
5 5 1.0 1.0
0.5 0.5
4 4 0.0 0.0
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Note: The policy rule simulations in this exhibit are based on rules that respond to core inflation. This choice
of rule specification was made in light of the tendency for current and near-term core inflation rates to outperform
headline inflation rates as predictors of the medium-term behavior of headline inflation.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 6 of 52

--- Page 9 ---

The results presented in these and subsequent simulations depend importantly on
the assumptions that policymakers will adhere to the simulated rule in the future and that
private sector expectations of the federal funds rate, real activity, and inflation correspond
exactly to the paths implied by the rule. These assumptions play a particularly critical
role in the case of the nominal income targeting rule, which is associated with outcomes
in which inflation runs slightly above the 2 percent longer-run goal for some years, even
after the output gap is closed.
The third exhibit, “Policy Rule Simulations with Current Thresholds and Forward
Guidance,” displays dynamic simulations in which the policy rules are subject to the
thresholds that the Committee adopted in December 2012 augmented with the staff’s
assumption regarding the enhanced forward guidance provided in the December 2013
postmeeting statement. In particular, for each of the rules, the federal funds rate stays at
the effective lower bound of 12½ basis points until the unemployment rate first moves
below 6 percent, the level of the unemployment rate in the baseline that prevails in the
quarter before the federal funds rate departs from the effective lower bound. In
subsequent quarters, the federal funds rate follows the prescriptions of the specified rule.
Thus, the alternative policy rule simulations adopt a data-based approach rather than a
date-based approach to mirror the property of the baseline projection that the federal
funds rate does not leave the effective lower bound until the unemployment rate has
fallen substantially below the 6½ percent threshold. As before, financial market
participants and price- and wage-setters are assumed to understand that the Committee
will switch to the specified rule once this condition is satisfied or the threshold for
projected inflation has been crossed, and to view this switch as permanent and fully
credible. In each of the simulations discussed below, the decline in the unemployment
rate turns out to be the catalyst for the shift to the specified rule; projected inflation
between one and two years ahead remains below 2 percent at the time of departure from
the effective lower bound in each simulation.
The imposition of the thresholds and additional forward guidance leads to a
departure of the federal funds rate from the effective lower bound in the second quarter of
2015 for most rules, the same quarter as in the December Tealbook and the staff baseline.
Compared with the case without thresholds and additional forward guidance, the
augmented rules postpone the departure of the federal funds rate from the effective lower
bound by three quarters or more for most rules. As a result, the unemployment rate
generally declines a bit more rapidly and inflation is a touch higher when the thresholds
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 7 of 52

--- Page 10 ---

Constrained versus Unconstrained Optimal Control Policy
Effective Nominal Federal Funds Rate Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent Percent
6 6 4 4
Current Tealbook: Constrained
Previous Tealbook: Constrained
5 Current Tealbook: Unconstrained 5 3 3
Tealbook baseline
4 4 2 2
3 3 1 1
2 2 0 0
1 1 -1 -1
0 0 -2 -2
-1 -1 -3 -3
-2 -2 -4 -4
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Unemployment Rate PCE Inflation
Percent Four-quarter average Percent
8 8 4.0 4.0
3.5 3.5
7 7 3.0 3.0
2.5 2.5
6 6 2.0 2.0
1.5 1.5
5 5 1.0 1.0
0.5 0.5
4 4 0.0 0.0
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 8 of 52

--- Page 11 ---

are imposed on these rules.3 The threshold strategy has the largest effect on the outcomes
for unemployment and inflation under the first-difference rule, as it delays the departure
of the federal funds rate from the effective lower bound by five quarters and provides
more stimulus in the medium term. Because the nominal income targeting rule does not
prescribe raising the federal funds rate above its effective lower bound until after the
unemployment rate falls below 6 percent, imposing the thresholds does not alter the date
for this rule’s prescribed departure from the lower bound.
The fourth exhibit, “Constrained versus Unconstrained Optimal Control Policy,”
compares the optimal control simulations derived using this Tealbook’s baseline forecast
with those reported in the December Tealbook.4 Policymakers are assumed to place
equal weights on keeping headline PCE inflation close to the Committee’s 2 percent goal,
on keeping the unemployment rate close to the staff’s estimate of the natural rate of
unemployment, and on minimizing changes in the federal funds rate. The optimal control
concept presented here corresponds to a commitment policy under which policymakers
make choices today that effectively constrain policy choices in future periods.
Reflecting the more favorable outlook that the staff now sees regarding the degree
of economic slack, the federal funds rate under the constrained optimal control path
departs from the effective lower bound three quarters earlier than in December and its
medium-term path is somewhat higher. The more favorable outlook also implies that the
outcomes derived from optimal control simulations are now similar to those associated
with policy under the staff’s baseline. In the simulations, which are subject to the usual
caveats regarding expectations and commitment, the optimal federal funds rate departs
from the lower bound in the second quarter of 2015, as in the staff’s baseline forecast, but
rises relatively slowly over subsequent years. The constrained optimal control policy
3 In the FRB/US model, the additional forward guidance is implemented by reducing the threshold
for the unemployment rate from 6.5 percent to 6 percent, while keeping unchanged the condition on
expected inflation between one and two years ahead remaining below 2.5 percent. For most of the rules,
the unemployment rate declines faster relative to the case without thresholds, and more than half of the
faster decline in the unemployment rate is due to the reduction in the unemployment threshold from 6.5 to
6 percent while the remainder is due to the imposition of the 6.5 percent unemployment rate threshold.
These results are in line with those discussed in the memo by Bora Durdu, Eric Engen, Steve Meyer, and
Robert Tetlow, “Some Possible Adjustments to the Committee’s Forward Guidance for the Federal Funds
Rate” (sent to the Committee on July 23, 2013), albeit slightly smaller.
4 The optimal control policy simulations incorporate the assumptions about underlying economic
conditions used in the staff’s baseline forecast, as well as the assumptions about balance sheet policies
described in footnote 2. The simulated policies do not incorporate thresholds.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 9 of 52

--- Page 12 ---

generates only a somewhat lower path for the real federal funds rate over the next few
years than in the staff’s baseline outlook, implying only small differences in the outcomes
for the unemployment rate and inflation.5
For the first time in recent history, the presence of the lower-bound constraint has
only minor effects on the outcome of optimal control policy under the current baseline
forecast. In the absence of the lower-bound constraint, the optimal federal funds rate
would reach a minimum of only about negative 15 basis points in the second half of 2014
and turn positive by the first quarter of 2015. Accordingly, the path for the real federal
funds rate is only slightly lower than in the constrained policy rate path, and the
unconstrained policy would bring down the unemployment rate at about the same speed
as the constrained policy and lead to a nearly identical path for inflation. This result
depends importantly on the presence of the penalty on changes in the federal funds rate in
the policymakers’ objective function; an objective function without interest-rate
smoothing would yield considerably larger differences between outcomes under the
constrained and unconstrained optimal policies.
The final two exhibits, “Outcomes under Alternative Policies without Thresholds”
and “Outcomes under Alternative Policies with Thresholds,” tabulate the simulation
results for key variables under each policy rule discussed above, with and without
thresholds.
5 Although the loss function uses headline inflation instead of core inflation, the real federal funds
rate shown in the upper-right panel of the exhibit, as in the other simulations reported in this section, is
calculated as the difference between the nominal federal funds rate and a four-quarter moving average of
core PCE inflation. Core PCE inflation is used to compute the real interest rate for this illustrative purpose
because it provides a less volatile measure of inflation expectations than does a four-quarter moving
average of headline inflation.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2004
Page 10 of 52

--- Page 13 ---

Outcomes under Alternative Policies without Thresholds
(Percent change, annual rate, from end of preceding period except as noted)
2013
Measure and scenario 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
H2
Real GDP
Extended Tealbook baseline1 3.8 3.1 3.4 3.2 2.7 2.1
Taylor (1993) 3.8 2.7 3.0 3.3 3.0 2.5
Taylor (1999) 3.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 2.9 2.4
Inertial Taylor (1999) 3.8 3.1 3.3 3.2 2.8 2.1
Outcome based 3.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 2.9 2.4
First difference 3.8 2.8 3.0 3.1 2.9 2.4
Nominal income targeting 3.8 3.4 3.8 3.6 2.8 2.0
Constrained optimal control 3.8 3.1 3.4 3.3 2.7 2.0
Unemployment rate2
Extended Tealbook baseline1 7.0 6.2 5.5 5.1 4.8 4.8
Taylor (1993) 7.0 6.4 5.9 5.5 5.1 4.9
Taylor (1999) 7.0 6.3 5.8 5.5 5.1 5.0
Inertial Taylor (1999) 7.0 6.2 5.6 5.2 4.9 4.8
Outcome based 7.0 6.3 5.8 5.4 5.1 4.9
First difference 7.0 6.3 5.9 5.5 5.2 5.0
Nominal income targeting 7.0 6.1 5.2 4.6 4.3 4.4
Constrained optimal control 7.0 6.2 5.5 5.1 4.8 4.9
Total PCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline1 1.3 1.4 1.6 1.7 1.8 2.0
Taylor (1993) 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.9
Taylor (1999) 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8
Inertial Taylor (1999) 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.7 1.8 2.0
Outcome based 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.5 1.7 1.8
First difference 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.8 1.9
Nominal income targeting 1.3 1.4 1.7 1.9 2.0 2.2
Constrained optimal control 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.7 1.8 2.0
Core PCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline1 1.2 1.5 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0
Taylor (1993) 1.2 1.5 1.7 1.7 1.8 1.9
Taylor (1999) 1.2 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.8
Inertial Taylor (1999) 1.2 1.5 1.7 1.8 1.9 1.9
Outcome based 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.7 1.7 1.8
First difference 1.2 1.5 1.7 1.7 1.8 1.9
Nominal income targeting 1.2 1.6 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2
Constrained optimal control 1.2 1.5 1.7 1.8 1.9 1.9
Effective nominal federal funds rate2
Extended Tealbook baseline1 0.1 0.1 1.2 2.4 3.5 4.1
Taylor (1993) 0.1 2.2 2.9 3.6 4.1 4.3
Taylor (1999) 0.1 1.2 2.4 3.5 4.2 4.4
Inertial Taylor (1999) 0.1 0.5 1.4 2.5 3.5 4.1
Outcome based 0.1 0.9 2.3 3.5 4.2 4.4
First difference 0.1 1.1 2.4 3.9 4.5 4.6
Nominal income targeting 0.1 0.1 0.3 1.2 2.4 3.1
Constrained optimal control 0.1 0.2 0.8 2.1 3.3 4.0
1. Policy in the Tealbook baseline keeps the federal funds rate at an effective lower bound of 12.5 basis points as
long as the unemployment rate is above 6.5 percent and projected one-year-ahead inflation is less than 2.5 percent.
Once either threshold is crossed, the federal funds rate follows the prescription of the inertial Taylor (1999) rule.
2. Percent, average for the final quarter of the period.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 11 of 52

--- Page 14 ---

Outcomes under Alternative Policies with Thresholds1
(Percent change, annual rate, from end of preceding period except as noted)
2013
Measure and scenario 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
H2
Real GDP
Extended Tealbook baseline1 3.8 3.1 3.4 3.2 2.7 2.1
Taylor (1993) 3.8 3.0 3.1 3.0 2.9 2.4
Taylor (1999) 3.8 3.0 3.1 3.0 2.8 2.3
Outcome based 3.8 3.0 3.2 3.0 2.7 2.3
First difference 3.8 3.1 3.4 3.2 2.8 2.3
Nominal income targeting 3.8 3.4 3.8 3.6 2.8 2.0
Constrained optimal control 3.8 3.1 3.4 3.3 2.7 2.0
Unemployment rate2
Extended Tealbook baseline1 7.0 6.2 5.5 5.1 4.8 4.8
Taylor (1993) 7.0 6.3 5.7 5.5 5.1 5.0
Taylor (1999) 7.0 6.3 5.7 5.4 5.1 5.0
Outcome based 7.0 6.2 5.6 5.3 5.1 5.0
First difference 7.0 6.2 5.5 5.1 4.8 4.7
Nominal income targeting 7.0 6.1 5.2 4.6 4.3 4.4
Constrained optimal control 7.0 6.2 5.5 5.1 4.8 4.9
Total PCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline1 1.3 1.4 1.6 1.7 1.8 2.0
Taylor (1993) 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.8 1.9
Taylor (1999) 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.9
Outcome based 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8
First difference 1.3 1.4 1.7 1.8 2.0 2.1
Nominal income targeting 1.3 1.4 1.7 1.9 2.0 2.2
Constrained optimal control 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.7 1.8 2.0
Core PCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline1 1.2 1.5 1.7 1.8 1.9 2.0
Taylor (1993) 1.2 1.5 1.7 1.7 1.8 1.9
Taylor (1999) 1.2 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.8
Outcome based 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.8
First difference 1.2 1.6 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1
Nominal income targeting 1.2 1.6 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2
Constrained optimal control 1.2 1.5 1.7 1.8 1.9 1.9
Effective nominal federal funds rate2
Extended Tealbook baseline1 0.1 0.1 1.2 2.4 3.5 4.1
Taylor (1993) 0.1 0.1 3.1 3.6 4.1 4.2
Taylor (1999) 0.1 0.1 2.5 3.5 4.2 4.4
Outcome based 0.1 0.1 1.5 3.5 4.2 4.3
First difference 0.1 0.1 1.3 3.0 3.7 3.8
Nominal income targeting 0.1 0.1 0.3 1.2 2.4 3.1
Constrained optimal control 0.1 0.2 0.8 2.1 3.3 4.0
1. With the exception of constrained optimal control, monetary policy is specified to keep the federal funds rate
at an effective lower bound of 12.5 basis points as long as the unemployment rate is above 6.5 percent and
projected one-year-ahead inflation is less than 2.5 percent. Once either of these thresholds is crossed, the federal
funds rate follows the prescriptions of the specified rule. Policy in the Tealbook baseline also uses these threshold
conditions and switches to the inertial Taylor (1999) rule once either of these thresholds is crossed.
2. Percent, average for the final quarter of the period.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 12 of 52

--- Page 15 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Appendix
POLICY RULES USED IN “MONETARY POLICY STRATEGIES”
The table below gives the expressions for the selected policy rules used in “Monetary
Policy Strategies.” In the table, Rt denotes the effective nominal federal funds rate for quarter t,
while the right-hand-side variables include the staff's projection of trailing four-quarter core PCE
inflation for the current quarter and three quarters ahead (nt and ^t+3|t), the output gap estimate
for the current period as well as its one-quarter-ahead forecast (gapt and gapt t), and the forecast
+1|
of the three-quarter-ahead annual change in the output gap (A4gapt+3\t). The value of
policymakers' long-run inflation objective, denoted n*, is 2 percent. The nominal income
targeting rule responds to the nominal income gap, which is defined as the difference between
nominal income ynt (100 times the log of the level of nominal GDP) and a target value yn‘t
(100 times the log of target nominal GDP). Target nominal GDP in 2007:Q4 is set equal to the
staff's estimate of potential real GDP in that quarter multiplied by the GDP deflator in that
quarter; subsequently, target nominal GDP grows 2 percentage points per year faster than the
staff's estimate of potential GDP.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Taylor (1993) rule Rt = 2 + nt + 0.5- n*} + 0.5gapt
Taylor (1999) rule Rt = 2 + nt + 0.5(nt — n*) + gapt
Inertial Taylor (1999) rule Rt = 0.85/?t_1 + 0.15 (2+ny + 0.5 (nt — n**) + gap^
Rt = 1.2Rt_1 - 0.39Rt_2 + 0.19(0.54 + 1.73rct
Outcome-based rule
+ 3.66gapt — 2.72gapt_1]
First-difference rule Rt = Rt-i + 0.5(^t+3|t -w*) + 0.5A4^upt+3|t
Nominal income targeting rule Rt = 0.75Rt_1 + 0.25(2 + n:t + ynt -yn*)
The first two of the selected rules were studied by Taylor (1993, 1999), while the inertial
Taylor (1999) rule has been featured prominently in recent analysis by Board staff.1 The
outcome-based rule uses policy reactions estimated using real-time data over the sample
1988:Q1-2006:Q4. The intercept of the outcome-based rule was chosen so that it is consistent
with a 2 percent long-run inflation objective and a long-run real interest rate of 2 percent, a value
used in the FRB/US model.2 The intercepts of the Taylor (1993, 1999) rules and the long-run
1 See Erceg and others (2012).
2 For the January 2013 Tealbook, the staff revised the long-run value of the real interest rate from
2% percent to 2 percent. The FRB/US model as well as the intercepts of the different policy rules have
been adjusted to reflect this change.
Page 13 of 52

--- Page 16 ---

intercept of the inertial Taylor (1999) rule are set at 2 percent for the same reason. The 2 percent
real rate estimate also enters the long-run intercept of the nominal income targeting rule. The
prescriptions of the first-difference rule do not depend on the level of the output gap or the long-
run real interest rate; see Orphanides (2003).
Near-term prescriptions from the different policy rules are calculated using Tealbook
projections for inflation and the output gap. For the rules that include the lagged policy rate as a
right-hand-side variable—the inertial Taylor (1999) rule, the first-difference rule, the estimated
outcome-based rule, and the nominal income targeting rule—the lines denoted “Previous
Tealbook outlook” report prescriptions derived from the previous Tealbook projections for
inflation and the output gap, while using the same lagged funds rate value as in the prescriptions
computed for the current Tealbook. When the Tealbook is published early in the quarter, this
lagged funds rate value is set equal to the actual value of the lagged funds rate in the previous
quarter, and prescriptions are shown for the current quarter. When the Tealbook is published late
in the quarter, the prescriptions are shown for the next quarter, and the lagged policy rate, for
each of these rules, including those that use the “Previous Tealbook outlook,” is set equal to the
average value for the policy rate thus far in the quarter. For the subsequent quarter, these rules
use the lagged values from their simulated, unconstrained prescriptions.
References
Erceg, Christopher, Jon Faust, Michael Kiley, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David López-Salido,
Stephen Meyer, Edward Nelson, David Reifschneider, and Robert Tetlow (2012). “An
Overview of Simple Policy Rules and Their Use in Policymaking in Normal Times and
Under Current Conditions.” Memo sent to the Committee on July 18, 2012.
Erceg, Christopher, Michael Kiley, and David López-Salido (2011). “Alternative Monetary
Policy Frameworks.” Memo sent to the Committee on October 6, 2011.
McCallum, Bennett T., and Edward Nelson (1999). “Nominal Income Targeting in an Open-
Economy Optimizing Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 43 (June), pp. 553–
578.
Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 50 (July), pp. 9831022.
Taylor, John B. (1993). “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 39 (December), pp. 195214.
Taylor, John B. (1999). “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B. Taylor,
ed., Monetary Policy Rules. University of Chicago Press, pp. 319341.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 14 of 52

--- Page 17 ---

ESTIMATES OF THE EQUILIBRIUM AND ACTUAL REAL RATES
An estimate of the equilibrium real rate appears as a memo item in the first exhibit,
“Policy Rules and the Staff Projection.” The concept of the short-run equilibrium real rate
underlying the estimate corresponds to the level of the real federal funds rate that is consistent
with output reaching potential in 12 quarters using an output projection from FRB/US, the staff’s
large-scale econometric model of the U.S. economy. This estimate depends on a very broad array
of economic factors, some of which take the form of projected values of the model’s exogenous
variables. The memo item in the exhibit reports the “Tealbook-consistent” estimate of r*, which
is generated after the paths of exogenous variables in the FRB/US model are adjusted so that they
match those in the extended Tealbook forecast. Model simulations then determine the value of
the real federal funds rate that closes the output gap conditional on the exogenous variables in the
extended baseline forecast.
The estimated actual real federal funds rate reported in the exhibit is constructed as the
difference between the federal funds rate and the trailing four-quarter change in the core PCE
price index. The federal funds rate is specified as the midpoint of the target range for the federal
funds rate on the Tealbook Book B publication date.
FRB/US MODEL SIMULATIONS
The exhibits of “Monetary Policy Strategies” that report results from simulations of
alternative policies are derived from dynamic simulations of the FRB/US model. Each simulated
policy rule is assumed to be in force over the whole period covered by the simulation. For the
optimal control simulations, the dotted line labeled “Previous Tealbook” is derived from the
optimal control simulations, when applied to the previous Tealbook projection.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 15 of 52

--- Page 18 ---

(This page is intentionally blank.)
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 16 of 52

--- Page 19 ---

Monetary Policy Alternatives
This Tealbook presents three policy alternatives—labeled A, B, and C—for the
Committee’s consideration. Alternative B reduces monthly purchases of both agency
MBS and Treasury securities by another $5 billion each, signals that further reductions of
that size are likely at future meetings, and repeats the December statement’s qualitative
description of the Committee’s likely policy approach after the 6½ percent threshold for
the unemployment rate is reached. Alternative C announces reductions of $10 billion
each in monthly purchases of agency MBS and of Treasury securities, suggests that
further such reductions are likely, and retains December’s forward guidance. Alternative
A maintains the current pace of asset purchases while stating that “measured reductions”
are likely at future meetings if labor market conditions and inflation develop about as the
Committee expects. Alternative A also modifies December’s post-threshold guidance by
replacing “well past the time that the unemployment rate declines below 6½ percent”
with a second set of quantitative thresholds.
In summarizing recent economic developments, each alternative acknowledges
that “growth of economic activity picked up in recent quarters.” Alternatives A and B
characterize labor market indicators received since the Committee met in December as
“mixed,” and again note that the unemployment rate declined but remains elevated.
Alternative C says that labor market conditions have shown further improvement,
pointing in particular to the continuing decline in the unemployment rate. All three
alternatives note that fiscal policy is restraining economic growth but that the extent of
restraint is diminishing; Alternative C puts greater emphasis on the diminution.
Alternative B observes that inflation has been running “below” the Committee’s longer-
run objective, but that longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
Alternative C emphasizes the stability of longer-term inflation expectations and places
less weight on the fact that inflation has been running below 2 percent. Alternative A
signals more concern about inflation, saying that inflation has been running “well below”
2 percent “even though” longer-term inflation expectations have been stable.
In characterizing the economic outlook, all three alternatives say the Committee
expects economic activity to “expand at a moderate pace” and the unemployment rate to
gradually decline toward its mandate-consistent level; these words are meant to convey
confidence about the recovery without suggesting that the Committee expects economic
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 17 of 52

--- Page 20 ---

growth to be as rapid as it was during the second half of last year. Alternatives B and C
describe the risks to the outlook for the economy and the labor market as “nearly
balanced,” while Alternative A characterizes those risks as “nearly balanced but still
tilted slightly to the downside.” Each alternative states that the Committee recognizes the
risks associated with inflation running persistently below 2 percent and is monitoring
inflation developments carefully; Alternative C adds that the Committee continues to
anticipate that inflation will move back toward 2 percent over the medium term.
With respect to balance sheet policies, Alternative B indicates—as in the
December statement—that “cumulative progress toward maximum employment and the
improvement in the outlook for labor market conditions” warrant a cut in the pace of
asset purchases; under this alternative, the Committee makes “a further measured
reduction” of $10 billion per month in the pace of purchases (to $30 billion per month for
agency MBS and to $35 billion per month for Treasury securities). Alternative C reduces
monthly purchases by a total of $20 billion, citing “continuing progress toward maximum
employment and the outlook for ongoing improvement in labor market conditions.”
Alternative A maintains the current pace of asset purchases, stating that the Committee
“judges that the information about labor market conditions and inflation received since it
met in December does not warrant a reduction in the pace of asset purchases at this
meeting.” Alternatives A and B retain language indicating that the Committee will likely
reduce the pace of asset purchases “in measured steps” at future meetings; Alternative C
says the Committee will likely continue to reduce the pace of purchases but omits “in
measured steps.” Each alternative states that asset purchases are “not on a preset course.”
All three alternatives retain the 0 to ¼ percent target range for the funds rate, the
6½ percent threshold for the unemployment rate, and the 2½ percent “ceiling” threshold
for projected inflation. Alternatives B and C maintain the “well past the time” qualitative
guidance that the Committee added to the statement in December to indicate its current
thinking about the likely path of the federal funds rate after the unemployment rate
declines below 6½ percent. Alternative A modifies that forward guidance by listing
some of the “other information” the Committee will consider in determining how long to
maintain the current target range for federal funds rate; Alternative A also offers two
approaches to providing more specific, data-based guidance about policy after the
unemployment rate goes below 6½ percent. The following table summarizes key
elements of the three alternative statements. Subsequent pages present complete drafts of
the three statements and arguments for each alternative.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 18 of 52

--- Page 21 ---

Table 1: Overview of Policy Alternatives for January FOMC Statement
Selected December January Alternatives
Elements Statement A B C
Economic Conditions, Outlook, and Risks
economic activity is expanding at a
growth in economic activity picked up in recent quarters
moderate pace
labor market conditions have shown
labor market indicators were mixed unchanged
further improvement
the unemployment rate,
though still elevated
Economic the unemployment rate has declined relative to levels judged
the unemployment rate declined but remains elevated
Conditions but remains elevated consistent with dual
mandate over the longer-
run, continued to decline
fiscal policy is restraining growth, extent to which fiscal
fiscal policy is restraining growth, although extent of
although the extent of restraint may policy is restraining
restraint is diminishing
be diminishing growth is diminishing
inflation has been running below the inflation has been running
unchanged
longer-run objective well below objective
economic growth will pick up;
Outlook unemployment rate will gradually economic activity will expand at a moderate pace; unemployment rate will
gradually decline
decline
risks nearly balanced but
Risks risks have become more nearly still tilted slightly to the risks nearly balanced
balanced
downside
Balance Sheet Policies
Agency MBS $35 billion/month unchanged $30 billion/month $25 billion/month
Treasuries $40 billion/month unchanged $35 billion/month $30 billion/month
cumulative progress toward information received about continuing progress toward
Rationale for maximum employment and labor market and inflation maximum employment and
unchanged
Purchases improvement in outlook for labor does not warrant a reduction outlook for ongoing
market in pace improvement in labor mkt
if incoming information broadly
. . . will likely reduce pace . . . will likely continue to
Purchase supports expectations, will likely
in measured steps at future unchanged reduce pace at future
Guidance reduce pace in further measured
meetings . . . meetings . . .
steps at future meetings . . .
Federal Funds Rate
Target 0 to ¼ percent unchanged
at least as long as thresholds (6½
percent; 2½ percent) are not crossed
unchanged
and inflation expectations remain
well anchored
likely will be appropriate to
continues to anticipate
anticipates it likely will be maintain current target for
it likely will be
appropriate to maintain current FFR at least until the
appropriate to maintain
target for FFR well past time that unemployment rate declines
Rate unemployment threshold is crossed, below [ 6 percent especially current target for FFR unchanged
Guidance especially if projected inflation if | 5½ percent so long as ] well past time that
unemployment threshold
continues to run below 2 percent projected inflation continues
is crossed . . .
below 2 percent
when begin to remove when eventually begin to
accommodation, will take balanced remove accommodation, unchanged
approach will take balanced approach
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 19 of 52

--- Page 22 ---

DECEMBER 2013 FOMC STATEMENT
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in October
indicates that economic activity is expanding at a moderate pace. Labor market
conditions have shown further improvement; the unemployment rate has declined but
remains elevated. Household spending and business fixed investment advanced,
while the recovery in the housing sector slowed somewhat in recent months. Fiscal
policy is restraining economic growth, although the extent of restraint may be
diminishing. Inflation has been running below the Committee’s longer-run objective,
but longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic growth will pick up from its recent pace and the
unemployment rate will gradually decline toward levels the Committee judges
consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee sees the risks to the outlook for the
economy and the labor market as having become more nearly balanced. The
Committee recognizes that inflation persistently below its 2 percent objective could
pose risks to economic performance, and it is monitoring inflation developments
carefully for evidence that inflation will move back toward its objective over the
medium term.
3. Taking into account the extent of federal fiscal retrenchment since the inception of its
current asset purchase program, the Committee sees the improvement in economic
activity and labor market conditions over that period as consistent with growing
underlying strength in the broader economy. In light of the cumulative progress
toward maximum employment and the improvement in the outlook for labor market
conditions, the Committee decided to modestly reduce the pace of its asset purchases.
Beginning in January, the Committee will add to its holdings of agency mortgage-
backed securities at a pace of $35 billion per month rather than $40 billion per month,
and will add to its holdings of longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of $40 billion
per month rather than $45 billion per month. The Committee is maintaining its
existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and
agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of
rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee’s sizable and
still-increasing holdings of longer-term securities should maintain downward pressure
on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make broader
financial conditions more accommodative, which in turn should promote a stronger
economic recovery and help to ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most
consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate.
4. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial
developments in coming months and will continue its purchases of Treasury and
agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate,
until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price
stability. If incoming information broadly supports the Committee’s expectation of
ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward
its longer-run objective, the Committee will likely reduce the pace of asset purchases
in further measured steps at future meetings. However, asset purchases are not on a
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 20 of 52

--- Page 23 ---

preset course, and the Committee’s decisions about their pace will remain contingent
on the Committee’s outlook for the labor market and inflation as well as its
assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases.
5. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that a highly accommodative stance of monetary
policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase
program ends and the economic recovery strengthens. The Committee also
reaffirmed its expectation that the current exceptionally low target range for the
federal funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent will be appropriate at least as long as the
unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent, inflation between one and two years
ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee’s
2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well
anchored. In determining how long to maintain a highly accommodative stance of
monetary policy, the Committee will also consider other information, including
additional measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and
inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. The Committee now
anticipates, based on its assessment of these factors, that it likely will be appropriate
to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate well past the time that
the unemployment rate declines below 6½ percent, especially if projected inflation
continues to run below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal. When the
Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced
approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation
of 2 percent.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 21 of 52

--- Page 24 ---

FOMC STATEMENT—JANUARY 2014 ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in October
December indicates that growth in economic activity is expanding at a moderate
pace picked up in recent quarters. Labor market conditions have shown further
improvement; indicators were mixed. The unemployment rate has declined but
remains elevated. Household spending and business fixed investment advanced
somewhat more quickly in recent months, while but the recovery in the housing
sector slowed somewhat in recent months. Fiscal policy is restraining economic
growth, although the extent of restraint may be is diminishing. Inflation has been
running well below the Committee’s longer-run objective, but even though longer-
term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic growth activity will pick up from its recent expand at a
moderate pace and the unemployment rate will gradually decline toward levels the
Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee sees the risks to
the outlook for the economy and the labor market as having become more nearly
balanced but still tilted slightly to the downside. The Committee recognizes that
inflation persistently below its 2 percent objective could pose risks to economic
performance, and it is monitoring inflation developments carefully for evidence that
inflation will move back toward its objective over the medium term.
3. Taking into account the extent of federal fiscal retrenchment since the inception of its
current asset purchase program, the Committee sees the improvement in economic
activity and labor market conditions over that period as consistent with growing
underlying strength in the broader economy. The Committee judges that the
information about labor market conditions and inflation received since it met in
December does not warrant a reduction in the pace of asset purchases at this
meeting. In light of the cumulative progress toward maximum employment and the
improvement in the outlook for labor market conditions, the Committee decided to
modestly reduce the pace of its asset purchases. Beginning in January Accordingly,
the Committee will continue to add to its holdings of agency mortgage-backed
securities at a pace of $35 billion per month rather than $40 billion per month, and
will add to its holdings of longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of $40 billion per
month rather than $45 billion per month. The Committee is maintaining its existing
policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency
mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over
maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee’s sizable and still-increasing
holdings of longer-term securities should maintain downward pressure on longer-term
interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial
conditions more accommodative, which in turn should promote a stronger economic
recovery and help to ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent
with the Committee’s dual mandate.
4. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial
developments in coming months and will continue its purchases of Treasury and
agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate,
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 22 of 52

--- Page 25 ---

until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price
stability. If incoming information broadly supports the Committee’s expectation of
ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward
its longer-run objective, the Committee will likely reduce the pace of asset purchases
in further measured steps at future meetings. However, asset purchases are not on a
preset course, and the Committee’s decisions about their pace will remain contingent
on the Committee’s outlook for the labor market and inflation as well as its
assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases.
5. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that a highly accommodative stance of monetary
policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase
program ends and the economic recovery strengthens. The Committee also
reaffirmed its expectation that the current exceptionally low target range for the
federal funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent will be appropriate at least as long as the
unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent, inflation between one and two years
ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee’s
2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well
anchored. In determining how long to maintain a highly accommodative stance of
monetary policy, the Committee will also consider other information, including
additional measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and
inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. Information
relevant to a comprehensive assessment of labor market conditions includes the
level and growth of payroll employment, labor force participation rates, and
measures of hiring and job separation. The Committee now anticipates, based on
its assessment of these factors, that it likely will be appropriate to maintain the current
target range for the federal funds rate well past the time that at least until the
unemployment rate declines below 6½ [ 6 percent, especially if | 5½ percent so long
as ] projected inflation continues to run below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run
goal. When the Committee eventually decides to begin to remove policy
accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals
of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 23 of 52

--- Page 26 ---

FOMC STATEMENT—JANUARY 2014 ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in October
December indicates that growth in economic activity is expanding at a moderate
pace picked up in recent quarters. Labor market conditions have shown further
improvement; indicators were mixed. The unemployment rate has declined but
remains elevated. Household spending and business fixed investment advanced more
quickly in recent months, while the recovery in the housing sector slowed somewhat
in recent months. Fiscal policy is restraining economic growth, although the extent of
restraint may be is diminishing. Inflation has been running below the Committee’s
longer-run objective, but longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic growth activity will pick up from its recent expand at a
moderate pace and the unemployment rate will gradually decline toward levels the
Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee sees the risks to
the outlook for the economy and the labor market as having become more nearly
balanced. The Committee recognizes that inflation persistently below its 2 percent
objective could pose risks to economic performance, and it is monitoring inflation
developments carefully for evidence that inflation will move back toward its
objective over the medium term.
3. Taking into account the extent of federal fiscal retrenchment since the inception of its
current asset purchase program, the Committee sees continues to see the
improvement in economic activity and labor market conditions over that period as
consistent with growing underlying strength in the broader economy. In light of the
cumulative progress toward maximum employment and the improvement in the
outlook for labor market conditions, the Committee decided to modestly reduce make
a further measured reduction in the pace of its asset purchases. Beginning in
January February, the Committee will add to its holdings of agency mortgage-
backed securities at a pace of $35 $30 billion per month rather than $40 $35 billion
per month, and will add to its holdings of longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of
$40 $35 billion per month rather than $45 $40 billion per month. The Committee is
maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of
agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. The
Committee’s sizable and still-increasing holdings of longer-term securities should
maintain downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets,
and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative, which in turn
should promote a stronger economic recovery and help to ensure that inflation, over
time, is at the rate most consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate.
4. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial
developments in coming months and will continue its purchases of Treasury and
agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate,
until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price
stability. If incoming information broadly supports the Committee’s expectation of
ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 24 of 52

--- Page 27 ---

its longer-run objective, the Committee will likely reduce the pace of asset purchases
in further measured steps at future meetings. However, asset purchases are not on a
preset course, and the Committee’s decisions about their pace will remain contingent
on the Committee’s outlook for the labor market and inflation as well as its
assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases.
5. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that a highly accommodative stance of monetary
policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase
program ends and the economic recovery strengthens. The Committee also
reaffirmed its expectation that the current exceptionally low target range for the
federal funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent will be appropriate at least as long as the
unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent, inflation between one and two years
ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee’s
2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well
anchored. In determining how long to maintain a highly accommodative stance of
monetary policy, the Committee will also consider other information, including
additional measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and
inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. The Committee now
anticipates continues to anticipate, based on its assessment of these factors, that it
likely will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds
rate well past the time that the unemployment rate declines below 6½ percent,
especially if projected inflation continues to run below the Committee’s 2 percent
longer-run goal. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy
accommodation, it will take a balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals
of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 25 of 52

--- Page 28 ---

FOMC STATEMENT—JANUARY 2014 ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in October
December indicates that growth in economic activity is expanding at a moderate
pace picked up in recent quarters. Labor market conditions have shown further
improvement; in particular, the unemployment rate, though still elevated relative
to levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate over the longer
run, has declined but remains elevated continued to decline. Household spending
and business fixed investment advanced more quickly in recent months, while even
as the recovery in the housing sector slowed somewhat in recent months further.
The extent to which fiscal policy is restraining economic growth, although the extent
of restraint may be is diminishing. Although inflation has been running below the
Committee’s longer-run objective, but longer-term inflation expectations have
remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic growth activity will pick up from its recent expand at a
moderate pace and the unemployment rate will gradually decline toward levels the
Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee sees the risks to
the outlook for the economy and the labor market as having become more nearly
balanced. The Committee recognizes that inflation persistently below its 2 percent
objective could pose risks to economic performance, and it is monitoring inflation
developments carefully for evidence, but it continues to anticipate that inflation will
move back toward its objective over the medium term.
3. Taking into account the extent of federal fiscal retrenchment since the inception of its
current asset purchase program, the Committee sees the improvement in economic
activity and labor market conditions over that period as consistent with growing
underlying strength in the broader economy. In light of the cumulative continuing
progress toward maximum employment and the outlook for ongoing improvement in
the outlook for labor market conditions, the Committee decided to modestly further
reduce the pace of its asset purchases. Beginning in January February, the
Committee will add to its holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of
$35 $25 billion per month rather than $40 $35 billion per month, and will add to its
holdings of longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of $40 $30 billion per month
rather than $45 $40 billion per month. The Committee is maintaining its existing
policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency
mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over
maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee’s sizable and still-increasing
holdings of longer-term securities should maintain downward pressure on longer-term
interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial
conditions more accommodative, which in turn should promote a stronger economic
recovery and help to ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent
with the Committee’s dual mandate.
4. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial
developments in coming months and will continue its purchases of Treasury and
agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate,
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 26 of 52

--- Page 29 ---

until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price
stability. If incoming information broadly supports the Committee’s expectation of
ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward
its longer-run objective, the Committee will likely continue to reduce the pace of
asset purchases in further measured steps at future meetings. However, asset
purchases are not on a preset course, and the Committee’s decisions about their pace
will remain contingent on the Committee’s outlook for the labor market and inflation
as well as its assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases.
5. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that a highly accommodative stance of monetary
policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase
program ends and the economic recovery strengthens. The Committee also
reaffirmed its expectation that the current exceptionally low target range for the
federal funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent will be appropriate at least as long as the
unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent, inflation between one and two years
ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee’s
2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well
anchored. In determining how long to maintain a highly accommodative stance of
monetary policy, the Committee will also consider other information, including
additional measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and
inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. The Committee now
anticipates, based on its assessment of these factors, that it likely will be appropriate
to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate well past the time that
the unemployment rate declines below 6½ percent, especially if projected inflation
continues to run below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal. When the
Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced
approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation
of 2 percent.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 27 of 52

--- Page 30 ---

THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B
Policymakers might see the information received during the intermeeting period
as broadly consistent with the pickup in economic growth that they saw as under way
when they met in December, and so judge it appropriate to reduce the monthly pace of
their purchases by another $10 billion and issue an essentially unchanged postmeeting
statement, as in Alternative B. In particular, while recognizing that any one employment
report provides a noisy signal of labor market conditions and that some of the data in the
most recent employment report may have been distorted by unusually severe weather,
they may judge that the last several reports, taken together, indicate ongoing
improvement in both payrolls and unemployment. In addition, they may view recent
readings from indicators of consumer spending and business fixed investment as broadly
consistent with their long-held expectation that the economic recovery would gain
strength. And they might see a high likelihood that sustained employment gains, in
combination with higher equity prices and house prices along with diminishing restraint
from fiscal policy, will support continued solid growth in consumer spending and
business investment. Nonetheless, recognizing that a large increase in inventory
investment accounted for a substantial portion of the pickup in growth of real GDP
during the second half of last year, they may project that output growth will moderate
from its recent pace in coming quarters. At the same time, policymakers may judge that
there remains considerable slack in labor markets and in the broader economy; they
might, for example, point to still-high levels of long-duration unemployment, to the large
number of part-time workers who would prefer a full-time job, and to the low level of
labor force participation. Policymakers might also note that inflation has been running
persistently below the Committee’s 2 percent objective.
Against this backdrop, policymakers might conclude that highly accommodative
monetary policy remains necessary to promote continued improvement in the labor
market and to return inflation to 2 percent over the medium run. At the same time, in
light of the cumulative progress in the labor market and their expectation that it will be
sustained, they may judge it appropriate to make a further gradual reduction in the pace
of asset purchases while maintaining the current target range for the federal funds rate
and the current forward guidance. They might note, for example, that the paths for
unemployment and inflation in the staff’s current baseline forecast (which reflects the
policy-settings of Alternative B, including continued gradual reductions in the pace of
asset purchases) are nearly the same as the paths generated by the optimal control
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 28 of 52

--- Page 31 ---

exercises summarized in the Monetary Policy Strategies section of this Tealbook.
Accordingly, policymakers might decide to issue a statement along the lines of
Alternative B, which announces a second measured reduction in the pace of asset
purchases and reaffirms that the Committee continues to anticipate that it will be
appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate well past the
time that the unemployment rate declines below 6½ percent, especially if inflation is
projected to continue to run below 2 percent.
Policymakers may worry that the sharp slowing in job growth in December,
though quite likely caused in part by unusually severe weather, could be an early
indication that the acceleration of economic activity during the second half of last year
will prove to be transitory. Indications that the recovery in the housing sector slowed
somewhat further may reinforce their apprehension. Or they may be concerned that
inflation shows little, if any, sign of beginning to move back up toward 2 percent. In
either case, policymakers may see a sizable probability that it will become necessary to
continue asset purchases at a higher pace and for a longer time than envisioned in the
Committee’s baseline scenario. However, they may judge it premature to deviate from
the announced baseline of further measured reductions in the pace of asset purchases and
want to wait for clearer evidence indicating whether the economy has diverged from the
path the Committee anticipated in December.
Alternatively, policymakers may be concerned that the gradual tapering of asset
purchases that the primary dealers and other market participants now seem to anticipate,
along with forward guidance that investors may read as indicating a high likelihood of
near-zero short-term interest rates for quite some time, risks an increase in longer-term
inflation expectations and an undesirably large increase in inflation over the medium run.
Policymakers also may worry that the perception that the FOMC has promised to keep
short-term rates near zero could lead to excessive risk-taking in the financial sector.
However, with inflation running well below 2 percent and expected inflation showing no
sign of drifting up, and with financial firms and other market participants reportedly
having pared back some of their leveraged positions since last spring, policymakers may
judge that the sequence of modest reductions in the pace of asset purchases and
subsequent gradual rise in the federal funds rate that market participants now anticipate
will be enough to contain such risks. And they may see the language in paragraph B.5
that says the Committee will consider financial conditions and inflation pressures in
determining how long to maintain a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy as
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 29 of 52

--- Page 32 ---

providing the Committee with sufficient flexibility to adjust policy in response to off-
baseline scenarios in which their concerns about rising inflation or increasing risk-taking
are realized. Moreover, they might think it desirable to wait until the unemployment rate
threshold is reached before modifying the forward guidance, particularly if they think that
threshold will be reached soon.
Market participants are unlikely to be surprised by a statement along the lines of
Alternative B. According to the Desk’s latest survey, all of the primary dealers expect
the Committee to announce a second $10 billion cut in the pace of asset purchases next
week and assign high probabilities to that outcome; other surveys suggest that market
participants generally share this expectation. Most dealers also anticipate a largely
unchanged statement, aside from a recognition that output growth strengthened and the
most recent employment report contained mixed signals. Some market commentary has
raised the possibility that the Committee might lower the unemployment threshold, but
such an action is viewed as unlikely at this meeting, inasmuch as the Committee only
recently provided qualitative post-threshold guidance. Consequently, a statement like
Alternative B should generate little adjustment in asset prices or yields.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE C
Policymakers may view the recent data not only as confirming that economic
activity is accelerating but also as indicating that the amount of slack in labor markets is
diminishing quickly; if so, they may worry that the risks of inflation overshooting the
Committee’s longer-run goal are increasing. Or they may be concerned that continuing
asset purchases as long as envisioned under Alternative B would pose unacceptable risks
to financial stability. Hence they may see little need to continue asset purchases as well
as increasing potential costs to doing so. They may therefore prefer to make a larger cut
in asset purchases at this meeting and open the possibility of ending the purchase
program in short order, as in Alternative C.
Policymakers may view the pickup in output growth during the second half of last
year, the strengthening in the pace of consumer spending and business fixed investment,
and the accompanying 0.8 percentage point decline in the unemployment rate since mid-
2013, as establishing that the economy and the labor market have sufficient momentum to
continue making good progress towards maximum employment even if the Committee
winds down asset purchases quickly. Moreover, they might see the pickup in economic
growth in the face of still-significant restraint from fiscal policy as evidence that the
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 30 of 52

--- Page 33 ---

recovery has become self-sustaining and that growth will continue at an above-potential
rate, as in the “Consumer and Business Confidence” alternative simulation in Book A of
the Tealbook, provided that fiscal restraint wanes in the coming year as they expect. Or
policymakers may have concluded that the slower-than-anticipated recovery in output
and employment over most of the past four and a half years has, to a large extent,
reflected a step-down in trend productivity growth relative to its pre-crisis norm
combined with a downward trend in the labor force participation rate and an increasing
natural rate of unemployment, as in the “Alternative View” box in Book A of the
Tealbook. If so, they may judge that the level of potential output is lower than the staff
estimates and that the unemployment rate is not much above its longer-run normal level.
In addition, policymakers may see the very low PCE inflation observed in recent months
as largely due to a temporary slowdown in the rate of increase in administered and
imputed prices and so anticipate that inflation will move back up toward 2 percent in the
near future if longer-term inflation expectations remain stable.
Based on the Survey of Primary Dealers, a decision to adopt a statement like
Alternative C would surprise market participants, as all dealers expect a second
$10 billion cut in the pace of asset purchases. A $20 billion reduction in the pace of
purchases, along with removal of the “measured steps” language from the fourth
paragraph of the statement, likely would be read by investors as a signal that the
Committee is moving to end the asset purchase program more quickly than previously
anticipated. In combination with the solidly positive characterization of the economy in
the first paragraph of the draft statement for Alternative C, a larger-than-expected cut in
the pace of purchases probably would lead market participants to pull forward their
forecasts of the date on which the Committee will first increase its target for the federal
funds rate, and perhaps to anticipate a steeper path for the funds rate after liftoff as well.
In response, longer-term interest rates likely would rise, equity prices and inflation
compensation fall, and the dollar appreciate. If, however, a statement along the lines of
Alternative C led investors to become more positive and more confident about the
economic outlook, equity prices might not decline but interest rates could rise more.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A
Although policymakers may be encouraged by the gains in private payroll
employment and the decline in the unemployment rate in recent quarters, they might see
the mixed data in the most recent employment report as an indication that it is too soon to
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 31 of 52

--- Page 34 ---

conclude that the gains are sustainable and so choose to continue asset purchases at their
current pace, as in Alternative A. The fact that 12-month PCE inflation has been running
below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective for a year and a half, and below
1 percent in recent months, might reinforce that conclusion. Moreover, policymakers
might judge that the decline in the unemployment rate in recent months overstates the
improvement in labor market conditions, inasmuch as the labor force participation rate
has declined fairly sharply and the levels of long-duration unemployment and of
individuals working part time for economic reasons remain quite high. Policymakers
also might think that the third quarter’s acceleration in real GDP overstates the
improvement in the economy’s underlying growth rate because increased inventory
investment accounted for a substantial share of the pickup. Concern that the economy
will revert to expanding at only a modest pace may be reinforced by recent data
suggesting that the recovery in the housing market slowed further. Accordingly,
policymakers might see a sizable probability that a more accommodative policy will be
necessary to forestall an even longer period of considerable slack in the labor market and
to avoid greater damage to the economy’s productive capacity and thus to future real
incomes.
Policymakers may judge not only that the modal outlook is unsatisfactory but also
that downside risks to the outlook, though smaller than they were last fall, remain large
enough to be a concern. In particular, another Congressional impasse on the federal debt
limit could elevate policy uncertainty and undermine confidence, again restraining
household spending and business investment in 2014. At the same time, with underlying
inflation continuing to run well below 2 percent, policymakers may see little risk that
inflation or inflation expectations will move up; indeed, they might be concerned with the
possibility that persistently low inflation in combination with substantial slack in labor
markets could eventually lead to declining longer-run inflation expectations, resulting in
mutually-reinforcing downward dynamics for inflation and economic activity.
To the extent they share the concerns outlined above, policymakers might prefer
to pause in the tapering process at this meeting in order to allow more time to collect and
assess information bearing on the outlook, and to emphasize that the Committee’s
decisions are data dependent. They also might think it appropriate to indicate, in the
postmeeting statement, that they see the risks to the outlook as still tilted to the downside,
as in the second paragraph of Alternative A. Finally, they might choose to clarify or
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 32 of 52

--- Page 35 ---

strengthen the post-threshold guidance they added to the postmeeting statement in
December by expressing it in quantitative terms, as in paragraph 5 of Alternative A.
The most recent Survey of Primary Dealers, along with other surveys, suggests
that few market participants expect the Committee to leave the pace of asset purchases
unchanged at this meeting. Although some market commentary has raised the possibility
that the Committee might lower the unemployment threshold, few expect the Committee
to replace its qualitative post-threshold guidance at this meeting. Thus a statement along
the lines of Alternative A would surprise market participants. Longer-term interest rates
likely would decline, and the dollar might well depreciate. Equity prices and inflation
compensation might rise. If, however, a statement like Alternative A led investors to
become less confident about the economic outlook, equity prices and inflation
compensation could decline.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 33 of 52

--- Page 36 ---

DIRECTIVE
The directive that was issued after the December meeting appears on the next
page, followed by drafts for a January directive that correspond to each of the three
policy alternatives. Each draft includes changes to make it consistent with the
corresponding postmeeting statement.
The directive for Alternative A instructs the Desk to continue purchasing
additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of about $35 billion per month
and to continue purchasing longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of about $40 billion
per month. The draft directive for Alternative B instructs the Desk to purchase agency
mortgage-backed securities at a pace of about $30 billion per month, and to purchase
longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of about $35 billion per month, beginning in
February. The draft directive for Alternative C instructs the Desk to purchase agency
mortgage-backed securities at a pace of about $25 billion per month, and to purchase
longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of about $30 billion per month, also beginning
in February. All three of the draft directives direct the Desk to maintain the current
policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency
mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over
maturing Treasury securities into new issues.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 34 of 52

--- Page 37 ---

December 2013 Directive
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee seeks
monetary and financial conditions that will foster maximum employment and price
stability. In particular, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain such conditions. Beginning
in January, the Desk is directed to purchase longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of
about $40 billion per month and to purchase agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace
of about $35 billion per month. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar
roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal
Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions. The Committee directs the
Desk to maintain its policy of rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues
and its policy of reinvesting principal payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-
backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities. The System Open Market
Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing
developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect the attainment over
time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 35 of 52

--- Page 38 ---

Directive for January 2014 Alternative A
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee seeks
monetary and financial conditions that will foster maximum employment and price
stability. In particular, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain such conditions. Beginning
in January, The Desk is directed to purchase continue purchasing longer-term Treasury
securities at a pace of about $40 billion per month and to purchase continue purchasing
agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of about $35 billion per month. The
Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed
securities transactions. The Committee directs the Desk to maintain its policy of rolling
over maturing Treasury securities into new issues and its policy of reinvesting principal
payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-
backed securities. The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will
keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance
sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of
maximum employment and price stability.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 36 of 52

--- Page 39 ---

Directive for January 2014 Alternative B
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee seeks
monetary and financial conditions that will foster maximum employment and price
stability. In particular, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain such conditions. Beginning
in January February, the Desk is directed to purchase longer-term Treasury securities at
a pace of about $40 $35 billion per month and to purchase agency mortgage-backed
securities at a pace of about $35 $30 billion per month. The Committee also directs the
Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate
settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions. The
Committee directs the Desk to maintain its policy of rolling over maturing Treasury
securities into new issues and its policy of reinvesting principal payments on all agency
debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities. The
System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee
informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect
the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and
price stability.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 37 of 52

--- Page 40 ---

Directive for January 2014 Alternative C
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee seeks
monetary and financial conditions that will foster maximum employment and price
stability. In particular, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain such conditions. Beginning
in January February, the Desk is directed to purchase longer-term Treasury securities at
a pace of about $40 $30 billion per month and to purchase agency mortgage-backed
securities at a pace of about $35 $25 billion per month. The Committee also directs the
Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate
settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions. The
Committee directs the Desk to maintain its policy of rolling over maturing Treasury
securities into new issues and its policy of reinvesting principal payments on all agency
debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities. The
System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee
informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect
the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and
price stability.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 38 of 52

--- Page 41 ---

Projections
BALANCE SHEET, INCOME, AND MONETARY BASE
The staff has prepared three scenarios for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet that
correspond in broad terms to Alternatives A, B, and C. All three alternatives include
additional asset purchases, though the pace and cumulative amount of purchases differ
across the alternatives. Under Alternative B we assume that the pace of purchases is
reduced in measured steps, with the next reduction implemented in February and the
program being completed early in the fourth quarter of 2014. Under Alternative C, each
reduction in purchases is larger than in Alternative B, and the program is brought to a
close by mid-2014. In contrast, under Alternative A the current pace of asset purchases is
assumed to remain unchanged until the second quarter of 2014 and then to be reduced in
measured steps to zero by early 2015.
Projections under each scenario are based on the staff’s assumptions about the
trajectory of various components of the balance sheet and the balance sheet normalization
strategy.1 The projections associated with each of the alternatives assume that when the
time comes to normalize the balance sheet, the SOMA portfolio shrinks only through
redemptions of Treasury securities and agency debt and paydowns of principal from
agency MBS; consistent with the strategy outlined in the press conference statement
following the June 2013 FOMC meeting, no sales of agency MBS are incorporated.
For the balance sheet scenario that corresponds to Alternative B, monthly
purchases of longer-term Treasury securities and of agency MBS are reduced by
$5 billion each in February. Thereafter, monthly purchases of Treasury securities and
agency MBS are each reduced further by $5 billion after subsequent FOMC meetings;
purchases wind down to zero in the fourth quarter of 2014. Under these assumptions,
which are consistent with the staff baseline forecast assumption, purchases total a bit less
1 With this Tealbook, the explanatory note that discussed the details of the underlying assumptions
has been discontinued. Some of the information formerly provided in that note has been included in this
section, as is a table summarizing the key line items of the balance sheet for Alternative B. Further
information on the assumptions regarding asset and liability categories not discussed here can be referenced
in the appendix of the December 2013 Tealbook, Book B.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 39 of 52

--- Page 42 ---

Alternative B Alternative A
Alternative C December Tealbook Alternative B
Total Assets
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Reserve Balances
Billions of dollars
6000
Monthly
5500
5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Billions of dollars
4500
Monthly
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
SOMA Treasury Holdings
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
SOMA Agency MBS Holdings
Billions of dollars
3500
Monthly
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Total Assets and Selected Balance Sheet Items
Billions of dollars
2400
Monthly
2200
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 40 of 52

--- Page 43 ---

than $1.5 trillion over 2013 and 2014, compared with about $1.4 trillion in Alternative B
in the December Tealbook.2
As shown in the exhibit “Total Assets and Selected Balance Sheet Items,” total
assets under the purchase program assumed for Alternative B peak at about $4.5 trillion
in the first quarter of 2015, with $2.5 trillion in Treasury securities holdings and
$1.7 trillion in agency MBS holdings. We assume that the first increase in the target
federal funds rate is in the second quarter of 2015, consistent with the staff forecast and
well past the time that the unemployment rate declines below 6½ percent. The timing of
liftoff is about two quarters earlier than we assumed in our balance sheet projections for
Alternative B of the December Tealbook. At the time of liftoff, all securities
reinvestments and rollovers are assumed to cease, and the SOMA portfolio begins to
contract.3,4,5 The size of the portfolio is normalized by late 2021, as in the December
Tealbook. The balance sheet then begins to expand, with increases in SOMA holdings
essentially matching the growth of currency in circulation and Federal Reserve Bank
capital.6 Total assets are $2.5 trillion at the end of 2025, with about $640 billion in
agency MBS holdings remaining in the SOMA portfolio.
2 The size of the purchase program is essentially the same as that assumed in the staff forecast for
December, while it is a bit larger than modeled in Alternative B for December.
3 Given potential communication issues that could arise with halting securities reinvestments prior
to the liftoff of the federal funds rate, we now assume the Committee stops reinvestments when it first
raises the target federal funds rate. In previous Tealbooks, securities reinvestments and rollovers were
assumed to cease two quarters before the initial increase in the target federal funds rate. In Alternative B,
securities with a par value of roughly $70 billion would have rolled off the balance sheet prior to liftoff
under the old assumption.
4 Temporary reserve draining tools—reverse repurchase agreements (RRPs) and term deposits—
are not modeled in any of the scenarios presented, though the model does assume RRPs associated with
foreign official and international accounts will remain around $100 billion throughout the forecast horizon.
Use of these tools would result in a shift in the composition of Federal Reserve liabilities—a decline in
reserve balances and a corresponding increase in reverse repurchase agreements or term deposits—but
would not produce an overall change in the size of the balance sheet.
5 Projected prepayments of agency MBS reflect interest rate projections as of January 17, 2014.
6 The size of the balance sheet is assumed to be normalized when the securities portfolio reverts to
its longer-run trend level, which is determined largely by currency in circulation plus Federal Reserve
capital and a projected steady-state level of reserve balances. The projected timing of the normalization of
the size of the balance sheet depends importantly on the level of reserve balances that is assumed to be
necessary to conduct monetary policy; currently, we assume that level of reserve balances to be $25 billion,
about where these balances stood prior to the crisis. However, ongoing regulatory and structural changes
could lead to a higher demand for reserve balances in the new steady state. A higher steady-state level for
reserve balances would, all else equal, imply an earlier normalization of the size of the balance sheet.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 41 of 52

--- Page 44 ---

Alternative B Alternative A
Alternative C December Tealbook Alternative B
Interest Income
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Interest Expense
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Realized Capital Gains
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Remittances to Treasury
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
−20
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
−20
Deferred Asset
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Memo: Unrealized Gains/Losses
Billions of dollars
120
End of year
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Income Projections
Billions of dollars
400
End of year
300
200
100
0
−100
−200
−300
−400
−500
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 42 of 52

--- Page 45 ---

The second exhibit, “Income Projections,” shows the implications of balance
sheet developments for Federal Reserve income. Under Alternative B, interest income
rises while purchases are ongoing, then increases slowly until reinvestments cease, and
subsequently declines for a number of years as the SOMA portfolio contracts through
redemptions and paydowns of principal. Although interest expense is quite small in the
near term, when the federal funds rate rises with reserve balances still quite elevated,
interest expense climbs. As a result, Federal Reserve remittances to the Treasury remain
robust in the near term but then slow markedly over the period from 2017 to 2021,
although they are projected to remain positive over the entire projection period. Annual
remittances peak at about $100 billion in 2014 and trough at about $20 billion later in the
decade, and no deferred asset is recorded.7 Cumulative remittances from 2009 through
2025 are about $1 trillion, well above the level that would have been observed without
the asset purchase programs.
The unrealized gain/loss position of the SOMA portfolio is importantly influenced
by the level of interest rates. For example, the portfolio was in a $200 billion unrealized
net gain position at the beginning of 2013 and an estimated $50 billion unrealized net loss
position at year-end, reflecting the nearly 125 basis-point rise in the ten-year Treasury
yield over the year.8 In Alternative B, the unrealized loss position is projected to peak at
about $340 billion at year-end 2017, primarily because of the projected rise in interest
rates. The unrealized loss position narrows through the remainder of the forecast period
as securities mature and roll off the portfolio.
Under Alternative C, in February, the monthly pace of purchases of longer-term
Treasury securities and agency MBS is reduced by $10 billion each. Further reductions
in the pace of purchases are assumed to occur in months following subsequent FOMC
meetings, and the pace of purchases is assumed to wind down to zero by mid-2014.9
Under this balance sheet scenario, purchases total about $1.3 trillion over 2013 and 2014,
7 In the event that a Federal Reserve Bank’s earnings fall short of the amount necessary to cover
operating costs, pay dividends, and equate surplus to capital paid-in, a deferred asset would be recorded. In
this Tealbook, none of the alternatives results in a deferred asset.
8 The Federal Reserve reports the level and the change in the quarter-end net unrealized gain/loss
position of the SOMA portfolio to the public with a lag in the “Federal Reserve Banks Combined Quarterly
Financial Report,” available on the Board’s website at
http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_fedfinancials.htm#quarterly.
9 The assumption that purchases will end by June 2014 is consistent with a view that the recovery
is proceeding more strongly than in the staff forecast or with a concern about the possible efficacy, costs, or
risks associated with asset purchases.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 43 of 52

--- Page 46 ---

Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Alternative B
Billions of dollars
Dec 31, 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 2025
Total assets 4,024 4,411 3,660 2,700 2,062 2,274 2,511
Selected assets
Loans and other credit extensions* 3 0 0 0 0 0 0
Securities held outright 3,756 4,157 3,447 2,519 1,904 2,131 2,383
U.S. Treasury securities 2,209 2,475 2,064 1,366 945 1,340 1,737
Agency debt securities 57 33 4 2 2 2 2
Agency mortgage-backed securities 1,490 1,649 1,379 1,150 956 789 644
Unamortized premiums 209 201 157 122 97 79 64
Unamortized discounts -12 -18 -15 -12 -9 -8 -7
Total other assets 69 71 71 71 71 71 71
Total liabilities 3,969 4,350 3,585 2,604 1,941 2,120 2,317
Selected liabilities
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 1,198 1,352 1,504 1,641 1,800 1,981 2,178
Reverse repurchase agreements 316 100 100 100 100 100 100
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 2,446 2,887 1,972 857 38 38 38
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 2,250 2,874 1,959 844 25 25 25
U.S. Treasury, General Account 162 5 5 5 5 5 5
Other Deposits 34 8 8 8 8 8 8
Interest on Federal Reserve Notes due 3 0 0 0 0 0 0
to U.S. Treasury
Total capital 55 60 76 96 121 153 194
Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
* Loans and other credit extensions includes primary, secondary, and seasonal credit; central bank liquidity swaps; Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan
Facility (TALF); net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC; and net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 44 of 52

--- Page 47 ---

and the federal funds rate is assumed to lift off in mid-2015. Reinvestment of principal
from maturing or prepaying securities ends and redemptions begin in the second quarter
of 2015 concurrent with the first increase in the federal funds rate, causing the portfolio
to begin to contract. Total assets in this scenario peak at about $4.3 trillion in the first
quarter of 2015, and the size of the balance sheet is normalized around the same time as
in Alternative B. Federal Reserve remittances to the Treasury are projected to remain
positive throughout the projection period, and no deferred asset is recorded. Cumulative
remittances from 2009 to 2025 are roughly the same as under Alternative B.
In the scenario for Alternative A, the current pace of purchases of longer-term
Treasury securities and agency MBS is maintained in the near term and then is reduced
gradually, with purchases ending in early 2015.10 Under these assumptions, purchases
total about $1.7 trillion from 2013 to 2015. In this scenario, total assets increase to a
peak of about $4.7 trillion in the first quarter of 2015. The first increase in the target
federal funds rate is assumed to occur in the second quarter of 2015, after the
unemployment rate declines below 6 percent.11 All reinvestments are assumed to cease at
the first increase in the federal funds rate, and then the SOMA portfolio begins to
contract. The size of the portfolio is normalized about two quarters later than in the
scenario corresponding to Alternative B, reflecting the larger amount of asset purchases.
Federal Reserve remittances to the Treasury are projected to remain positive over the
entire projection period, and no deferred asset is recorded. Cumulative remittances from
2009 through 2025 are roughly the same as under Alternative B.
As shown in the exhibit, “Alternative Projections for the 10-Year Treasury Term
Premium Effect,” under Alternative B, the effect of the Federal Reserve’s asset purchases
on the term premium embedded in the yield on the ten-year Treasury note in the first
quarter of 2014 is negative 127 basis points, about the same as under Alternative B in the
December Tealbook. Over the remainder of the projection period, the term premium
effect declines slowly toward zero, reflecting the actual and anticipated normalization of
the portfolio. Under Alternative C, the contemporaneous term premium effect is negative
119 basis points. The effect is less negative than in Alternative B because there are fewer
10 This later conclusion to the purchases would be consistent with progress toward the
Committee’s objectives for the labor market and inflation occurring more gradually in the near term than in
the staff forecast.
11 If the Committee chose to implement a 5½ percent unemployment rate threshold, liftoff would
occur about three quarters later.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 45 of 52

--- Page 48 ---

Alternative Projections for the 10-Year Treasury Term Premium Effect
December
Date Alternative B Alternative C Alternative A
Alternative B
Basis Points
Quarterly Averages
Quarterly
2014 Q1 -127 -119 -136 -122
Q2 -123 -114 -131 -117
Q3 -117 -109 -127 -112
Q4 -112 -104 -121 -107
2015 Q1 -107 -99 -116 -101
Q2 -102 -94 -110 -96
Q3 -96 -89 -105 -91
Q4 -91 -84 -99 -86
2016 Q1 -87 -80 -94 -82
Q2 -82 -76 -89 -77
Q3 -78 -72 -85 -73
Q4 -74 -68 -80 -69
2017 Q4 -59 -54 -64 -54
2018Q4 -47 -43 -51 -42
2019 Q4 -37 -34 -41 -33
2020 Q4 -29 -27 -32 -25
2021 Q4 -23 -22 -25 -20
2022 Q4 -19 -18 -20 -16
2023 Q4 -15 -14 -16 -12
2024 Q4 -11 -11 -12 -9
2025 Q4 -8 -8 -9 -6
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 46 of 52

--- Page 49 ---

securities purchases than under Alternative B. Under Alternative A, the term premium
effect is about negative 136 basis points in the current quarter. The effect is more
negative than in Alternative B because more securities are purchased than under
Alternative B.
The differences across the scenarios regarding the projected peak amount of
reserve balances and the level of reserve balances at liftoff are directly related to the
magnitude of assumed asset purchases, the level of premiums associated with purchases,
and the timing of the liftoff of the federal funds rate, although the level of reserve
balances is also contingent on the evolution of other balance sheet items. Reserve
balances peak when the federal funds rate lifts off from its lower bound at about
$3.3 trillion, $3.0 trillion, and $2.8 trillion under Alternatives A, B, and C, respectively.
As shown in the final exhibit, “Alternative Projections for the Monetary Base,” in
the scenario corresponding to Alternative B, the monetary base increases through the
middle of 2015 because the purchase program is accompanied by an increase in reserve
balances. Once exit begins, the monetary base shrinks, on net, into early 2022, primarily
because redemptions of securities cause corresponding reductions in reserve balances.
Starting around mid-2022, after reserve balances are assumed to have stabilized at
$25 billion, the monetary base begins to expand in line with the growth of currency in
circulation. Because the turning points in the balance sheets are not that different across
the alternatives, the growth rates of the monetary base in Alternatives C and A are
broadly similar to those under Alternative B. snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 47 of 52

--- Page 50 ---

Alternative Projections for the Monetary Base
Percent change, annual rate; not seasonally adjusted
December
Date Alternative B Alternative C Alternative A
Alternative B
Quarterly
2013: Q4 33.6 33.6 33.6 33.2
2014: Q1 55.0 54.6 55.3 28.9
Q2 17.7 14.2 20.4 11.1
Q3 14.2 6.6 19.3 13.0
Q4 6.1 0.4 11.5 4.1
2015: Q1 1.4 0.5 6.3 1.6
Q2 4.7 4.9 5.4 -5.6
Q3 -2.9 -2.8 -2.8 1.1
Q4 -4.0 -4.0 -4.0 -1.4
2016: Q1 -6.1 -6.2 -5.9 -2.0
Q2 -11.5 -11.9 -11.1 -12.6
Q3 -9.1 -9.3 -8.8 -10.0
Q4 -7.6 -7.8 -7.5 -8.4
Annual
2013 37.8 37.8 37.8 37.7
2014 24.9 19.7 29.0 14.9
2015 -0.2 -0.4 1.2 -1.1
2016 -8.3 -8.5 -8.1 -8.0
2017 -8.8 -9.0 -8.6 -9.6
2018 -13.3 -13.7 -12.9 -14.6
2019 -14.4 -14.5 -14.2 -15.9
2020 -13.6 -13.6 -13.5 -15.2
2021 -11.9 -9.1 -12.1 -12.3
2022 1.7 4.2 -3.8 4.1
2023 4.2 4.2 4.2 4.8
2024 4.3 4.3 4.3 4.8
2025 4.3 4.2 4.3 4.8
Note: For years, Q4 to Q4; for quarters, calculated from corresponding
average levels.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 48 of 52

--- Page 51 ---

MONEY
After advancing briskly in 2013, M2 is projected to increase at a rate in line with
that of nominal GDP in the first quarter of this year. Thereafter, M2 is forecast to expand
more slowly than nominal GDP, in part because investors are assumed to reallocate a
portion of their elevated M2 balances to riskier investments as economic conditions
improve.12 In 2015 and 2016, M2 growth is depressed as the projected rise in short-term
market rates increases the opportunity cost of holding M2 assets.
M2 Monetary Aggregate Projections
1
(Percent change, annual rate; seasonally adjusted)
Quarterly
2014: Q1 3.7
Q2 3.8
Q3 3.1
Q4 3.4
2015: Q1 -1.6
Q2 -2.4
Q3 -2.2
Q4 -2.1
2016: Q1 -1.5
Q2 -0.8
Q3 -0.4
Q4 0.5
Annual
2014 3.6
2015 -2.0
2016 -0.6
Note: This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates
in the Tealbook forecast. Actual data through January 13, 2014;
projections thereafter.
1. Growth rates are computed from period averages with the exception
of annual growth rates which are the change from fourth quarter of
previous year to fourth quarter of year indicated.
12 The staff’s M2 forecast is constructed using the staff’s forecast of nominal income growth and
model-based estimates of interest rate effects with judgmental adjustments.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 49 of 52

--- Page 52 ---

(This page is intentionally blank.)
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Page 50 of 52

--- Page 53 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
Abbreviations
ABCP asset-backed commercial paper
ABS asset-backed securities
AFE advanced foreign economy
BEA Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce
BHC bank holding company
BOE Bank of England
BOJ Bank of Japan
CDS credit default swaps
C&I commercial and industrial
CLO collateralized loan obligation
CMBS commercial mortgage-backed securities
CP commercial paper
CRE commercial real estate
Desk Open Market Desk
ECB European Central Bank
EME emerging market economy
ETF exchange-traded fund
FDIC Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
FOMC Federal Open Market Committee; also, the Committee
G-7 Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, U.K., U.S.)
G-20 Group of Twenty (Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, China,
European Union, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan,
Mexico, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, South Korea, Turkey,
U.K., U.S.)
GCF general collateral finance
GDP gross domestic product
LIBOR London interbank offered rate
LSAP large-scale asset purchase
MBS mortgage-backed securities
Page 51 of 52

--- Page 54 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) January 23, 2014
NIPA national income and product accounts
OIS overnight index swap
OTC over-the-counter
PCE personal consumption expenditures
REIT real estate investment trust
REO real estate owned
repo repurchase agreement
RMBS residential mortgage-backed securities
RRP reverse repurchase agreement
SCOOS Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms
SFA Supplemental Financing Account
SOMA System Open Market Account
S&P Standard & Poor’s
TALF Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility
TBA to be announced (for example, TBA market)
TGA U.S. Treasury’s General Account
TIPS Treasury inflation-protected securities
TPE Term premium effects
Page 52 of 52

# Tables

## Page_13_Table_1


| 2013   | 2014   | 2015   | 2016   | 2017   |
|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
| H2     |        |        |        |        |


## Page_14_Table_1


| 2013   | 2014   | 2015   | 2016   | 2017   |
|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
| H2     |        |        |        |        |


## Page_21_Table_1


| Selected
Elements                       | December
Statement                                                                                                                                                                                     | January Alternatives                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
|-----------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                        | A                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | B                                                                                                                                                    | C                                                                                              |
| Economic Conditions, Outlook, and Risks |                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
|                                         | economic activity is expanding at a                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
|                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                        | growth in economic activity picked up in recent quarters                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
|                                         | moderate pace                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
|                                         | labor market conditions have shown                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
|                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                        | labor market indicators were mixed                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                      | unchanged                                                                                      |
|                                         | further improvement                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
|                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                      | the unemployment rate,                                                                         |
|                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                      | though still elevated                                                                          |
| Economic                                | the unemployment rate has declined                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                      | relative to levels judged                                                                      |
|                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                        | the unemployment rate declined but remains elevated                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
| Conditions                              | but remains elevated                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                      | consistent with dual                                                                           |
|                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                      | mandate over the longer-                                                                       |
|                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                      | run, continued to decline                                                                      |
|                                         | fiscal policy is restraining growth,                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                      | extent to which fiscal                                                                         |
|                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                        | fiscal policy is restraining growth, although extent of                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
|                                         | although the extent of restraint may                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                      | policy is restraining                                                                          |
|                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                        | restraint is diminishing                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
|                                         | be diminishing                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                      | growth is diminishing                                                                          |
|                                         | inflation has been running below the                                                                                                                                                                   | inflation has been running                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
|                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | unchanged                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                |
|                                         | longer-run objective                                                                                                                                                                                   | well below objective                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
|                                         | economic growth will pick up;                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
| Outlook                                 | unemployment rate will gradually                                                                                                                                                                       | economic activity will expand at a moderate pace; unemployment rate will                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
|                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                        | gradually decline                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
|                                         | decline                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
|                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                        | risks nearly balanced but                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
| Risks                                   | risks have become more nearly                                                                                                                                                                          | still tilted slightly to the                                                                                                                                                                                        | risks nearly balanced                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                |
|                                         | balanced                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
|                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                        | downside                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
| Balance Sheet Policies                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
| Agency MBS                              | $35 billion/month                                                                                                                                                                                      | unchanged                                                                                                                                                                                                           | $30 billion/month                                                                                                                                    | $25 billion/month                                                                              |
| Treasuries                              | $40 billion/month                                                                                                                                                                                      | unchanged                                                                                                                                                                                                           | $35 billion/month                                                                                                                                    | $30 billion/month                                                                              |
| Rationale for
Purchases                 | cumulative progress toward
maximum employment and
improvement in outlook for labor
market                                                                                                              | information received about
labor market and inflation
does not warrant a reduction
in pace                                                                                                                          | unchanged                                                                                                                                            | continuing progress toward
maximum employment and
outlook for ongoing
improvement in labor mkt |
| Purchase
Guidance                       | if incoming information broadly
supports expectations, will likely
reduce pace in further measured
steps at future meetings . . .                                                                      | . . . will likely reduce pace
in measured steps at future
meetings . . .                                                                                                                                            | unchanged                                                                                                                                            | . . . will likely continue to
reduce pace at future
meetings . . .                             |
| Federal Funds Rate                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
| Target                                  | 0 to ¼ percent                                                                                                                                                                                         | unchanged                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
| Rate
Guidance                           | at least as long as thresholds (6½
percent; 2½ percent) are not crossed
and inflation expectations remain
well anchored                                                                                | unchanged                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                |
|                                         | anticipates it likely will be
appropriate to maintain current
target for FFR well past time that
unemployment threshold is crossed,
especially if projected inflation
continues to run below 2 percent | likely will be appropriate to
maintain current target for
FFR at least until the
unemployment rate declines
below [ 6 percent especially
if | 5½ percent so long as ]
projected inflation continues
below 2 percent | continues to anticipate
it likely will be
appropriate to maintain
current target for FFR
well past time that
unemployment threshold
is crossed . . . | unchanged                                                                                      |
|                                         | when begin to remove
accommodation, will take balanced
approach                                                                                                                                        | when eventually begin to
remove accommodation,
will take balanced approach                                                                                                                                          | unchanged                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                |


## Page_51_Table_1


| M2 Monetary Aggregate Projections
1
(Percent change, annual rate; seasonally adjusted)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                            |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Quarterly                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                            |
| 2014:
2015:
2016:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | Q1 3.7
Q2 3.8
Q3 3.1
Q4 3.4
Q1 -1.6
Q2 -2.4
Q3 -2.2
Q4 -2.1
Q1 -1.5
Q2 -0.8
Q3 -0.4
Q4 0.5 |
| Annual                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                            |
|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | 2014 3.6
2015 -2.0
2016 -0.6                                                               |
| Note: This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates
in the Tealbook forecast. Actual data through January 13, 2014;
projections thereafter.
1. Growth rates are computed from period averages with the exception
of annual growth rates which are the change from fourth quarter of
previous year to fourth quarter of year indicated. |                                                                                            |