# 20121212_tealbook.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:41:47*
*Pages: 65, Tables: 8*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that
material was received on a confidential basis. Redacted material is indicated by
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content. All redacted
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of
Information Act.
Content last modified 01/05/2018.

--- Page 2 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR)
Report to the FOMC
on Economic Conditions
and Monetary Policy
Book B
Monetary Policy:
Strategies and Alternatives
December 6, 2012
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
by the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

--- Page 3 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
Monetary Policy Strategies
s
e
i
g
The top panel of the first exhibit, “Policy Rules and the Staff Projection,” e
t
a
provides near-term prescriptions for the federal funds rate from six policy rules: the r
t
S
Taylor (1993) rule, the Taylor (1999) rule, the inertial Taylor (1999) rule, the outcome-
based rule, the first-difference rule, and the nominal income targeting rule.1 These
prescriptions take as given the staff’s baseline projections for real activity and inflation in
2013. (Medium-term prescriptions derived from dynamic simulations of each rule are
discussed later). As shown in the left-hand columns, all but two of the near-term
prescriptions keep the federal funds rate at the effective lower bound through the second
quarter of 2013. The Taylor (1993) rule, which puts relatively little weight on the output
gap, prescribes an increase in the target federal funds rate to about 130 basis points in
both the first and second quarters of 2013. In addition, the first-difference rule, which
responds to the three-quarter-ahead change in the output gap, prescribes a target federal
funds rate of 37 basis points for the second quarter of 2013.
The right-hand columns display the rule prescriptions that arise in the absence of
the lower-bound constraint. The outcome-based rule and the inertial Taylor (1999) rule
prescribe federal funds rates that are near zero for the next two quarters, while the Taylor
(1999) rule and the nominal income targeting rule prescribe rates that are well below
zero. The more-accommodative prescriptions arising from the latter two rules reflect the
stronger immediate response of the rules to the staff’s estimate of the output gap, which
remains appreciably negative.2
The Tealbook baseline projections for the output gap and inflation are shown in
the bottom half of the exhibit, titled “Key Elements of the Staff Projection.” As
described in Book A of the Tealbook, the projected path of the output gap is wider in
2013 and 2014, relative to the October projection, reflecting a modest downward revision
to the staff’s assessment of the underlying strength of household spending in light of
1 Details for each rule appear in Explanatory Note A. Note that the prescriptions of the outcome-
based rule reported in the table are not adjusted to conform with the Committee’s forward guidance, unlike
the approach taken by the staff in using this rule to set the path of the federal funds rate in its baseline
forecast.
2 Although the rule prescriptions are not constrained to be at or above the lower bound, the inertial
Taylor (1999) rule, the outcome-based rule, and the nominal income targeting rule all include and place
substantial weight on the lagged federal funds rate, which is subject to the lower-bound constraint.
1 of 63

--- Page 4 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
Policy Rules and the Staff Projection
s
e
g i Near-Term Prescriptions of Selected Policy Rules
e
t
a
r Constrained Policy Unconstrained Policy
t
S
2013Q1 2013Q2 2013Q1 2013Q2
Taylor (1993) rule 1.30 1.32 1.30 1.32
Previous Tealbook 1.40 1.43 1.40 1.43
Taylor (1999) rule 0.13 0.13 −0.79 −0.71
Previous Tealbook 0.1 3 0.1 3 −0. 63 −0. 54
Inertial Taylor (1999) rule 0.13 0.13 0.01 −0.10
Previous Tealbook Outlook 0.1 3 0.1 3 0. 03 −0. 05
Outcome-based rule 0.13 0.13 −0.03 −0.14
Previous Tealbook Outlook 0.1 3 0.1 3 0. 01 −0. 06
First-difference rule 0.20 0.37 0.20 0.37
Previous Tealbook Outlook 0.26 0.56 0.26 0.56
Nominal income targeting rule 0.13 0.13 −0.48 −0.96
Previous Tealbook Outlook 0.1 3 0.1 3 −0. 42 −0. 86
Memo: Equilibrium and Actual Real Federal Funds Rate
Current Previous
Tealbook Tealbook
Tealbook-consistent FRB/US r* estim ate −2.21 −1.90
A ctual real federal funds rate −1. 45 −1. 47
Key Elements of the Staff Projection
GDP Gap PCE Prices ex. Food and Energy
Percent Four-quarter percent change
3 3 4.0 4.0
Current Tealbook
2 Previous Tealbook 2
3.5 3.5
1 1
3.0 3.0
0 0
-1 -1 2.5 2.5
-2 -2
2.0 2.0
-3 -3
-4 -4 1.5 1.5
-5 -5
1.0 1.0
-6 -6
0.5 0.5
-7 -7
-8 -8 0.0 0.0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Note: For rules which have the lagged policy rate as a right-hand-side variable, the lines denoted "Previous Tealbook
Outlook" report rule prescriptions based on the previous Tealbook’s staff outlook, but jumping off from the average value
for the policy rate thus far in the quarter.
2 of 63

--- Page 5 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
surprisingly weak incoming data on consumer spending and income, as well as somewhat
less favorable financial conditions.3 In contrast, the staff’s projection of core inflation is
essentially unchanged since the October Tealbook. Because of the slightly weaker s
e
i
g
outlook for economic activity, the near-term prescriptions from all of the unconstrained e
t
a
rules have decreased a bit compared with those in the October Tealbook. r
t
S
The top panel of the first exhibit also reports the Tealbook-consistent estimate of
short-run r*, which is generated by the FRB/US model when conditioned on the staff’s
outlook for the economy. The short-run r* estimate corresponds to the real federal funds
rate that, if maintained, would return output to potential in twelve quarters. Consistent
with the staff’s revision to the output gap, the r* estimate is about 30 basis points lower
than in the October Tealbook. As in previous rounds, the estimate of r*—currently about
2¼ percent— remains below the estimated actual real federal funds rate of about 1½
percent.
The second exhibit, “Policy Rule Simulations,” reports dynamic simulations using
the FRB/US model that incorporate the endogenous responses of inflation and the output
gap to the different paths of the federal funds rate prescribed by the constrained versions
of the six policy rules described above. The model is adjusted to match the staff’s
baseline outlook for the economy and then simulated using each of the policy rules. Each
rule is implemented from the first quarter of 2013 onward, under the assumption that
private agents fully understand and anticipate the implications of the rule for future real
activity, inflation, and interest rates.4 The exhibit also displays the Tealbook baseline
3 With regards to financial conditions, the staff’s baseline assumption is that the asset purchase
program will end in mid-2013. Market participants appear to expect purchases to continue longer, and so
they are assumed to be disappointed when purchases end. The staff’s output gap forecast embeds the
assumption that market rates will reflect the smaller-than-expected total purchases by the beginning of the
third quarter of 2013. The disappointment will result in a weaker stock market, a stronger dollar and higher
longer-term real interest rates that widen the output gap by 8 basis points by the end of 2013, 24 basis
points by the end of 2014, and 34 basis points by the end of 2015.
4 The staff’s baseline forecast incorporates the effects of the large-scale asset purchase programs
that the FOMC has undertaken in recent years, as well as the effects of the flow-based asset purchases
through December, the continuation of the maturity extension program until the end of this year, and the
modifications to the Federal Reserve’s reinvestment policies that were announced in September 2011. The
staff baseline also assumes that the FOMC will purchase an additional $500 billion in long-term Treasury
securities and MBS through mid-2013, and incorporates some “disappointment” on the part of financial
market participants as they gradually come to recognize that the program will not be continued past this
point, as they currently appear to expect. Based on these assumptions, the policy rule simulations
incorporate the baseline effects of these balance sheet policies; the rules themselves are not directly
adjusted for the effects of balance sheet policies.
3 of 63

--- Page 6 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
Policy Rule Simulations
s
e
i
g Nominal Federal Funds Rate Real Federal Funds Rate
e
t Percent Percent
a
r 7 7 4 4
S t Taylor (1993) rule
Taylor (1999) rule
6 Inertial Taylor (1999) rule 6
3 3
Nominal income targeting rule
First-difference rule
Tealbook baseline
5 5
2 2
4 4
1 1
3 3
0 0
2 2
-1 -1
1 1
-2 -2
0 0
-1 -1 -3 -3
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Unemployment Rate PCE Inflation
Percent Four-quarter average Percent
1 0 10 4.0 4.0
3.5 3.5
9 9
3.0 3.0
8 8
2.5 2.5
7 7 2.0 2.0
1.5 1.5
6 6
1.0 1.0
5 5
0.5 0.5
4 4 0.0 0.0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Note: The policy rule simulations in this exhibit are based on rules that respond to core inflation. This choice
of rule specification was made in light of the tendency for current and near-term core inflation rates to outperform
headline inflation rates as predictors of the medium-term behavior of headline inflation.
4 of 63

--- Page 7 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
paths, which are conditioned on the prescriptions of the outcome-based rule, adjusted to
be consistent with the policy guidance reaffirmed in the October statement.5
s
e
In the Tealbook baseline, the federal funds rate departs from the effective lower g i
e
t
bound in the fourth quarter of 2015, one quarter later than in the October Tealbook. a
r
t
S
Subsequently, the federal funds rate increases to 3.5 percent by the second quarter of
2018, and reaches 4.2 percent by the end of the decade. The unemployment rate reaches
6.5 percent at the end of 2015 and is expected to reach the staff’s long-term estimate of
the natural rate of unemployment by 2017 and remain close to this level thereafter.6
Headline inflation is projected to rise gradually over time and eventually converge to 2
percent after 2017.
The Taylor (1993) rule initially prescribes a tighter path for the federal funds rate
than the other rules. As noted above, because the Taylor (1993) rule does not respond
very strongly to the level of the output gap, it calls for a federal funds rate of 140 basis
points for the current quarter before a reduction to just below 100 basis points in the first
quarter of 2013. The higher federal funds rate makes real activity and inflation weaker
than in the baseline, prompting a subsequent partial reversal of the initial rate increase.
Reflecting the early tightening, however, the rule implies a higher unemployment rate
throughout the medium term as well as lower levels of inflation over the whole projection
period.
While the first-difference rule does not call for an increase in the federal funds
rate until the third quarter of 2014, it implies real and nominal federal funds rates that are
above those prescribed by all but the Taylor 1993 rule through mid-2017. Reflecting the
more-elevated average federal funds rate, the unemployment rate is higher and inflation
lower in the medium term than under all of the rules except the Taylor 1993 rule.
Compared with the Taylor (1993) rule, the Taylor (1999) rule prescribes a later
tightening of policy and produces generally lower unemployment rates and slightly
5 As discussed in Book A of the Tealbook, the staff projection for the federal funds rate follows
the estimated outcome-based rule, augmented with an intercept adjustment that reflects the forward
guidance in the Committee’s October statement and the economic outlook as it stood at the time.
Beginning in the third quarter of 2015, this intercept adjustment is steadily reduced and is zero beginning in
the fourth quarter of 2017.
6 The staff’s estimate of the effective natural rate of unemployment declines from about 6 percent
in the fourth quarter of 2013 to 5¼ percent by the end of 2017; it is assumed to remain at this level
thereafter.
5 of 63

--- Page 8 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
higher inflation rates over the projection period. However, because the policy rate is
higher under the Taylor (1999) rule than in the baseline, the rule produces worse
s outcomes. The unemployment rate slowly converges to the staff’s estimate of the
e
i
g
e effective natural rate of unemployment while inflation declines to 1.1 percent before
t
a
r gradually increasing to the 2 percent goal.
t
S
Under the inertial Taylor (1999) rule, the first increase in the federal funds rate
takes place in the third quarter of 2014, two quarters before the Taylor (1999) rule would
initiate tightening. This earlier firming of policy reflects the fact that the inertial Taylor
(1999) rule subsequently prescribes a slower pace of policy tightening with higher future
inflation, thereby generating a lower average path for the real federal funds rate through
the rest of the decade, and so fueling a more rapid pickup in real activity and a lower path
for the unemployment rate. The unemployment gap is essentially closed by late 2017,
when inflation is around 2 percent.
Under the nominal income targeting rule, the initial increase in the federal funds
rate occurs in the second quarter of 2015, and for several years thereafter policy is
generally more accommodative than under the other rules. In particular, the average
level of the real federal funds rate through the rest of the decade is markedly lower than
in the baseline. This more-accommodative policy is reflected in a more-rapid decline of
the unemployment rate, culminating in a period during which it is below the natural rate,
while inflation is uniformly higher than in the Tealbook baseline and modestly exceeds
its 2 percent longer-run objective for a few years.7
The next exhibit, “Constrained vs. Unconstrained Optimal Control Policy,”
compares optimal control simulations derived for this Tealbook with those shown in
October.8 In these simulations, policymakers are assumed to place equal weights on
7 With the exception of the Taylor (1993) rule, the prescribed dates of departure from the effective
lower bound under the various simple rules are sensitive to the assumption that the public recognizes at the
start of the simulations both what rule the FOMC will follow and the full implications of that rule for future
economic conditions, as this assumption can lead to significant near-term movements in real activity and
inflation in the simulations. If the public were instead assumed to revise only gradually its expectations for
the FOMC future policy actions, then the prescribed departure dates under the Taylor (1999) rule, the
inertial Taylor rule, and the first-difference rule would be advanced relative to the results reported in the
exhibit, while the prescribed departure date under the nominal income targeting rule would be pushed
further off into the future.
8 The optimal policy simulations incorporate the assumptions about underlying economic
conditions used in the staff’s baseline forecast, including the assumptions about balance sheet policies
described above.
6 of 63

--- Page 9 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
Constrained vs. Unconstrained Optimal Control Policy
s
e
Nominal Federal Funds Rate Real Federal Funds Rate g i
e
Percent Percent t
8 8 4 4 r
a
Current Tealbook: Constrained S t
Previous Tealbook: Constrained
7 7
Current Tealbook: Unconstrained 3 3
Tealbook baseline
6 6
2 2
5 5
1 1
4 4
3 3 0 0
2 2 -1 -1
1 1
-2 -2
0 0
-3 -3
-1 -1
-4 -4
-2 -2
-3 -3 -5 -5
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Unemployment Rate PCE Inflation
Percent Four-quarter average Percent
1 0 10 4.0 4.0
3.5 3.5
9 9
3.0 3.0
8 8
2.5 2.5
7 7 2.0 2.0
1.5 1.5
6 6
1.0 1.0
5 5
0.5 0.5
4 4 0.0 0.0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
7 of 63

--- Page 10 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
keeping headline PCE inflation close to the Committee’s 2 percent goal, on keeping the
unemployment rate close to the staff’s estimate of the effective natural rate of
s unemployment, and on minimizing changes in the federal funds rate. The simulations
e
i
g
e indicate that, with the federal funds rate constrained to remain positive, the optimal
t
a
r control path for the federal funds rate does not rise above the effective lower bound until
t
S
the first quarter of 2016, one quarter later than in the optimal control exercise shown in
the October Tealbook; the optimal path is revised down beyond 2015, reflecting the
wider output gap in the staff projection.9 Under the optimal control path, when the
federal funds rate rises above the lower bound, the unemployment rate is 5.7 percent and
the projected rate of inflation over both subsequent years is close to 2 percent.
The constrained optimal control policy would promote a faster pace of economic
recovery than in the staff’s baseline outlook by raising rates more slowly than under any
of the simple rules, while still keeping inflation close to the Committee’s goal of
2 percent over the medium term. Under this policy, the gap between the unemployment
rate and the staff’s estimate of the effective natural rate of unemployment is closed by
mid-2016, and the unemployment rate subsequently runs below the natural rate for a few
years. Inflation initially exhibits a decline similar to that in the Tealbook baseline, but it
then increases to the 2 percent objective by mid-2016 and then overshoots slightly,
peaking at about 2¼ percent in 2018 and gradually returning to the 2 percent objective
thereafter. The more-rapid convergence to the Committee’s assumed objectives than in
the Tealbook baseline, and the subsequent persistent overshooting, occur because
policymakers respond to the lower bound constraint by committing to keep interest rates
low for an extended period of time. As this policy is assumed to be completely credible,
it boosts inflation expectations and reduces real interest rates during the initial years of
the simulation.
Under the optimal unconstrained policy, the federal funds rate would gradually
decline to about 2 percent by early 2014 and return to positive territory only in late
2015. Under these conditions, the unemployment rate would decline more rapidly than
under the optimal constrained policy. Inflation would return to 2 percent by mid-2016, a
9 Although the loss function uses headline inflation instead of core inflation, the real federal funds
rate shown in the upper right panel of the exhibit is calculated as the difference between the nominal
federal funds rate and a four-quarter moving average of core PCE inflation. Core PCE inflation is used to
compute the real rate for this illustrative purpose because it provides a less volatile measure of inflation
expectations than does a four-quarter moving average of headline inflation.
8 of 63

--- Page 11 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
pattern much like that in the constrained simulation. In subsequent years, inflation would
slightly exceed the 2 percent objective, but less persistently than in the constrained case.10
s
e
The fourth exhibit, “Optimal Control Policy: Commitment vs. Discretion,” g i
e
t
displays simulations of the FRB/US model using two different concepts of optimality. a
r
t
S
Under the first concept (commitment), policymakers can choose conditional policies
today that effectively constrain the Committee’s policy choices in future periods; under
the second concept (discretion), policymakers are assumed to be unable to bind the policy
decisions of future Committees and so choose policy today subject to the expected
behavior of future policymakers. The commitment policy corresponds to the optimal
control concept presented in the third exhibit and so the red lines in this exhibit trace the
same paths as in the constrained case in the third exhibit. In the case of discretion, results
are presented both with and without the effective lower bound imposed on the federal
funds rate.
As can be seen from the unconstrained simulations under discretion, policymakers
would like to provide additional stimulus by cutting the federal funds rate today. With
that option ruled out by the lower-bound constraint, they therefore might consider an
alternative strategy of promising to keep the policy rate lower in the future. Under
discretion, however, policymakers’ inability to credibly bind future Committees to carry
out the original plan limits their ability to influence private-sector expectations regarding
the federal funds rate and other variables. Instead, the public knows that future
Committees will always reoptimize policy without regard for past policymakers’
promises. As a result, policy under discretion evolves over time in a way that causes the
federal funds rate to leave the lower bound sooner than under commitment, accompanied
by higher unemployment and lower inflation.11
Importantly, these exercises take the staff’s baseline assumption about the SOMA
portfolio policy as given and so treat the federal funds rate as the sole instrument that the
Committee adjusts in response to the state of the economy.12 If policymakers wished to
10 The differences, in terms of economic outcomes, between constrained and unconstrained
optimal control policies have noticeably narrowed since the December 2011 Tealbook. This narrowing is
in line with the intuition that additional policy accommodation provided this year and other factors have
boosted aggregate demand and thereby reduced the impact of the lower-bound constraint.
11 For further discussion of the different properties of commitment and discretion, see the box in
Book B of the December 2010 Tealbook, “The Role of Commitment in Optimal Policy Simulations.”
12 As discussed in Book A of the Tealbook, the baseline assumption about the conduct of
monetary policy is that the Federal Reserve will complete the maturity extension program as scheduled at
9 of 63

--- Page 12 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
Optimal Control Policy: Commitment vs. Discretion
s
e
g i Nominal Federal Funds Rate Real Federal Funds Rate
e
t Percent Percent
a
r 8 8 4 4
S t Optimal policy: Commitment, constrained
Optimal policy: Discretion, constrained
7 7
Optimal policy: Discretion, constrained, 3 3
(Previous Tealbook)
6 6
Optimal policy: Discretion, unconstrained
2 2
5 5
1 1
4 4
3 3 0 0
2 2 -1 -1
1 1
-2 -2
0 0
-3 -3
-1 -1
-4 -4
-2 -2
-3 -3 -5 -5
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Unemployment Rate PCE Inflation
Percent Four-quarter average Percent
1 0 10 4.0 4.0
3.5 3.5
9 9
3.0 3.0
8 8
2.5 2.5
7 7 2.0 2.0
1.5 1.5
6 6
1.0 1.0
5 5
0.5 0.5
4 4 0.0 0.0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
10 of 63

--- Page 13 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
provide additional policy stimulus but saw little remaining scope to lower private sector
expectations of the funds rate path because of limits on their ability to commit to future
policy actions, they could still provide stimulus by expanding the Federal Reserve’s s
e
i
g
holdings of longer-term securities. That such a step could be appropriate is suggested by e
t
a
the unconstained optimal control simulations under either commitment or discretion, r
t
S
which uniformly call for pushing the funds rate noticeably below zero in the near term.
The final exhibit, “Outcomes under Alternative Policies,” tabulates the simulation
results for key variables under the selected policy rules described above.
the end of this month, and purchase another $40 billion of agency MBS over the course of the month. As
noted above, the staff further assumes, as in October, that the Federal Reserve will purchase longer-term
securities at a pace of about $85 billion per month through the end of June 2013.
11 of 63

--- Page 14 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
Outcomes under Alternative Policies
(Percent change, annual rate, from end of preceding period except as noted)
s 2012
e Measure and scenario 2013 2014 2015 2016
i
g
e H1 H2
t
a
r Real GDP
t
S Extended Tealbook baseline 1.6 1.8 2.5 3.2 3.6 3.2
Taylor (1993) 1.6 1.8 1.6 2.5 3.3 3.5
Taylor (1999) 1.6 1.8 2.1 2.8 3.3 3.2
Inertial Taylor (1999) 1.6 1.8 2.4 3.0 3.5 3.3
First-difference 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.7 3.2 3.3
Nominal income targeting 1.6 1.7 2.7 3.4 3.7 3.4
Constrained optimal control 1.6 1.8 2.8 3.6 3.9 3.5
Unemployment rate1
Extended Tealbook baseline 8.2 8.0 7.8 7.4 6.5 5.8
Taylor (1993) 8.2 8.0 8.1 8.1 7.5 6.6
Taylor (1999) 8.2 8.0 7.9 7.7 7.0 6.3
Inertial Taylor (1999) 8.2 8.0 7.9 7.5 6.7 5.9
First-difference 8.2 8.0 8.0 7.8 7.2 6.4
Nominal income targeting 8.2 8.0 7.7 7.2 6.3 5.4
Constrained optimal control 8.2 8.0 7.7 7.1 6.0 5.1
Total PCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline 1.6 1.6 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.8
Taylor (1993) 1.6 1.3 0.9 0.9 1.0 1.2
Taylor (1999) 1.6 1.4 1.1 1.1 1.3 1.5
Inertial Taylor (1999) 1.6 1.6 1.4 1.5 1.7 1.9
First-difference 1.6 1.4 1.1 1.1 1.3 1.5
Nominal income targeting 1.6 1.7 1.6 1.8 1.9 2.1
Constrained optimal control 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.8 1.9 2.1
Core PCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline 2.0 1.2 1.6 1.6 1.7 1.8
Taylor (1993) 2.0 0.9 1.2 1.1 1.2 1.3
Taylor (1999) 2.0 1.1 1.4 1.4 1.5 1.6
Inertial Taylor (1999) 2.0 1.2 1.7 1.7 1.9 2.0
First-difference 2.0 1.0 1.4 1.3 1.5 1.6
Nominal income targeting 2.0 1.3 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2
Constrained optimal control 2.0 1.2 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.2
Federal funds rate1
Extended Tealbook baseline 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.4 2.0
Taylor (1993) 0.2 1.4 0.9 1.0 1.7 2.5
Taylor (1999) 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.2 1.4 2.5
Inertial Taylor (1999) 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.4 1.2 2.2
First-difference 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.5 1.8 2.6
Nominal income targeting 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.8 1.9
Constrained optimal control 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.2 1.1
1. Percent, average for the final quarter of the period.
12 of 63

--- Page 15 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
Monetary Policy Alternatives
This Tealbook presents three policy alternatives—labeled A, B, and C—for the
Committee’s consideration. As always, the Committee could blend elements of the draft
statements to construct its desired statement.
In its description of recent economic developments, Alternative B begins by
observing that, “apart from weather-related disruptions,” economic activity has continued
to expand moderately and that employment growth has picked up a bit although the
unemployment rate remains elevated. Like the October statement, Alternative B notes
that household spending has advanced; in light of recent data, however, October’s
s
observation that this spending category has been rising a bit more quickly is omitted. The e
v
i
t
draft statement also notes “further signs of improvement” in the housing sector. a
n
r
e
t
l
Alternative A, unlike Alternative B, repeats the Committee’s October assessment A
that employment growth “has been slow,” that there have only been “some” further signs
of improvement in the housing sector, and that the improvement in housing activity is
taking place “from a depressed level.” Alternative C offers a somewhat more upbeat
characterization of the data by describing employment growth as having “strengthened
somewhat” and stating that the “unemployment rate, though still elevated, has declined.”
Alternative C also drops the reference in the October statement to slower growth in
business fixed investment, instead observing more broadly that private domestic demand
has continued to advance.
With respect to inflation, Alternatives A and B say that it “has been running
somewhat below the Committee’s longer-run objective, apart from temporary variations
that largely reflect fluctuations in energy prices,” while Alternative C states that inflation
“has been running close” to the Committee’s longer-run objective and does not cite
energy prices. Each alternative indicates that longer-term inflation expectations have
remained stable.
The language in Alternative B follows the October statement language on the
outlook for real activity and employment, reiterating the Committee’s concern that,
without sufficient policy accommodation, “economic growth might not be strong enough
to generate sustained improvement in labor market conditions.” Alternative A’s language
on this issue is also similar to October’s, except that “further” policy accommodation is
13 of 63

--- Page 16 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
said to be needed to achieve the sustained labor market improvement. Alternative C
indicates that the Committee expects economic growth to pick up gradually and that it
anticipates that the unemployment rate will continue to decline at a pace consistent with
the Committee’s mandate. All of the draft statements continue to highlight the significant
downside risks to the economic outlook from strains in global financial markets. With
respect to inflation, Alternatives A and B state that the Committee anticipates that
inflation over the medium term “likely will run at or below its 2 percent objective,” while
Alternative C indicates that inflation over the medium term “will run near its 2 percent
objective.”
Reflecting their contrasting economic assessments, the alternatives also offer
different approaches to balance sheet policy after December. Alternative B maintains the
s
e
v purchases of agency MBS at a pace of $40 billion per month and indicates that, after the
i
t
a completion of the MEP at the end of the year, the Committee will purchase longer-term
n
r
t e Treasury securities, “initially at a pace of $45 billion per month.”1 The statement would
l
A
indicate that the Committee “will continue its purchases of Treasury and agency
mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate” until
substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market is achieved in a context of
price stability. Alternative A would increase the monthly flow of purchases of agency
MBS to $50 billion per month beginning in January and would increase the flow of
purchases of longer-term Treasury securities to $50 billion per month after the MEP
concludes.2 Moreover, the draft statement for Alternative A indicates that the purchases
will continue until the Committee judges that data on economic activity and labor market
conditions are consistent with an outlook for sustained progress toward maximum
employment in a context of price stability. In contrast, Alternative C announces that
purchases of both MBS and longer-term Treasury securities will stop at year-end. Both
Alternatives A and B would continue to indicate that the Committee will also take into
1 The sales side of the MEP will, by the end of the year, have brought down to near zero the
Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities of maturities within three years. Therefore, a renewal of
the MEP is not feasible, and those alternatives (A and B) whose policy announcements include continued
purchases of longer-term Treasury securities do not include sales of shorter-term Treasuries.
2 Staff analysis suggests that agency MBS purchases of $50 billion per month in addition to
reinvestments appear feasible over the first six months of next year, even though such purchases would
account for roughly 93 percent of gross TBA issuance. See the memo, “Agency MBS Market Functioning
and Purchase Capacity under the Open-Ended Purchase Program” (by M. Wei of the Federal Reserve
Board and M. Ezer, D. Finkelstein, J. Frost, D. Lucca, L. Molloy, J. Moore, M. Raskin, J. Remache, R.
Shimonov, and N. Wuerffel of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York). This memo was sent to the
Committee on November 30, 2012.
14 of 63

--- Page 17 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
account the likely efficacy and costs of the purchases when deciding on their size, pace,
and composition. All three alternatives envision that the Committee will continue to
reinvest principal payments on its holdings of agency MBS and agency debt into agency
MBS, and all three statements indicate that the Federal Reserve will, in January, resume
rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction.
Under each alternative, the Committee would maintain the 0 to ¼ percent target
range for the federal funds rate. However, the alternatives take different approaches to
the forward guidance regarding the path of the federal funds rate. Alternative A and one
of the two versions of the forward guidance for Alternative B would provide quantitative
thresholds that link the Committee’s eventual reconsideration of the target range for the
federal funds rate to labor market conditions and the outlook for inflation.3 The draft
s
language for Alternative B states that the Committee “currently anticipates that this e
v
i
t
exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as a
n
r
the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent, inflation between one and two years e
t
l
A
ahead is projected to be no more than ½ percentage point above the Committee’s 2
percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well
anchored.” Alternative A adopts this formulation too, except that the unemployment
threshold is 6 percent.
Another new sentence in Alternative B indicates that the Committee views these
thresholds as “consistent with its earlier date-based forward guidance.” This sentence
does not appear in Alternative A because the 6 percent unemployment threshold in
Alternative A would likely amount to a shift in forward guidance toward a longer period
of exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate than was indicated in October.
Further sentences in the new forward guidance in both Alternatives A and B state
that other indicators of economic and financial conditions will also enter into the decision
to tighten, and that when the Committee begins to remove policy accommodation, it “will
take a balanced approach” in line with its statutory mandate.
The other version of the forward guidance in Alternative B is closer to the
language used in October. Both versions of the forward guidance in the fifth paragraph
3 For a detailed analysis of quantitative thresholds, see the memo by E. Engen, J.P. Laforte, D.
López-Salido, E. Nelson, W. Nelson, D. Reifschneider, and R. Tetlow, titled “Using Thresholds to Clarify
the Conditionality in the Committee’s Forward Guidance for the Federal Funds Rate,” which was
distributed to the Committee on October 16, 2012.
15 of 63

--- Page 18 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
of Alternative B include optional additional language intended to clarify that the firming
of the funds rate will occur after the Committee “sees a substantial improvement in the
outlook for the labor market” and “the asset purchase program ends.” One variant of the
fifth paragraph of Alternative C retains language from the October statement without this
new clarifying phrase, while providing the option of stating that highly accommodative
policy will remain appropriate for “some time” after the economic recovery strengthens
instead of “for a considerable time.” This variant of the paragraph in Alternative C gives
the choice of several dates, each prior to mid-2015, through which exceptionally low
federal funds rates would be warranted. The other variant of the fifth paragraph of
Alternative C describes qualitative factors the Committee will consider in deciding when
to raise its target for the funds rate. Specifically, this variant states that the exceptionally
low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate until the Committee “has
s
e
v observed substantial improvement in labor market conditions, provided that the
i
t
a
n Committee projects that inflation over the medium term will be close to its [ 2 percent ]
r
e
l t objective and longer-term inflation expectations remain stable.”
A
The following table summarizes key elements of the alternative statements. The
table is followed by complete draft statements and then by a summary of the arguments
for each alternative.
16 of 63

--- Page 19 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
Table 1: Overview of Policy Alternatives for the December 12FOMC Statement
Selected October December Alternatives
Elements Statement A B C
Economic Outlook
without sufficient policy without further policy economic growth will pick up
accommodation, economic accommodation, economic gradually; unemployment rate
unchanged
growth might not be strong growth might not be strong will continue to decline at a
Outlook enough enough mandate-consistent pace
inflation likely would run at or
inflation likely will run at or below 2 percent inflation will run near 2 percent
below 2 percent
Balance Sheet Policies
MEP continue through end of year complete at end of year
raise to $50 billion per
Agency MBS $40 billion per month unchanged discontinue at end of year
month in January
s
initially $45 billion e
Longer-Term $50 billion per month after v
none per month after none i
Treasuries MEP is completed t
MEP is completed a
n
r
principal payments from agency e
Securities securities into agency MBS unchanged l t
A
Reinvestment
redeem maturing Treasuries in January, resume rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction
if outlook for labor market does
not improve substantially, will
essentially unchanged… prepared to take further action as
continue employing policy tools
needed to promote sustained
as appropriate until…
improvement in labor market
Guidance … such improvement is … conditions are consistent conditions in a context of price
achieved in a context of price with outlook for sustained unchanged stability
stability progress toward objectives
will take account of efficacy and
unchanged n.a.
costs
Federal Funds Rate
Target 0 to ¼ percent unchanged
highly accommodative policy highly accommodative policy for a considerable highly accommodative policy for
for a considerable time after time after [substantial improvement in outlook for [a considerable | some] time after
economic recovery labor market, asset purchase program ends, and] economic recovery
strengthens… economic recovery strengthens… strengthens…
quantitative thresholds: qualitative thresholds:
at least as long as unemployment rate above until observe substantial
[A: 6 | B: 6½] percent, inflation one- to two-years improvement in labor market
ahead is no more than ½ percentage point above 2 conditions, provided inflation
Guidance percent, and longer-term inflation expectations over the medium term will be
remain well anchored; [B: these thresholds are close to [2 percent] objective and
n.a.
consistent with earlier date-based guidance;] will inflation expectations remain
also consider other information; when begin to stable
remove accommodation, will take balanced
approach consistent with [satisfactory progress
toward objectives | longer-run goals]
OR OR
date-based: at least through
n.a. unchanged
at least through mid-2015 [late 2014 | mid-2014 | late 2013]
17 of 63

--- Page 20 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
OCTOBER FOMC STATEMENT
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September
suggests that economic activity has continued to expand at a moderate pace in recent
months. Growth in employment has been slow, and the unemployment rate remains
elevated. Household spending has advanced a bit more quickly, but growth in
business fixed investment has slowed. The housing sector has shown some further
signs of improvement, albeit from a depressed level. Inflation recently picked up
somewhat, reflecting higher energy prices. Longer-term inflation expectations have
remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee remains concerned that, without
sufficient policy accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to
generate sustained improvement in labor market conditions. Furthermore, strains in
global financial markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic
s
e
v outlook. The Committee also anticipates that inflation over the medium term likely
i
a t would run at or below its 2 percent objective.
n
r
e 3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
t
l
A is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee will continue
purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $40 billion per
month. The Committee also will continue through the end of the year its program to
extend the average maturity of its holdings of Treasury securities, and it is
maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of
agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
securities. These actions, which together will increase the Committee’s holdings of
longer-term securities by about $85 billion each month through the end of the year,
should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage
markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative.
4. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial
developments in coming months. If the outlook for the labor market does not
improve substantially, the Committee will continue its purchases of agency mortgage-
backed securities, undertake additional asset purchases, and employ its other policy
tools as appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a context of price stability.
In determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases, the Committee
will, as always, take appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of such
purchases.
5. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will
remain appropriate for a considerable time after the economic recovery strengthens.
In particular, the Committee also decided today to keep the target range for the
federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that exceptionally low
levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted at least through mid-2015.
18 of 63

--- Page 21 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
DECEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September
October suggests that economic activity has continued to expand at a moderate pace
in recent months, apart from weather-related disruptions. Growth in employment
has been slow, and the unemployment rate remains elevated. Household spending
has continued to advanced a bit more quickly, but growth in business fixed
investment has slowed. The housing sector has shown some further signs of
improvement, albeit from a depressed level. Inflation recently picked up somewhat,
has been running somewhat below the Committee’s longer-run objective, apart
from temporary variations that largely reflecting higher fluctuations in energy
prices. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee remains concerned that, without
sufficient further policy accommodation, economic growth might not be strong
s
enough to generate sustained improvement in labor market conditions. Furthermore, e
v
i
strains in global financial markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the t
a
n
economic outlook. The Committee also anticipates that inflation over the medium r
e
term likely would will run at or below its 2 percent objective. t
l
A
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee will continue
purchasing agreed today to increase its purchases of additional agency mortgage-
backed securities at to a pace of $40 $50 billion per month beginning in January.
The Committee also will continue through the end of the year purchase longer-term
Treasury securities at a pace of $50 billion per month after its program to extend
the average maturity of its holdings of Treasury securities, and it is completed at the
end of this year. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting
principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed
securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and, in January, will resume
rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. These actions, which
together will increase the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities by about
$85 $100 billion each per month through the end of the year, should put downward
pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets, and help to make
broader financial conditions more accommodative.
4. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial
developments in coming months. If the outlook for the labor market does not
improve substantially, the Committee will continue its purchases of Treasury and
agency mortgage-backed securities, undertake additional asset purchases, and employ
its other policy tools as appropriate, until such improvement is achieved it judges
that data on economic activity and labor market conditions are consistent with
an outlook for sustained progress toward maximum employment in a context of
price stability. In determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases,
the Committee will, as always, take appropriate account of the likely efficacy and
costs of such purchases.
19 of 63

--- Page 22 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
5. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will
remain appropriate for a considerable time after [ it sees a substantial improvement
in the outlook for the labor market, the asset purchase program ends, and ] the
economic recovery strengthens. In particular, the Committee also decided today to
keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently
anticipates that exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be
warranted at least through mid-2015 this exceptionally low range for the federal
funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains
above 6 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no
more than ½ percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal,
and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. In
determining how long to maintain a highly accommodative stance of monetary
policy, the Committee will also consider other information, including additional
measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and
s inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. When the
e
v Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
i
t
a balanced approach consistent with [ maintaining satisfactory progress toward
n
r
e maximum employment in a context of price stability | its longer-run goals of
t
l
A maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent ].
20 of 63

--- Page 23 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
DECEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September
October suggests that economic activity has continued to expand at a moderate pace
in recent months, apart from weather-related disruptions. Growth in employment
has been slow picked up a bit, and but the unemployment rate remains elevated.
Household spending has continued to advanced a bit more quickly, and the housing
sector has shown further signs of improvement, but growth in business fixed
investment has slowed. The housing sector has shown some further signs of
improvement, albeit from a depressed level. Inflation recently picked up somewhat,
has been running somewhat below the Committee’s longer-run objective, apart
from temporary variations that largely reflecting higher fluctuations in energy
prices. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee remains concerned that, without
s
sufficient policy accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to e
v
i
generate sustained improvement in labor market conditions. Furthermore, strains in t
a
n
global financial markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic r
e
outlook. The Committee also anticipates that inflation over the medium term likely t
l
A
would will run at or below its 2 percent objective.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee will continue
purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $40 billion per
month. The Committee also will continue through the end of the year purchase
longer-term Treasury securities after its program to extend the average maturity of
its holdings of Treasury securities, and it is completed at the end of the year,
initially at a pace of $45 billion per month. The Committee is maintaining its
existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and
agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and, in
January, will resume rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction.
Taken together, these actions, which together will increase the Committee’s
holdings of longer-term securities by about $85 billion each month through the end of
the year, should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support
mortgage markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more
accommodative.
4. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial
developments in coming months. If the outlook for the labor market does not
improve substantially, the Committee will continue its purchases of Treasury and
agency mortgage-backed securities, undertake additional asset purchases, and employ
its other policy tools as appropriate, until such improvement is achieved in a context
of price stability. In determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset
purchases, the Committee will, as always, take appropriate account of the likely
efficacy and costs of such purchases.
21 of 63

--- Page 24 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
5. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will
remain appropriate for a considerable time after [ it sees a substantial improvement
in the outlook for the labor market, the asset purchase program ends, and ] the
economic recovery strengthens. In particular, the Committee also decided today to
keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently
anticipates that exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be
warranted at least through mid-2015 this exceptionally low range for the federal
funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains
above 6½ percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be
no more than ½ percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run
goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. The
Committee views these thresholds as consistent with its earlier date-based
guidance. In determining how long to maintain a highly accommodative stance
of monetary policy, the Committee will also consider other information,
s including additional measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation
e
v pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments.
i
t
a When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will
n
r
e take a balanced approach consistent with [ maintaining satisfactory progress
t
l
A toward maximum employment in a context of price stability | its longer-run
goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent ].
OR
5'. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will
remain appropriate for a considerable time after [ it sees a substantial improvement
in the outlook for the labor market, the asset purchase program ends, and ] the
economic recovery strengthens. In particular, the Committee also decided today to
keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently
anticipates that exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be
warranted at least through mid-2015.
22 of 63

--- Page 25 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
DECEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September
October suggests that economic activity has continued to expand at a moderate pace
in recent months, apart from weather-related disruptions. Growth in employment
has been slow strengthened somewhat, and the unemployment rate, remains though
still elevated, has declined. Household spending has advanced a bit more quickly,
but growth in business fixed investment has slowed. Private domestic demand has
continued to advance, and the housing sector has shown some further signs of
improvement, albeit from a depressed level. Inflation recently picked up somewhat,
reflecting higher energy prices has been running close to the Committee’s longer-
run objective. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee remains concerned that, without
sufficient policy accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to
s
generate sustained improvement in labor market conditions expects economic e
v
i
growth to be moderate over coming quarters and then to pick up gradually, t
a
n
supported in part by the highly accommodative stance of monetary policy, and r
e
consequently anticipates that the unemployment rate will continue to decline at a l t
A
pace that the Committee judges consistent with its mandate. Furthermore
However, strains in global financial markets continue to pose significant downside
risks to the economic outlook. The Committee also anticipates that inflation over the
medium term likely would will run at or below near its 2 percent objective.
3. In light of the improving economic outlook, the Committee judges that it has
provided sufficient policy accommodation to support a stronger economic recovery
and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual
mandate. Accordingly, the Committee will, at the end of the year, discontinue
purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $40 billion per
month. and complete The Committee also will continue through the end of the year
its program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of Treasury securities. and
it The Committee is maintaining continuing its existing policy of reinvesting
principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed
securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and, in January, will resume
rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. These actions, which
together will increase keep the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities by
about $85 billion each month through the end of the year, at a level of about $2.8
trillion, will maintain a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy and
should put sustain downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support
mortgage markets, and help to make keep broader financial conditions more
accommodative.
23 of 63

--- Page 26 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
4. The Committee will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial
developments in coming months. If the outlook for the labor market does not
improve substantially, the Committee will continue its purchases of agency mortgage-
backed securities, undertake additional asset purchases, and employ its other policy
tools as appropriate until such improvement is achieved and is prepared to take
further action as needed to promote sustained improvement in labor market
conditions in a context of price stability. In determining the size, pace, and
composition of its asset purchases, the Committee will, as always, take appropriate
account of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases.
5. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will
remain appropriate for [ a considerable | some ] time after the economic recovery
strengthens. In particular, the Committee also decided today to keep the target range
for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that exceptionally
low levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted at least through mid-
s
e 2015 this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate
v
t i until it has observed substantial improvement in labor market conditions,
a
n provided that the Committee projects that inflation over the medium term will
r
e
t be close to its [ 2 percent ] objective and longer-term inflation expectations
l
A
remain stable.
OR
5'. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will
remain appropriate for [ a considerable | some ] time after the economic recovery
strengthens. In particular, the Committee also decided today to keep the target range
for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that exceptionally
low levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted at least through mid-
2015 [ late 2014 | mid-2014 | late 2013 ].
24 of 63

--- Page 27 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B
The Committee might judge that the medium-term outlook for economic activity
has changed only modestly since the October meeting, and that fostering substantial
improvement in the outlook for the labor market will require a continuation of the recent
pace of asset purchases, as in Alternative B. Policymakers may see recent data, even
after adjusting for weather effects, as reinforcing their judgment that real GDP growth is
not, and, absent additional purchases, will not be sufficient to produce sustained progress
toward maximum employment. Moreover, they may view inflation as having remained
somewhat below the Committee’s longer-run objective, especially when temporary
variations that reflect recent fluctuations in energy prices are excluded; in addition,
participants may see inflation as likely to remain subdued over the medium term. e s
v
i
Participants might additionally note that measures of medium- and longer-run inflation t
a
n
compensation have been relatively stable over the intermeeting period and that the mean e r
t
l
A
and median of the primary dealers’ medium-term forecasts for inflation are roughly
unchanged from their values ahead of the October FOMC meeting. Accordingly,
participants might judge that inflation expectations remain well anchored. Against this
backdrop, the Committee may conclude that it is appropriate to continue purchases of
agency MBS at a pace of $40 billion per month and, once the MEP is completed, to
maintain the Federal Reserve’s $45 billion per month rate of acquisition of longer-term
Treasuries.4
Policymakers may judge that downside risks to the outlook for economic
activity—particularly from the euro-area crisis and unresolved U.S. fiscal policy
decisions—remain quite elevated. While noting that financial conditions in the euro area
have improved slightly, on balance, since October, policymakers may see non-trivial
odds that the euro-area crisis could deepen next year and produce a very substantial drag
on U.S. economic growth. Some policymakers may also see a sizable probability that
fiscal policy could tighten more sharply at the turn of the year than in their baseline
projections. Nonetheless, policymakers may anticipate that the January meeting will
provide a better vantage point for assessing the fiscal situation, and for determining
whether monetary policy accommodation, beyond that implied by the current pace of
4 The Desk’s proposed distribution for the Treasury securities purchases under Alternatives A and
B implies a 9-year duration of purchases, about the same as the duration of net purchases under the MEP
but greater than under LSAP1 or LSAP2.
25 of 63

--- Page 28 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
asset purchases, is needed to help lean against the effects of tighter fiscal policy on
economic activity and inflation. A decision made in early 2013 rather than in December
might also put policymakers in a better position to reach judgments about the extent of
improvement in euro-area financial markets and to adjust for distortions to incoming data
arising from the immediate impact of Hurricane Sandy. Taking these considerations
together, policymakers may judge it appropriate to continue existing monthly flows of
asset purchases at this meeting, and await additional information before deciding on any
adjustment to the pace and composition of the Committee’s asset purchases.
Some policymakers may view the economic outlook as somewhat brighter than in
October and see the risks to the outlook as having diminished in recent months, perhaps
because they tend to put greater weight on the underlying growth in payroll employment,
s
e
v the signs of improvement in the housing market, and reduced financial strains in the euro
i
t
a area. These policymakers may nonetheless judge that the information received to date
n
r
e
t does not imply a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market and
l
A
conclude that the present flows of asset purchases should be continued at this meeting, as
in Alternative B.
Some participants may concur that labor market conditions point to the need for
continuing policy accommodation but may see the costs and risks associated with an
ongoing expansion of the Committee’s securities holdings as potentially outweighing the
likely benefits at some stage. These participants may nevertheless favor continuing for
the time being the present flows of purchases of longer-term securities. While staying on
alert for signs that costs of asset purchases are becoming more important, members may
currently judge that the costs of purchases are likely to be low in comparison with the
benefits. Moreover, some members may view the language in Alternative B that the new
year’s Treasury purchases will proceed “initially at a pace of $45 billion per month” as
useful in conveying the message that purchases could be scaled back if evidence emerged
of rising costs of purchases.
With respect to the forward guidance for the federal funds rate, policymakers may
judge that explicit quantitative thresholds for unemployment and inflation would more
clearly communicate the Committee’s policy intentions than the date-based language in
recent statements. They may regard a move to such thresholds as more likely than date-
based guidance to promote a situation in which the responses of financial asset prices to
changes in the outlook are of a direction and magnitude that are consistent with the
26 of 63

--- Page 29 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
Committee’s reaction function. They also may view the December meeting as a
convenient time to introduce new forward guidance because the change can be explained
and underscored at the post-meeting press conference.
Policymakers may also wish to make explicit that the threshold language, while
intended to provide greater clarity about the Committee’s reaction function, does not
signal a change in the Committee’s assessment of the likely future path of the federal
funds rate. In particular, participants may view thresholds for the unemployment rate of
6½ percent and for projected inflation between one and two years ahead of “no more than
½ percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal” as broadly
consistent with the version of the date-based forward guidance used since September.5
Policymakers may therefore favor inclusion in the Committee’s statement of a sentence,
s
like that in the fifth paragraph of Alternative B, indicating that the Committee views the e
v
i
t
thresholds language as consistent with its earlier date-based forward guidance. a
n
r
Policymakers may regard this sentence as useful to include in the December statement, as e
t
l
A
the Committee transitions from date-based to thresholds-based guidance concerning the
federal funds rate target, but see no need to include this sentence in subsequent
statements. The draft statement in Alternative B also indicates that the Committee will
continue to take a balanced approach toward meeting its objectives after a threshold is
crossed. The Committee might wish to provide such guidance in light of the important
role that expectations of interest-rate policy after the Committee begins to remove policy
accommodation play in shaping current financial conditions. If they favor adopting
quantitative thresholds, policymakers may also view a reference to the Committee’s
“longer-run goals of maximum employment and inflation of 2 percent” as a valuable way
to round off the new forward guidance language, on the grounds that this reference
underlines the distinction between the thresholds and the Committee’s statutory
objectives. Alternatively, if policymakers regard this distinction as adequately
highlighted by the paragraph’s earlier reference to the Committee’s longer-run goal of 2
percent inflation, they may prefer to conclude the forward guidance language with a
reference to “maintaining satisfactory progress toward maximum employment in a
context of price stability.”
5 Such a judgment would be in line with the staff analysis provided in the memo, “Using
Thresholds to Clarify the Conditionality in the Committee’s Forward Guidance for the Federal Funds
Rate,” cited earlier.
27 of 63

--- Page 30 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
Some policymakers, while agreeing with the overall settings of policy associated
with Alternative B, may think that date-based forward guidance is a more effective way
of communicating policy. Other policymakers might accept the desirability in principle
of including thresholds in the statement but may regard the quantitative specification of
the thresholds as an issue that requires further analysis before thresholds could be
announced. These policymakers may prefer a statement along the lines of the variant in
paragraph 5' of Alternative B that preserves the date-based forward guidance language.
Members may see the additional optional language in both versions of paragraph
5 of Alternative B—language that indicates that a highly accommodative policy will
continue after the Committee “sees a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor
market, the asset purchase program ends, and the economic recovery strengthens”—as
s
e
v potentially helpful in further clarifying the likely sequence of the Committee’s policy
i
t
a steps as the economy improves. However, other members may regard this distinction as
n
r
e
t already well understood by market participants. They may view the optional language as
l
A
unnecessary and liable to create confusion if added to the statement.
The Desk’s latest survey of primary dealers indicates that the median dealer
expects flow-based asset purchases to continue into the first quarter of 2014; no dealer
expects purchases to end before mid-2013. The survey also indicates that the dealers
expect the Committee to continue MBS purchases of $40 billion a month and to continue
acquiring longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of $45 billion per month after the
MEP comes to a close, as in Alternative B. The survey further suggests that dealers
assign a high probability to the eventual adoption by the Committee of threshold
language, and that thresholds of 6½ percent for unemployment and 2½ percent for
inflation (as in Alternative B) are broadly consistent with market participants’
expectations of the quantitative form that thresholds would likely take. However, the
survey also indicates that dealers do not see a move to thresholds at this meeting as all
that likely. All told, a December statement along the lines of Alternative B would not
surprise market participants in terms of the announced flows of asset purchases, but the
shift to thresholds-based forward guidance would be somewhat unexpected. The degree
to which this new form of the forward guidance led to an appreciable market reaction
would likely be tempered by the indication in the statement that the Committee regards
the thresholds as consistent with its earlier date-based guidance. However, longer-term
interest rates could rise somewhat if the phrase “initially at a pace of $45 billion per
month” is taken to imply that purchases may be scaled back in a few months.
28 of 63

--- Page 31 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A
Some policymakers may instead see the medium-term outlook as still sufficiently
weak to justify announcing further policy accommodation immediately, as in Alternative
A. These members may have doubted that the amount of policy accommodation
provided via the last two meetings’ decisions regarding flow-based asset purchases was
sufficient to generate satisfactory progress toward the Committee’s goals of maximum
employment and 2 percent inflation in the longer term. Information since the October
meeting may have reaffirmed their earlier assessment that, absent an increase in the pace
of asset purchases, sustained improvement in labor market conditions is likely to take an
unacceptably long time.
Those members who see the outlook as unsatisfactory may also point to the fact s
e
v
that the gradual firming in economic activity that they projected earlier appears less likely t i
a
n
given the softer tone of incoming economic data, particularly on household income and r
e
t
l
spending. Moreover, members may see recent inflation rates as somewhat below the A
Committee’s longer-run goal of 2 percent and, especially now that upward pressure on
energy prices has abated, might expect that inflation will continue to run appreciably
below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective for the next several years, even
with asset purchases continuing at their present $85 billion per month pace well into next
year. Thus, for some members, the underlying weakness in economic activity and low
inflation may suggest the need for further policy accommodation, in the form of a
stepping-up in the pace of purchases of both longer-term Treasury securities and agency
mortgage-backed securities.
Moreover, policymakers may think that stepping up the pace of purchases of
agency MBS would help strengthen the emerging recovery in the housing sector, a
development that they might see as generating ancillary benefits such as raising consumer
confidence and boosting household wealth. They may further regard an announcement of
increased purchases of longer-term Treasury securities as providing desirable downward
pressure on longer-term interest rates while continuing the broad outlines of the Treasury
purchase policy included in the MEP. These policymakers may anticipate that these
further purchases of Treasuries and agency MBS would raise market participants’
expectations of the ultimate stock of securities acquired by the Federal Reserve under the
flow-based purchase program, and thereby make financial conditions more
accommodative. Policymakers might view such a shift to greater accommodation as
29 of 63

--- Page 32 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
warranted by the weak outlook that is in prospect in the absence of further expansionary
measures. Furthermore, participants may see the purchases made by the Committee since
September as having had stronger effects on financial conditions than they had
anticipated, without an offsetting increase in costs, suggesting that larger purchases
would be desirable.
Other members who previously viewed the Committee as having established an
appropriately accommodative monetary policy stance may have come to reassess their
position in light of recent months’ financial market developments. These members may
regard financial conditions as having become less accommodative in the last couple of
months as a result of lower equity prices and a higher dollar, and they may see financial
conditions as poised to become still less accommodative in the absence of a shift to a
s
e
v greater pace of purchases. If so, they might view the pace of purchases previously
i
t
a decided upon by the Committee, while appropriate in September and October, as now
n
r
e
t inadequate.
l
A
While acknowledging some improvement in the outlook for the euro area since
the October meeting, members may feel that risks to the economic outlook stemming
from the euro-area crisis are still heavily weighted to the downside. Moreover, they may
see further downside risks associated with a sharper-than-expected U.S. fiscal tightening
and a greater-than-anticipated slowdown in China. Members may also judge that the
consequences of a new adverse shock at a time when the economy remains weak are
significantly more costly than the consequences of some delay in tightening policy should
economic performance or inflation surprise to the upside. If so, they may see the degree
of uncertainty about the outlook and the asymmetry in risks and potential costs as arguing
for further policy accommodation. They may also think it would be useful to indicate
that asset purchases will continue until the Committee “judges that data on economic
activity and labor market conditions are consistent with an outlook for sustained progress
toward maximum employment in a context of price stability.” In addition, policymakers
might view a move to a thresholds-based formulation of the forward guidance for the
federal funds rate as a useful complement to their announcement of increased flows of
purchases and their guidance regarding the purchase policy.
The Desk’s latest survey shows a median dealer expectation that the Committee
will announce that it will continue purchases of MBS at a pace of $40 billion per month
and Treasury securities at $45 billion per month. An announcement like Alternative A
30 of 63

--- Page 33 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
that raised the flows of each of these monthly purchases to $50 billion per month would
thus come as a considerable surprise to market participants, and it would likely prompt
investors to mark upward the projected amount of securities that the Federal Reserve will
acquire under its flow-based program. Moreover, while dealers do expect threshold
language to be adopted by the FOMC eventually, the 6 percent unemployment threshold
in Alternative A is lower, and so implies a more expansionary policy, than dealers expect
to be associated with thresholds-based guidance. In response to a statement like
Alternative A, longer-term real interest rates likely would decline somewhat, reflecting a
higher projected peak for Federal Reserve securities holdings and a lower expected path
for the federal funds rate. Inflation compensation and equity prices might rise, and the
dollar could depreciate. However, if investors read the statement of Alternative A as
indicating that the FOMC has a relatively gloomy outlook for growth and employment,
s
e
equity prices would rise by less or could even decline. v
i
t
a
n
r
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE C
t
e
l
A
Some participants might see the recent data as suggesting that, adjusting for
temporary factors such as the effects of the drought and the disruptions from Hurricane
Sandy, the underlying pace of economic recovery and rate of employment gains have
improved, on balance, in recent months. Policymakers might point not only to recent
months’ labor market reports but also to the further signs of improvement in the housing
market. Indeed, after smoothing through the month-to-month fluctuations in recent data,
policymakers may see the economic recovery as having reached a sustainable course that
is likely to be associated with ongoing improvements in labor market conditions.
Furthermore, they may view financial strains in Europe—and the corresponding
downside risks to the U.S. economy—as having eased further since October. As a result,
they may see the monetary policy settings put in place by the Committee since September
as having provided sufficient accommodation and so choose to bring asset purchases to a
close at year-end, as in Alternative C.
Moreover, some policymakers may regard the potential benefits of additional
asset purchases under present circumstances as likely to be small and unlikely to
outweigh the costs. They may view the accommodation already provided by Federal
Reserve purchases as having laid the groundwork for the unemployment rate to decline at
a pace consistent with achieving the Committee’s statutory mandate over the medium
term. In addition, participants may see inflation as having been near the Committee’s
31 of 63

--- Page 34 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
longer-term goal of 2 percent and as likely to pick up if withdrawal of policy
accommodation does not begin before long. They may agree that longer-term inflation
expectations remain well anchored for the time being but perceive upside risks to the
inflation outlook in both the near term and the medium run unless asset purchases are
promptly discontinued and policy normalization commences sooner than expected in
markets.
Some members may also be concerned that a continuation of asset purchases
beyond the end of this year would likely be inconsistent with the exit strategy principles
announced by the Committee in June 2011, and they may worry that making an
adjustment to the exit strategy principles at this point could weaken the credibility of the
Committee’s announcements about future monetary policy. In addition, members could
s
e
v see further asset purchases as raising the odds that the Federal Reserve realizes
i
t
a significant losses during exit and be worried about the communications and political
n
r
t e issues that such losses could raise.6
l
A
Some policymakers, moreover, may be skeptical that the downward pressure on
longer-term interest rates from additional Treasury and MBS purchases would have a
significant effect on macroeconomic outcomes. For example, they may feel that lower
longer-term interest rates would prompt corporations to restructure their balance sheets
but would have little impact on their investment and hiring decisions. Alternatively, they
may worry that further purchases by the Federal Reserve of safe assets when longer-term
interest rates are already quite low could lead to excessive risk-taking and other
imbalances that might undermine financial stability over time. In light of these concerns,
policymakers may prefer to adopt a statement like that in Alternative C, which indicates
that the Committee will cease expanding the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet at the end
of this year.
If policymakers judge that the recovery is presently on a course that will generate
sustained reductions in unemployment, and that the present stance of monetary policy
risks a rise in inflation, or if they are concerned that continuing to hold the federal funds
rate near zero until mid-2015 or later would pose increasing risks to financial stability,
6 See the analysis of Federal Reserve income under various purchase scenarios in the memo,
“Options for Continuation of Open-Ended Asset Purchases in 2013” (by A. Figura, J. Huther, J. Ihrig, J.
Kandrac, D. Kim, E. Klee, D. Reifschneider, J. Roberts, and M. Wei of the Federal Reserve Board, and A.
Cambron, M. Ezer, J. Frost, D. Leonard, J. Remache, and N. Wuerffel of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York). This memo was sent to the Committee on November 30, 2012.
32 of 63

--- Page 35 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
they might consider it appropriate to begin scaling back the public’s expectations of how
long the federal funds rate will remain at its current exceptionally low level. If so, they
might favor a statement like the version of Alternative C that includes paragraph C.5',
which alters the existing date-based forward guidance in the direction of a 2013 or 2014
date for initial policy firming. Alternatively, as in paragraph C.5, they might prefer to
eliminate the calendar date from the Committee’s forward guidance and replace it with
new language that lays out in somewhat greater detail the key economic factors that will
figure in the Committee’s decisions concerning when, and how quickly, to increase its
target for the federal funds rate.
A statement along the lines of Alternative C would greatly surprise market
participants and would be interpreted as signaling a significantly more rapid removal of
s
policy accommodation than investors had expected. According to the Desk’s survey, e
v
i
t
primary dealers expect purchases of longer-term securities to continue well beyond a
n
r
December, and to proceed at their present pace. The primary dealers also anticipate little e
t
l
A
change to the Committee’s forward guidance at this meeting. Moving the projected date
of the first increase closer to the present, as in paragraph 5' of Alternative C, would cause
a sizable upward shift in market participants’ expectations of the likely path for the
federal funds rate, leaving interest rates significantly higher at maturities beyond a year or
so. The upward movement in longer-term interest rates would be reinforced by the
announcement, in Alternative C, that additional asset purchases will be discontinued at
the end of the year. Equity prices would probably fall significantly, and the dollar might
appreciate. If the Committee were to drop the date from its forward guidance without
providing a clear indication of the specific economic conditions that would lead the
Committee to begin raising the target rate, as in paragraph 5 of Alternative C, investors
might become uncertain about the Committee’s intentions, and interest rate volatility
could increase.
33 of 63

--- Page 36 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
LONG-RUN PROJECTIONS OF THE BALANCE SHEET AND MONETARY BASE
The staff has prepared three scenarios for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet that
correspond to Alternatives A, B, and C.7 All options assume that the maturity extension
program is completed at the end of December and that $40 billion of agency mortgage-
backed securities (MBS) are purchased in December, resulting in about $250 billion in
purchases of longer-term securities from October to December 2012. Alternatives A and
B include asset purchases that continue beyond the end of the year and assume that the
Committee maintains an exceptionally low federal funds rate until October 2015. In
contrast, Alternative C ends purchases at the end of this year and has the federal funds
rate lift off from its lower bound in October 2014. Projections under each scenario are
based on assumptions about the trajectory of various components of the balance sheet.
s
e Details of these assumptions, as well as projections for each major component of the
v
i
t
a balance sheet, can be found in Explanatory Note D.
n
r
e
t
l
A
7 For additional analysis of a number of possible asset purchase options, see the memo titled
“Options for Continuation of Open-Ended Asset Purchases in 2013” by Board and FRBNY staff sent to the
Committee on November 30, 2012 (hereafter “the options memo for the December FOMC”).
34 of 63

--- Page 37 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
For the balance sheet scenario that corresponds to Alternative B, the Committee is
assumed to continue MBS purchases at $40 billion per month and make additional
purchases of longer-term Treasury securities of $45 billion per month through June 2013.
These roughly $500 billion in additional purchases in 2013, when combined with the
$250 billion in purchases from October through December 2012, imply a total expansion
of SOMA holdings of longer-term securities of about $750 billion.8 This scenario might
be viewed as roughly consistent with the description of asset purchases in Alternative B.9
Overall, under this scenario, SOMA securities holdings increase to about $3.3 trillion by
December 2013.
In the Alternative B scenario, we assume that the first increase in the target
federal funds rate is in October 2015 as in the staff forecast.10 The date of liftoff is a key
s
determinant of the trajectory of the balance sheet. In April 2015, six months before the e
v
i
t
first increase in the target federal funds rate, all reinvestment is assumed to cease, and the a
n
r
SOMA portfolio begins to contract.11 In April 2016, six months after the initial increase e
t
l
A
in the target federal funds rate, the Committee begins to sell its holdings of agency
securities at a pace that reduces the amount of these securities in the portfolio to zero in
five years, that is, by March 2021. Through these redemptions and sales, the size of the
portfolio is normalized by March 2019.12, 13 The balance sheet then begins to expand,
8 This amount does not include purchases conducted in September 2012. Although the SOMA
portfolio’s holdings of longer-term securities increases by about $750 billion between October 2012 and
June 2013, total securities holdings increase by less because of the asset sales and redemptions under the
MEP.
9 The statement indicates that the Committee will continue asset purchases until a substantial
improvement in the outlook for the labor market is achieved in a context of price stability. In the staff
economic outlook, by mid-2013, there will be accumulating evidence of a pickup in economic growth and
an outlook for substantial improvement in the unemployment rate, which is projected to decline from near 8
percent in mid-2013 to 7¾ percent in mid-2014 and to 7½ percent in late 2014. Alternatively, by mid-
2013, the Committee could end the purchase program based on its assessment of the efficacy and costs of
additional asset purchases.
10 At the time of liftoff, the unemployment rate is projected to be 6.5 percent, and core PCE
inflation is expected to be 1.7 percent. This liftoff date for the federal funds rate is two months later than
that assumed in the balance sheet projections for Alternative B in the October Tealbook and is consistent
with the policy assumption in the current staff forecast in Tealbook Book A.
11 After the end of the MEP, the Committee is assumed to reinstate its policy of reinvesting
principal payments from Treasury securities at auction. It is also assumed to continue reinvesting principal
payments from agency MBS and agency debt securities into agency MBS. The effect of assuming
reinvestment of Treasury securities at auction is very modest; after the completion of the MEP, there will
be less than $6 billion of Treasury securities in the SOMA portfolio that mature before January 2016.
12 The tools to drain reserve balances (reverse repurchase agreements and term deposits) are not
modeled in any of the scenarios presented. Use of these tools would result in a shift in the composition of
Federal Reserve liabilities—a decline in reserve balances and a corresponding increase in reverse
35 of 63

--- Page 38 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
with increases in SOMA holdings essentially matching the growth of Federal Reserve
Bank capital and currency in circulation. Total assets are $2.6 trillion at the end of 2025.
The additional purchases of securities through the middle of 2013 significantly
increase the level of SOMA holdings and reserve balances through the medium term.
Sales of agency MBS after the federal funds rate increases are projected to result in
realized capital losses.14 These capital losses in conjunction with the rise in interest
expense on reserve balances substantially reduce Federal Reserve net income; the Federal
Reserve makes modest remittances to the Treasury in 2017, 2018, and 2019, but no
deferred asset is recorded.15
In the scenario for Alternative A, the Committee is assumed to continue its
s
e current purchases of MBS through the end of the year, as well as complete the MEP.
v
i
a t Beginning in January 2013, the Committee is assumed to increase the pace of purchases
n
r
e of Treasury securities and agency MBS to $50 billion each per month. Around midyear,
t
l
A
the Committee is assumed to begin to taper purchases and at year-end it stops all
purchases. These purchases total $1 trillion in 2013, which, when combined with the
$250 billion in purchases from October through December 2012, ultimately expand the
SOMA portfolio’s holdings of longer-term securities by about $1.25 trillion. This
repurchase agreements or term deposits—but would not produce an overall change in the size of the
balance sheet.
13 The size of the balance sheet is assumed to be normalized when the securities portfolio reverts
to its longer-run trend level, determined largely by currency in circulation plus Federal Reserve capital and
a projected steady-state level of reserve balances. The projected timing of the normalization of the size of
the balance sheet depends importantly on the level of reserve balances that is assumed to be necessary to
conduct monetary policy; currently, we assume that level of reserve balances to be $25 billion. A higher
demand for reserve balances would, all else equal, lead to an earlier normalization of the size of the balance
sheet.
14 Under Reserve Bank accounting, securities held in the SOMA portfolio are recorded on an
amortized cost basis. As a result, realized losses and gains on securities sold affect the Federal Reserve’s
net income; unrealized losses and gains are not reflected in net income.
15 Alternative B is similar to the $750 billion purchase program scenario presented in the options
memo for the December FOMC. Balance sheet and income projections in that memo are based on the
interest rate assumptions from the October Tealbook. Based on those interest rate assumptions, the
projections for the $750 billion purchase program in the options memo and for Alternative B in the October
Tealbook suggested that the Federal Reserve experiences a temporary period of operating losses. As a
result, remittances to Treasury cease for a time and a small deferred asset is booked on the balance sheet at
year-end in 2017, 2018, and 2019, peaking at about $4 billion in 2018. Remittances are higher, and a
deferred asset is not booked, in the current projection for Alternative B because the interest rate
assumptions are lower than in the previous Tealbook in 2015 through 2020, reflecting a downward revision
to the projection for economic activity and an associated widening of the output gap. The lower assumed
path of interest rates significantly dampens the rise in interest expense and reduces realized capital losses
relative to the last Tealbook.
36 of 63

--- Page 39 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
scenario might be viewed as roughly consistent with the descriptions of asset purchases
in Alternative A, with the tapering allowing the Committee to wind down purchases as
the economy makes “sustained progress toward maximum employment in a context of
price stability.”16 The Committee continues reinvesting principal payments from agency
MBS and agency debt securities into agency MBS, and, after the MEP is complete,
reinstitutes its policy of reinvesting principal payments from Treasury securities at
auction. In this scenario, total assets increase to $4.0 trillion. In April 2015, six months
prior to the assumed first increase in the federal funds rate in October 2015, all
reinvestment is assumed to cease and the SOMA portfolio begins to contract. Six months
after the lift off of the federal funds rate, sales of agency securities begin and continue for
five years. The size of the portfolio is normalized by August 2019—about three-and-a-
half years after sales begin, and somewhat longer than the timeframe anticipated in the
s
e
exit strategy principles.17 (See the box, “Implications of Additional Securities Purchases v
i
t
a
for the Exit Strategy Principles” for more discussion.) n
r
e
t
l
A
The additional purchases of securities in this scenario substantially boost the level
of reserve balances. As the federal funds rate rises in 2016 and 2017, the interest expense
on reserve balances increases quickly. The interest expense combined with the losses
realized on the sales of agency MBS result in an operating loss, which causes remittances
to the Treasury to cease and a small deferred asset to be recorded on the balance sheet at
year-end in 2017, 2018, and 2019. The deferred asset peaks at about $4 billion in early
2019.18
16 Under the staff’s baseline forecast, by mid-2013, the longer run outlook will have improved
somewhat. In late 2013, payrolls will have been increasing at a pace of close to 170,000 per month for a
few months, the unemployment rate will have fallen some, and real GDP will be expanding at about a 3
percent annual rate. The outlook for labor market conditions as of late 2013 would include a half
percentage point decline in the unemployment rate through late 2014 and a one and a quarter percentage
point decline through late 2015.
17 In Alternative A, MBS are sold over a five-year period. If sales were assumed to be completed
over about three and a half years, the portfolio would normalize in three years; however, for consistency,
we have maintained the same assumption about the timeframe of sales—five years—as in Alternative B.
18 Alternative A is similar to the $1.25 trillion purchase programs presented in the options memo
for the December FOMC. In those projections, as well as in October Tealbook’s Alternative A, a deferred
asset was recorded on the balance sheet at year end from 2017 to 2021, peaking at about $45 billion in
2020. The deferred asset is smaller in the current projection reflecting a lower assumed path for interest
rates than in the October Tealbook. The lower interest rate path, in turn, implies a more modest increase in
interest expense on reserve balances and lower realized capital losses on MBS sales over the projection
period.
37 of 63

--- Page 40 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
For the scenario that corresponds to Alternative C, the Committee is assumed to
purchase MBS only through the end of this year, after which no additional asset
purchases are undertaken. In this scenario, the federal funds rate is assumed to lift off in
October 2014, one year earlier than in Alternatives B and A. Corresponding to this
earlier increase in the federal funds rate, reinvestment of principal from maturing or
prepaying securities ends in April 2014, and the portfolio begins to contract. Sales of
agency securities commence in April 2015 and last for five years. Total assets in this
scenario peak at $3 trillion, and the size of the balance sheet is normalized in April 2018,
11 months earlier than under Alternative B.
Across scenarios, the peak amount of reserve balances and the level of reserve
balances outstanding at liftoff are directly related to the magnitude of assumed asset
s
e
v purchases. Under Alternative A, reserve balances peak at about $2.7 trillion, while under
i
t
a Alternative B, reserve balances peak at $2.2 trillion. Under Alternative C, reserve
n
r
e
t balances rise only slightly from their current level to $1.7 trillion. For the scenarios
l
A
corresponding to Alternatives B and A, reserve balances are $1.9 trillion and $2.4 trillion,
respectively, when the federal funds rate lifts off from its lower bound in October 2015.
For the scenario corresponding to Alternative C, reserve balances are $1.5 trillion when
the federal funds rate lifts off from its lower bound in October 2014.
In the scenario corresponding to Alternative B, the monetary base increases
substantially from 2012 to 2013 because of the purchase program and the accompanying
increase in reserve balances. Once exit begins, the monetary base shrinks rapidly through
the second quarter of 2019, primarily reflecting a decline in reserve balances as securities
are redeemed or sold. Starting in the third quarter of 2019, after reserve balances are
assumed to have stabilized at $25 billion, the monetary base begins to expand again, in
line with the growth of Federal Reserve notes in circulation. Under Alternative A, the
monetary base increases from 2012 to 2014 as the level of reserve balances climbs in
concert with the expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. The base then
contracts during the exit until after the size of the portfolio is normalized. Under
Alternative C, the monetary base increases a bit from 2012 to 2013— rising with the
delayed settlement of MBS purchases undertaken in 2012 as well as with the growth of
currency—and then contracts, on net, until after the size of the portfolio is normalized.
38 of 63

--- Page 41 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
Growth Rates for the Monetary Base
October
Date Alternative B Alternative A Alternative C
Alternative B
Percent, annual rate
Monthly
Apr-12 -12.2 -12.2 -12.2 -12.3
May-12 -8.7 -8.7 -8.7 -8.7
Jun-12 -5.1 -5.1 -5.1 -5.1
Jul-12 7.7 7.7 7.7 7.7
Aug-12 7.8 7.8 7.8 7.7
Sep-12 -12.4 -12.4 -12.4 -12.4
Oct-12 -8.9 -8.9 -8.9 1.1
Nov-12 32.6 32.5 32.5 28.9 s
e
Dec-12 37.9 37.8 38.5 23.1 v
i
t
a
n
r
Quarterly e
t
l
2011 Q3 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0 A
2011 Q4 -5.9 -5.9 -5.9 -5.9
2012 Q1 5.5 5.5 5.5 5.5
2012 Q2 -3.9 -3.9 -3.9 -3.9
2012 Q3 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8
2012 Q4 6.6 6.5 6.6 7.5
2013 Q1 36.4 38.2 24.0 28.3
2013 Q2 30.2 38.6 -4.2 30.1
Annual - Q4 to Q4
2010 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9
2011 32.9 32.9 32.9 32.9
2012 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.5
2013 25.7 40.4 5.5 25.1
2014 -0.6 2.5 -1.0 -0.6
2015 -1.3 -1.5 -6.6 -2.4
2016 -13.2 -12.5 -16.7 -14.3
2017 -16.5 -15.9 -18.3 -16.9
2018 -23.4 -22.8 -8.5 -23.9
2019 -7.4 -21.3 4.4 -6.2
2020 4.6 4.6 4.6 4.4
2021 4.6 4.6 4.6 4.4
2022 4.6 4.6 4.6 4.5
2023 4.7 4.7 4.7 4.6
2024 4.7 4.7 4.7 4.7
2025 4.7 4.7 4.7 4.7
Note: Not seasonally adjusted.
39 of 63

--- Page 42 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
Implications of Additional Securities Purchases
for the Exit Strategy Principles
Since the Committee described its exit strategy principles in June 2011, the SOMA
portfolio and its likely evolution, along with the outlook for the economy and
interest rates, have changed considerably. The change in reinvestment policy
increased the share of agency MBS in the portfolio, the maturity extension
program lengthened the average duration of the portfolio, the outright agency
MBS purchases have expanded the size of the portfolio, and the Committee’s
extended forward guidance language has pushed out expectations for the timing
of the unwinding of the highly accomodative stance of monetary policy. If open‐
ended purchases continue into 2013, the portfolio will expand further in size and
duration.
s
e The balance sheet projections for Alternatives A, B, and C take account of these
v
i
a t changes in the portfolio as well as the staff’s assumptions regarding the
r n implementation of the Commttee’s exit strategy principles.1 In particular, the
e
l t projections assume that sales of agency MBS proceed over five years, starting six
A
months after the first increase in the target federal funds rate. Under
Alternatives B and C, such sales are sufficient to normalize the size of the Federal
Reserve’s balance sheet over three years or less, consistent with the exit strategy
principles. However, under Alternative A, normalization takes somewhat
longer—about three and a half years. It would be possible to normalize the size
of the balance sheet over three years even in this case if the sales of agency MBS
were conducted over a shorter period. However, at some stage the size of the
Federal Reserve’s portfolio will reach a point where normalization over three
years will require sales of agency securities at a pace that may be difficult to
achieve without adverse effects on market functioning.2 The June 2011 FOMC
minutes noted that the Committee is prepared to make adjustments to its exit
strategy principles in light of on economic and financial developments. Against
this backdrop, the Committee may wish to revisit these principles if purchases of
longer‐term securities continue for long enough. For example, the Committee
might want to allow for somewhat longer periods over which to sell agency
securities and normalize the size of the balance sheet.
1
In the June 2011 FOMC minutes, the exit strategy principles noted the anticipated steps
and sequence of actions for the removal of policy accommodation and the normalization of
the balance sheet. These were listed as:
1. Cease reinvesting some or all principal payments on securities holdings;
2. Modify forward guidance for the path of the federal funds rate and initiate
temporary reserve‐draining operations;
3. Raise the federal funds target rate and adjust the interest rate on excess
reserves to move the federal funds rate toward the target rate;
4. Sell agency securities gradually and steadily over three to five years with the size
of the portfolio expected to normalize over two to three years.
2
The effect of the pace of agency MBS sales on market functioning is discussed in the
memo by Board and FRBNY staff titled “The effect of an additional $1 trillion LSAP on the exit
strategy" sent to the Committee on August 28, 2012.
40 of 63

--- Page 43 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
The Committee could also consider more substantial changes to its exit strategy
princples. For example, the Committee could consider strategies in which the
portfolio is normalized by allowing securities to run off without the use of sales,
or by selling Treasury securities instead of or in addition to agency securities, or
by selling securities before raising the target for the federal funds rate. Such
changes could materially impact both the level of reserves around the time of lift‐
off—and so the extent to which reserve draining tools may need to be
employed—and the path of income and remittances to the Treasury.3
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
3
For example, the staff memo on purchase options distributed prior to this meeting
noted that allowing securities to run off without sales was consistent with a higher path for
Federal Reserve income during exit as well as greater remittances to the Treasury but
normalization of the size of the balance sheet would be delayed by about a year under the
options with larger purchases.
41 of 63

--- Page 44 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
DEBT, BANK CREDIT, AND MONEY FORECASTS
Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to expand at an annual rate of 4¾
percent in the fourth quarter of 2012, driven by significant expansion in federal
government debt and a modest rise in private nonfinancial debt. For the remainder of the
forecast period ending in 2015, we expect the rise in domestic nonfinancial debt to slow
to about a 3¾ percent pace, on average, as federal debt advances less rapidly and private
debt accelerates only gradually. Nonfinancial business debt is forecast to increase at a
moderate pace over the projection period, reflecting favorable financing conditions and
increasing capital expenditures. The level of home mortgage debt is projected to bottom
out in 2013 but only edge up thereafter, as financing conditions are expected to remain
tight and a substantial amount of remaining negative home equity continues to damp debt
s
e growth. Meanwhile, we project consumer credit to accelerate over most of the forecast
v
i
t
a period, from a growth rate of about 5½ percent in the fourth quarter of this year to about
n
r
e 7¼ percent in 2015, driven by continued strong demand for student loans and a pickup in
t
l
A
spending on consumer durables.
We anticipate commercial bank credit to increase at a moderate pace over the
forecast period. Core loans—the sum of commercial and industrial (C&I), real estate,
and consumer loans—are projected to increase steadily. C&I loans are expected to rise at
a moderate rate over the forecast period, consistent with the projected growth in business
investment. We expect growth in both residential real estate and consumer loans to pick
up gradually from their currently weak pace, reflecting improvements in borrowers’
credit quality and a further gradual easing of standards and terms on such loans. We also
anticipate residential real estate lending to be supported by a pickup in residential
investment. Commercial real estate loans are projected to accelerate only very slowly
over the next three years, as high vacancy rates, depressed prices for commercial
properties, and the poor credit quality of existing loans are likely to continue to suppress
activity in this sector. Banks’ securities holdings are expected to rise at a modest pace,
with smaller increases over the forecast period than were posted in 2012, as deposit
growth ebbs and demand for bank loans strengthens.
42 of 63

--- Page 45 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
We expect M2 to contract in the first quarter of 2013 following the expiration of
the unlimited FDIC insurance on noninterest-bearing transaction deposits at year-end.19
Subsequently, M2 is forecast to grow, but at a pace below that of nominal income, as the
expected improvement in financial and economic conditions over the forecast horizon
encourages investors to reallocate their portfolios away from M2 assets and toward
riskier investments. M2 is projected to contract towards the end of 2015 in response to
the liftoff in the federal funds rate and the accompanying rise in the opportunity cost of
holding money.
These reallocations away from M2 assets over the forecast period are expected to
depress growth of liquid deposits—the largest component of M2—relative to the rapid
pace observed over recent years. With respect to the other components of M2, continuing
s
a trend seen since the end of 2008, retail money funds and small time deposits are e
v
i
t
projected to contract until late in the forecast period; with interest rates expected to a
n
r
remain low, yields on these products are projected to offer only limited benefits relative e
t
l
A
to those on investment alternatives. Currency growth is expected to moderate to a pace
somewhat above that of nominal income and to continue at that pace through the
projection period.
19 The Dodd-Frank Act provides temporary, unlimited deposit insurance coverage for noninterest-bearing
transaction accounts at FDIC-insured institutions from December 31, 2010, through December 31, 2012. For
additional background, see the box “Expiration of Unlimited FDIC Deposit Insurance” in the Financial Developments
section of Tealbook, Book A.
43 of 63

--- Page 46 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
Growth Rates for M2
(Percent, seasonally adjusted annual rate)
Monthly Growth Rates Tealbook Forecast*
Apr-12 5.5
May-12 3.8
Jun-12 5.1
Jul-12 9.0
Aug-12 4.5
Sep-12 10.1
Oct-12 11.2
Nov-12 5.9
Dec-12 7.3
s Jan-13 -7.5
e
v
i Feb-13 -4.0
t
a
n Mar-13 2.0
r
e
t
l
A
Quarterly Growth Rates
2012 Q3 6.7
2012 Q4 8.7
2013 Q1 -0.9
2013 Q2 1.6
2013 Q3 2.1
2013 Q4 2.0
2014 Q1 2.0
2014 Q2 2.3
2014 Q3 2.5
2014 Q4 2.6
2015 Q1 2.8
2015 Q2 2.4
2015 Q3 0.9
2015 Q4 -0.4
Annual Growth Rates
2012 7.3
2013 1.2
2014 2.4
2015 1.4
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest
rates in the Tealbook forecast. Actual data through
November 26, 2012; projections thereafter.
44 of 63

--- Page 47 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
DIRECTIVE
The directive that was issued in October appears on the next page, followed by
drafts for a December directive that correspond to each of the policy alternatives.
The draft directives for all three Alternatives instruct the Desk to complete the
MEP of $267 billion on schedule by the end of December 2012, and to continue
purchasing longer-term Treasury securities after December (either by $50 billion per
month in Alternative A, or by $45 billion per month in Alternative B). All three
directives also instruct the Desk to resume, in January, rolling over maturing Treasury
securities at auction. The draft directive for Alternative A directs the Desk to continue
purchasing additional agency MBS at a pace of about $40 billion per month until the end
of December 2012 and to raise the flow of purchases to $50 billion beginning in January s
e
v
2013; it does not specify an end-date for these purchases. The draft directive for t i
a
n
Alternative B instructs the Desk to continue purchasing additional agency MBS at a pace r
e
t
l
of about $40 billion per month; it, too, does not specify an end-date. The directive for A
Alternative C instructs the Desk to continue its purchases of agency MBS at a pace of
$40 billion per month until the end of December 2012. Each of the draft directives would
also direct the Desk to continue the current practice of reinvesting principal payments on
all agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS.
45 of 63

--- Page 48 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
October 2012 Directive
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will
foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
continue the maturity extension program it announced in June to purchase Treasury
securities with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years with a total face value of about
$267 billion by the end of December 2012, and to sell or redeem Treasury securities with
remaining maturities of approximately 3 years or less with a total face value of about
$267 billion. For the duration of this program, the Committee directs the Desk to
suspend its policy of rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues. The
s
e
v Committee directs the Desk to maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal
i
t
a payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in the System Open
n
r
e
t Market Account in agency mortgage-backed securities. The Desk is also directed to
l
A
continue purchasing agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of about $40 billion per
month. The Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap
transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS
transactions. The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the
Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that
could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum
employment and price stability.
46 of 63

--- Page 49 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
December 2012 Directive—Alternative A
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will
foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
continue complete the maturity extension program it announced in June to purchase
Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years with a total face
value of about $267 billion by the end of December 2012, and to sell or redeem Treasury
securities with remaining maturities of approximately 3 years or less with a total face
value of about $267 billion. For the duration Following the completion of this program,
the Committee directs the Desk to suspend resume its policy of rolling over maturing
s
Treasury securities into new issues. From the beginning of January, the Desk is e
v
i
t
directed to purchase longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of about $50 billion a
n
r
per month. The Committee directs the Desk to maintain its existing policy of e
t
l
A
reinvesting principal payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities
in the System Open Market Account in agency mortgage-backed securities. The Desk is
also directed to continue purchasing agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of
about $40 billion per month until the end of December 2012, and to purchase agency
mortgage-backed securities at a pace of about $50 billion per month beginning in
January. The Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap
transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS
transactions. The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the
Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that
could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum
employment and price stability.
47 of 63

--- Page 50 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
December 2012 Directive—Alternative B
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will
foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
continue complete the maturity extension program it announced in June to purchase
Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years with a total face
value of about $267 billion by the end of December 2012, and to sell or redeem Treasury
securities with remaining maturities of approximately 3 years or less with a total face
value of about $267 billion. For the duration Following the completion of this program,
the Committee directs the Desk to suspend resume its policy of rolling over maturing
s
e
v Treasury securities into new issues. From the beginning of January, the Desk is
i
t
a directed to purchase longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of about $45 billion
n
r
e
t per month. The Committee directs the Desk to maintain its existing policy of
l
A
reinvesting principal payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities
in the System Open Market Account in agency mortgage-backed securities. The Desk is
also directed to continue purchasing agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of
about $40 billion per month. The Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and
coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s
agency MBS transactions. The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary
will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s
balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of
maximum employment and price stability.
48 of 63

--- Page 51 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
December 2012 Directive—Alternative C
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will
foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
continue complete the maturity extension program it announced in June to purchase
Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years with a total face
value of about $267 billion by the end of December 2012, and to sell or redeem Treasury
securities with remaining maturities of approximately 3 years or less with a total face
value of about $267 billion. For the duration Following the completion of this program,
the Committee directs the Desk to suspend resume its policy of rolling over maturing
s
Treasury securities into new issues. The Committee directs the Desk to maintain its e
v
i
t
existing policy of reinvesting principal payments on all agency debt and agency a
n
r
mortgage-backed securities in the System Open Market Account in agency mortgage- e
t
l
A
backed securities. The Desk is also directed to continue purchasing agency mortgage-
backed securities at a pace of about $40 billion per month until the end of December
2012. The Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap
transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS
transactions. The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the
Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that
could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum
employment and price stability.
49 of 63

--- Page 52 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
(This page is intentionally blank.)
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
50 of 63

--- Page 53 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
Explanatory Notes
A. Policy Rules Used in “Monetary Policy Strategies”
The table below gives the expressions for the selected policy rules used in “Monetary
Policy Strategies.” In the table, (cid:1844) denotes the nominal federal funds rate for quarter t, while the
(cid:3047)
right-hand-side variables include the staff’s projection of trailing four-quarter core PCE inflation
for the current quarter and three quarters ahead ((cid:2024) and (cid:2024) ), the output gap estimate for the
(cid:3047) (cid:3047)(cid:2878)(cid:2871)|(cid:3047)
current period as well as its one-quarter-ahead forecast (gap and gap ), and the forecast of the
t t+1|t
three-quarter-ahead annual change in the output gap (4gap ). The value of policymakers’
t+3|t
long-run inflation objective, denoted π*, is 2 percent. The nominal income targeting rule
responds to the nominal income gap, which is defined as the difference between nominal income
(cid:1877)(cid:1866) (100 times the log of the level of nominal GDP) and a target value (cid:1877)(cid:1866)(cid:1499) (100 times the log of
(cid:3047) (cid:3047)
potential nominal GDP). Target nominal GDP in 2007:Q4 is set equal to potential real GDP in
that quarter multiplied by the GDP deflator in that quarter; subsequently, target nominal GDP
grows 2 percentage points per year faster than potential GDP.
Taylor (1993) rule (cid:1844) (cid:3404) 2.25(cid:3397)(cid:2024) (cid:3397)0.5(cid:4666)(cid:2024) (cid:3398) (cid:2024)(cid:1499)(cid:4667)(cid:3397)0.5(cid:1859)(cid:1853)(cid:1868)
(cid:3047) (cid:3047) (cid:3047) (cid:3047)
Taylor (1999) rule (cid:1844) (cid:3404) 2.25(cid:3397)(cid:2024) (cid:3397)0.5(cid:4666)(cid:2024) (cid:3398) (cid:2024)(cid:1499)(cid:4667)(cid:3397)(cid:1859)(cid:1853)(cid:1868)
(cid:3047) (cid:3047) (cid:3047) (cid:3047)
Inertial Taylor (1999) rule (cid:1844) (cid:3404) 0.85(cid:1844) (cid:3397)0.15(cid:4666)2.25(cid:3397)(cid:2024) (cid:3397)0.5(cid:4666)(cid:2024) (cid:3398)(cid:2024)(cid:1499)(cid:4667)(cid:3397)(cid:1859)(cid:1853)(cid:1868) (cid:4667)
(cid:3047) (cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869) (cid:3047) (cid:3047) (cid:3047)
(cid:1844) (cid:3404) 1.2(cid:1844) (cid:3398)0.39(cid:1844) (cid:3397)0.19(cid:4670)0.79(cid:3397)1.73(cid:2024)
Outcome-based rule (cid:3047) (cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869) (cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2870) (cid:3047) e s
(cid:3397)3.66(cid:1859)(cid:1853)(cid:1868) (cid:3398)2.72(cid:1859)(cid:1853)(cid:1868) (cid:4671) t
(cid:3047) (cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869) o
N
First-difference rule (cid:1844) (cid:3047) (cid:3404) (cid:1844) (cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869) (cid:3397)0.5(cid:3435)(cid:2024) (cid:3047)(cid:2878)(cid:2871)|(cid:3047) (cid:3398)(cid:2024)(cid:1499)(cid:3439)(cid:3397)0.5Δ(cid:2872)(cid:1859)(cid:1853)(cid:1868) (cid:3047)(cid:2878)(cid:2871)|(cid:3047) o r y
t
a
Nominal income targeting rule (cid:1844) (cid:3404) 0.75(cid:1844) (cid:3397)0.25(cid:4666)2.25(cid:3397)(cid:2024) (cid:3397) (cid:1877)(cid:1866) (cid:3398)(cid:1877)(cid:1866)(cid:1499)(cid:4667) n
(cid:3047) (cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869) (cid:3047) (cid:3047) (cid:3047) a
l
p
x
E
The first two of the selected rules were studied by Taylor (1993, 1999), while the inertial
Taylor (1999) rule has featured prominently in recent analysis by Board staff.1 The outcome-
based rule uses policy reactions estimated using real-time data over the sample
1988:Q12006:Q4. The intercept of the outcome-based rule was chosen so that it is consistent
with a 2 percent long-run inflation objective and a long-run, quarterly real interest rate of
2¼ percent, a value used in the FRB/US model. The intercepts of the Taylor (1993, 1999) rules,
and the long-run intercept of the inertial Taylor (1999) rule, are set at 2¼ percent—instead of
Taylor’s original value of 2 percent—for the same reason. The 2¼ percent real rate estimate also
enters the long-run intercept of the nominal income targeting rule. The prescriptions of the first
1 See Erceg and others (2012).
51 of 63

--- Page 54 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
difference rule do not depend on the level of the output gap or the long-run, quarterly real interest
rate; see Orphanides (2003).
Near-term prescriptions from these rules are calculated using Tealbook projections for
inflation and the output gap. The inertial Taylor (1999) rule, the first-difference rule, the
estimated outcome-based rule, and the nominal income targeting rule include the lagged policy
rate as a right-hand-side variable. When the Tealbook is published early in the quarter, the lines
denoted “Previous Tealbook” report rule prescriptions based on the previous Tealbook’s staff
outlook, jumping off from the actual value of the lagged funds rate in the previous quarter. When
the Tealbook is published late in the quarter, the lines denoted “Previous Tealbook Outlook”
report rule prescriptions based on the previous Tealbook’s staff outlook, but jumping off from the
average value for the policy rate thus far this quarter.
REFERENCES
Erceg, Christopher, Jon Faust, Michael Kiley, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David López-
Salido, Stephen Meyer, Edward Nelson, David Reifschneider, and Robert Tetlow (2012). “An
Overview of Simple Policy Rules and Their Use in Policymaking in Normal Times and Under
Current Conditions.” Memo sent to the Committee on July 18, 2012.
Erceg, Christopher, Michael Kiley, and David López-Salido (2011). “Alternative
Monetary Policy Frameworks.” Memo sent to the Committee on October 6, 2011.
McCallum, Bennett T., and Edward Nelson (1999). “Nominal Income Targeting in an
Open-Economy Optimizing Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 43 (June), pp. 553–
578.
s
e
t
o Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor
N
Rule,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 50 (July), pp. 9831022.
y
r
o
t
a
n Taylor, John B. (1993). “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
a
p l Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 39 (December), pp. 195214.
x
E
Taylor, John B. (1999). “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B.
Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules. University of Chicago Press, pp. 319341.
52 of 63

--- Page 55 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
B. Estimates of the Equilibrium and Actual Real Rates
An estimate of the equilibrium real rate appears as a memo item in the first exhibit,
“Policy Rules and the Staff Projection.” The concept of the short-run equilibrium real rate
underlying the estimate corresponds to the level of the real federal funds rate that is consistent
with output reaching potential in twelve quarters using the projection for the economy of
FRB/US, the staff’s large-scale econometric model of the U.S. economy. This estimate depends
on a very broad array of economic factors, some of which take the form of projected values of the
model’s exogenous variables. The estimate reported is the “Tealbook-consistent” estimate of r*,
which is generated after the paths of exogenous variables in the FRB/US model are adjusted so
that they match those in the extended Tealbook forecast. Model simulations then determine the
value of the real federal funds rate that closes the output gap conditional on the exogenous
variables in the extended baseline forecast.
The estimated actual real federal funds rate reported in the exhibit is constructed as the
difference between the federal funds rate and the trailing four-quarter change in the core PCE
price index. The federal funds rate is specified as the midpoint of the target range for the federal
funds rate on the Tealbook Book B publication date.
s
e
t
o
N
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
53 of 63

--- Page 56 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
C. FRB/US Model Simulations
The exhibits of “Monetary Policy Strategies” that report results from simulations of
alternative policies are derived from dynamic simulations of the FRB/US model. The simulated
policy rule is assumed to be in force over the whole period covered by the simulation. For the
optimal control simulations, the dotted line labeled “Previous Tealbook” is derived from the
optimal control simulations, when applied to the previous Tealbook projection.
s
e
t
o
N
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
54 of 63

--- Page 57 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
D. Long-Run Projections of the Balance Sheet and Monetary Base
This explanatory note presents the assumptions underlying the projections provided in the
section titled “Long-Run Projections of the Balance Sheet and Monetary Base,” as well as
projections for each major component of the balance sheet.
GENERAL ASSUMPTIONS
The balance sheet projections are constructed at a monthly frequency from November
2012 to December 2025. The few balance sheet items that are not discussed below are assumed
to be constant over the projection period at the level observed on October 31, 2012. The
projections for all major asset and liability categories under each scenario are summarized in the
tables that follow the bullet points.
The Tealbook projections for the scenarios corresponding to Alternatives B and A
assume that the target federal funds rate begins to increase in October 2015. This date of liftoff is
consistent with the current staff economic forecast but is two months later than assumed in the
balance sheet projections for Alternative B in the October Tealbook. The projection for the
scenario corresponding to Alternative C assumes the target federal funds rate lifts off in October
2014, consistent with the draft statement language “at least through [late 2014 | mid-2014 | late
2013]” and a year earlier than in Alternative B. In each case, the balance sheet projections
assume that no use of short-term draining tools is necessary to achieve the projected path for the
target federal funds rate.1
s
e
t
o
N
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
1 If term deposits or reverse repurchase agreements were used to drain reserves prior to raising the
federal funds rate, the composition of liabilities would change: Increases in term deposits and reverse
repurchase agreements would be matched by corresponding declines in reserve balances. Presumably,
these draining tools would be wound down as the balance sheet returns to its steady state growth path, so
that the projected paths for Treasury securities presented here remain valid.
55 of 63

--- Page 58 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
ASSETS
Treasury Securities, Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS), and Agency Debt
Securities
 The assumptions under Alternative B are:
o The Committee is assumed to continue its current purchases of MBS through the end
of the year, when the MEP concludes, and then continue MBS purchases and
additional purchases of longer-term Treasury securities through June 2013.
Purchases of Treasury securities will continue at a pace of $45 billion per month and
purchases of MBS will continue at a pace of $40 billion per month. The Treasury
securities purchased after the conclusion of the MEP are assumed to have an average
duration of about nine years, roughly equal to the net duration of purchases and sales
under the MEP. The purchases between October 2012 and June 2013 expand the
SOMA portfolio’s holdings of longer-term securities by $763 billion.
o The FOMC continues to reinvest the proceeds from principal payments on its agency
securities holdings in agency MBS.
o Starting in April 2015—six months prior to the assumed increase in the target federal
funds rate—all securities are allowed to roll off the portfolio as they mature or
prepay.
o The Federal Reserve begins to sell agency MBS and agency debt securities in April
2016, six months after the assumed date of the first increase in the target federal
funds rate. Holdings of agency securities are reduced over five years and reach zero
by March 2021.
o For agency MBS, the rate of prepayment is based on staff models using estimates of
s housing market factors from one of the Desk’s analytical providers, long-run average
e
o t prepayment speeds of MBS, and interest rate projections from the Tealbook.2 The
N
projected rate of prepayment is sensitive to these underlying assumptions.
y
r
o
t
a
n  In the scenario corresponding to Alternative A, the Committee is assumed to continue its
a
p l current purchases of MBS through the end of the year, when the MEP concludes, and
x
E then continue MBS purchases and additional purchases of longer-term Treasury securities
through December 2013. From January through June 2013, the pace of purchases of
Treasury securities and MBS will be $50 billion per month each. After June 2013, the
pace of purchases slows, and purchases end in December 2013. The Treasury securities
purchased after the conclusion of the MEP are assumed to have an average duration of
about nine years. These purchases expand the SOMA portfolio’s holdings of longer-term
securities by $1.25 trillion between October 2012 and December 2013. In addition, the
Committee is assumed to maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS. In April 2015, six
months prior to the assumed increase in the target federal funds rate in October 2015,
2 Projected prepayments of agency MBS reflect interest rate projections as of December 3, 2012.
56 of 63

--- Page 59 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
principal payments from all securities are allowed to roll off the portfolio. Sales of
agency securities begin in April 2016 and continue for five years.
 In the scenario corresponding to Alternative C, the Committee is assumed to purchase
MBS only through the end of this year; no additional asset purchases are assumed. The
FOMC continues to reinvest the proceeds from principal payments on its agency
securities holdings in agency MBS until April 2014—six months prior to the assumed
increase in the target federal funds rate under this alternative. Starting in April 2014, all
securities are allowed to roll off the portfolio as they mature or prepay. The Federal
Reserve begins to sell agency MBS and agency debt securities in April 2015. Holdings
of agency securities are reduced over five years and reach zero by March 2020.
 Because current and expected interest rates in the near term are below the average coupon
rate on outstanding Treasury securities, the market value at which these securities are
purchased will generally exceed their face value, with a larger premium for longer-
maturity securities. As a result, in Alternatives B and A, premiums are boosted by
roughly $33 billion and $41 billion, respectively, by the time asset purchases end. In
Alternative C, premiums will increase $5 billion. The increase in premiums is reflected
in higher total assets and in higher reserve balances.
 The asset purchases under all three alternatives put downward pressure on market interest
rates, in particular primary and secondary mortgage rates.
 The current and near-term market value of agency MBS is assumed to be four percent
above face value. As a result, for Alternatives B, A, and C, the $360 billion, $620 billion,
and $120 billion of agency MBS purchases, respectively, will cause unamortized
premiums on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to rise by roughly $14 billion, $25
billion, and $5 billion, respectively, relative to a scenario without these MBS purchases. e s
t
o
The increase in premiums is reflected in higher total assets and in higher reserve
N
balances. y
r
o
t
 The level of central bank liquidity swaps is assumed to decline, as draws under the recent a
n
foreign central bank swap auctions mature; it is assumed to return to zero in early 2013. a
l
p
x
 In all three scenarios, once reserve balances drop to $25 billion, the Desk begins to E
purchase Treasury bills to maintain this level of reserve balances going forward.
Purchases of bills continue until such securities comprise one-third of the Federal
Reserve’s total Treasury securities holdings—about the average share prior to the crisis.
Once this share is reached, the Federal Reserve buys coupon securities in addition to bills
to maintain an approximate composition of the portfolio of one-third bills and two-thirds
coupon securities.
Liquidity Programs and Credit Facilities
 Credit through the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) declines to zero
by the end of 2015, reflecting loan maturities and prepayments.
57 of 63

--- Page 60 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
 The assets held by TALF LLC remain at about $1 billion through 2014 before declining
to zero the following year. Assets held by TALF LLC consist of investments of
commitment fees collected by the LLC and the U.S. Treasury’s initial funding. In this
projection, the LLC is assumed to not purchase any asset-backed securities. (It would
have to make such purchases if an asset-backed security were received by the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York in connection with a decision of a borrower not to repay a
TALF loan.)
 The assets held by Maiden Lane LLC decline to zero in 2016.
LIABILITIES AND CAPITAL
 Federal Reserve notes in circulation grow in line with the staff forecast for money stock
currency through 2015. Afterwards, Federal Reserve notes in circulation grow at the
same rate as nominal GDP in the extended Tealbook projection.
 The level of reverse repurchase agreements (RRPs) is assumed to be around $70 billion,
about the average level of RRPs associated with foreign official and international
accounts observed over the past three years.
 Balances held in the U.S. Treasury’s General Account (TGA) follow recent patterns until
the assumed initial increase in the target federal funds rate in each alternative. At that
point, the TGA drops back to its historical target level of $5 billion as it is assumed that
the Treasury will implement a new cash management system and invest funds in excess
of $5 billion. The TGA remains constant at $5 billion over the remainder of the forecast
period.
 Federal Reserve capital grows 15 percent per year, in line with the average rate of the
s
t e past ten years.3
o
N
y  In general, increases in the level of Federal Reserve assets are matched by higher levels
r
o of reserve balances. All else equal, increases in the levels of liability items, such as
t
a
n Federal Reserve notes in circulation or other liabilities, or increases in the level of
a
p l Reserve Bank capital, drain reserve balances. When increases in these liability or capital
x
E items would otherwise cause reserve balances to fall below $25 billion, purchases of
Treasury securities are assumed in order to maintain that level of reserve balances.
 In the event that a Federal Reserve Bank’s earnings fall short of the amount necessary to
cover operating costs, pay dividends, and equate surplus to capital paid-in, a deferred
asset would be recorded. This deferred asset is reported on the liability side of the
balance sheet as “Interest on Federal Reserve notes due to U.S. Treasury.” This liability
takes on a positive value when weekly cumulative earnings have not yet been distributed
3 The annual growth rate of capital affects the date of normalization of the size of the balance sheet
and the size of the SOMA portfolio. Growth in Reserve Bank capital has been modest over the past two
years; however, even if Federal Reserve capital were assumed to be constant, normalization only would be
pushed later by about a quarter.
58 of 63

--- Page 61 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
to the Treasury and takes on a negative value when earnings fall short of the expenses
listed above. In Alternative A, a small deferred asset—peaking at about $4 billion in
2018—is recorded on the balance sheet at year-end in 2017, 2018 and 2019.4
TERM PREMIUM EFFECTS
5
 Under Alternative A, the term premium effect on the yield of the ten-year Treasury note
is negative 113 basis points in the current quarter. The effect wanes over time as the
length of time the securities will be held by the Federal Reserve shortens and as securities
subsequently roll off the portfolio or are sold until the size of the portfolio is normalized.
 Under Alternative B, the contemporaneous term premium effect is negative 113 basis
points. This estimate is the same as in Alternative A and reflects the fact that market
participants are expecting an asset purchase program more in line with Alternative A.
Over the first half of next year, as market participants come to realize that the purchases
will end in June, the term premium effect converges to one associated with the $750
billion purchase program. Over the remainder of the projection period, the term premium
effect declines slowly toward zero, reflecting the actual and anticipated normalization of
the portfolio.
 Under Alternative C, the term premium effect is negative 69 basis points. The effect is
less negative than in Alternative B because there are no additional securities purchases in
2013 and the liftoff date is earlier so asset sales begin sooner than under Alternatives B
and A.
s
e
o
t
N
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
4 In our projections, Federal Reserve capital is much larger than the peak value of the deferred
asset.
5 Staff estimates include all current and projected asset purchases and use the model outlined in the
appendix of the memo titled “Possible MBS Large-Scale Asset Purchase Program” written by staff at the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the Board of Governors and sent to the Committee on January 18,
2012. More details of the model can be found in “Term Structure Modeling with Supply Factors and the
Federal Reserve’s Large Scale Asset Purchase Programs” by Li and Wei, FEDS working paper #37, 2012.
59 of 63

--- Page 62 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
10-Year Treasury Term Premium Effect
October
Date Alternative B Alternative A Alternative C
Alternative B
Basis Points
Quarterly Averages
2012 Q4 -113 -113 -69 -93
2013 Q1 -104 -110 -65 -90
2013 Q2 -94 -107 -61 -86
2013 Q3 -83 -103 -57 -81
2013 Q4 -78 -98 -53 -76
2014 Q1 -73 -92 -49 -72
2014 Q2 -69 -86 -45 -67
2014 Q3 -64 -81 -41 -62
2014 Q4 -59 -75 -38 -57
2015 Q1 -55 -70 -34 -53
2015 Q2 -51 -64 -31 -49
2015 Q3 -47 -59 -28 -44
2015 Q4 -43 -54 -25 -40
2016 Q4 -29 -37 -17 -27
s
e 2017 Q4 -20 -24 -11 -17
t
o
N 2018 Q4 -14 -16 -9 -10
y 2019 Q4 -11 -11 -9 -7
r
o
t 2020 Q4 -10 -9 -8 -5
a
n 2021 Q4 -9 -8 -7
a
l
p 2022 Q4 -8 -6 -6
x
E
2023 Q4 -6 -5 -5
2024 Q4 -4 -4 -4
2025 Q4 -3 -3 -3
60 of 63

--- Page 63 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Alternative B
Billions of dollars
Oct 31, 2012 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 2025
Total assets 2,825 3,521 3,402 2,469 1,884 2,097 2,345 2,635
Selected assets
Liquidity programs for financial firms 13 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 13 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC
Securities held outright 2,579 3,253 3,170 2,283 1,736 1,973 2,230 2,527
U.S. Treasury securities 1,645 1,923 1,923 1,511 1,439 1,973 2,230 2,527
Agency debt securities 82 57 33 4 2 0 0 0
Agency mortgage-backed securities 852 1,273 1,215 768 295 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
Total other assets 229 266 231 186 148 125 116 108
s
e
t
o
Total liabilities 2,771 3,450 3,307 2,344 1,720 1,880 2,057 2,254 N
y
Selected liabilities r
o
t
a
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 1,100 1,179 1,329 1,466 1,604 1,764 1,942 2,138 n
a
l
Reverse repurchase agreements 100 70 70 70 70 70 70 70 p
x
E
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,559 2,190 1,898 798 36 36 36 36
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 1,435 2,123 1,887 787 25 25 25 25
U.S. Treasury, General Account 100 61 5 5 5 5 5 5
Other Deposits 24 6 6 6 6 6 6 6
Interest on Federal Reserve Notes due 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
to U.S. Treasury
Total capital 55 71 94 124 165 218 288 381
Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
61 of 63

--- Page 64 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Alternative A
Billions of dollars
Oct 31, 2012 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 2025
Total assets 2,825 3,998 3,895 2,863 1,883 2,099 2,346 2,636
Selected assets
Liquidity programs for financial firms 13 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 13 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC
Securities held outright 2,579 3,709 3,645 2,664 1,727 1,969 2,226 2,524
U.S. Treasury securities 1,645 2,153 2,153 1,737 1,370 1,969 2,226 2,524
Agency debt securities 82 57 33 4 2 0 0 0
Agency mortgage-backed securities 852 1,499 1,459 922 355 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
Total other assets 229 287 250 199 156 130 120 111
s
e
t
o
N Total liabilities 2,771 3,927 3,801 2,738 1,718 1,881 2,059 2,255
y
r Selected liabilities
o
t
a
n Federal Reserve notes in circulation 1,100 1,179 1,329 1,466 1,604 1,764 1,942 2,138
a
l
p Reverse repurchase agreements 100 70 70 70 70 70 70 70
x
E
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,559 2,664 2,389 1,190 36 36 36 36
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 1,435 2,598 2,378 1,179 25 25 25 25
U.S. Treasury, General Account 100 61 5 5 5 5 5 5
Other Deposits 24 6 6 6 6 6 6 6
Interest on Federal Reserve Notes due 2 0 0 0 -2 0 0 0
to U.S. Treasury
Total capital 55 71 94 124 165 218 288 381
Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
62 of 63

--- Page 65 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 6, 2012
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Alternative C
Billions of dollars
Oct 31, 2012 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 2025
Total assets 2,825 2,979 2,692 1,866 1,884 2,097 2,345 2,634
Selected assets
Liquidity programs for financial firms 13 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 13 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC
Securities held outright 2,579 2,750 2,501 1,711 1,758 1,985 2,240 2,536
U.S. Treasury securities 1,645 1,653 1,652 1,275 1,709 1,985 2,240 2,536
Agency debt securities 82 57 33 4 1 0 0 0
Agency mortgage-backed securities 852 1,040 816 432 48 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
Total other assets 229 227 191 155 126 112 105 99
s
e
t
o
Total liabilities 2,771 2,908 2,598 1,742 1,719 1,880 2,057 2,254 N
y
Selected liabilities r
o
t
a
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 1,100 1,179 1,329 1,466 1,604 1,764 1,942 2,138 n
a
l
Reverse repurchase agreements 100 70 70 70 70 70 70 70 p
x
E
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,559 1,648 1,189 195 36 36 36 36
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 1,435 1,581 1,178 184 25 25 25 25
U.S. Treasury, General Account 100 61 5 5 5 5 5 5
Other Deposits 24 6 6 6 6 6 6 6
Interest on Federal Reserve Notes due 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
to U.S. Treasury
Total capital 55 71 94 124 165 218 288 381
Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
63 of 63

# Tables

## Page_14_Table_1


| 2012   |    | 2013   | 2014   | 2015   |
|--------|----|--------|--------|--------|
| H1     | H2 |        |        |        |


## Page_19_Table_1


| Selected
Elements       |                        |    | October
Statement                                                                                                      |                |    | December Alternatives                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |           |                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |    |
|-------------------------|------------------------|----|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------|----|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|--------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----|
|                         |                        |    |                                                                                                                        |                |    | A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |           | B                                                      | C                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |    |
| Economic Outlook        |                        |    |                                                                                                                        |                |    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |           |                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |    |
| Outlook                 |                        |    | without sufficient policy
accommodation, economic
growth might not be strong
enough                                    |                |    | without further policy
accommodation, economic
growth might not be strong
enough                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |           | unchanged                                              | economic growth will pick up
gradually; unemployment rate
will continue to decline at a
mandate-consistent pace                                                                                                      |    |
|                         |                        |    | inflation likely would run at or
below 2 percent                                                                       |                |    | inflation likely will run at or below 2 percent                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |           |                                                        | inflation will run near 2 percent                                                                                                                                                                                    |    |
|                         | Balance Sheet Policies |    |                                                                                                                        |                |    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |           |                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |    |
| MEP                     |                        |    | continue through end of year                                                                                           |                |    | complete at end of year                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |           |                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |    |
| Agency MBS              |                        |    | $40 billion per month                                                                                                  |                |    | raise to $50 billion per
month in January                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |           | unchanged                                              | discontinue at end of year                                                                                                                                                                                           |    |
| Longer-Term
Treasuries  |                        |    | none                                                                                                                   |                |    | $50 billion per month after
MEP is completed                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |           | initially $45 billion
per month after
MEP is completed | none                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |    |
| Securities
Reinvestment |                        |    | principal payments from agency
securities into agency MBS                                                              |                |    | unchanged                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |           |                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |    |
|                         |                        |    | redeem maturing Treasuries                                                                                             |                |    | in January, resume rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |           |                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |    |
| Guidance                |                        |    | if outlook for labor market does
not improve substantially, will
continue employing policy tools
as appropriate until… |                |    | essentially unchanged…                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |           |                                                        | prepared to take further action as
needed to promote sustained
improvement in labor market
conditions in a context of price
stability                                                                                |    |
|                         |                        |    | … such improvement is
achieved in a context of price
stability                                                         |                |    | … conditions are consistent
with outlook for sustained
progress toward objectives                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |           | unchanged                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |    |
|                         |                        |    | will take account of efficacy and
costs                                                                                |                |    | unchanged                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |           |                                                        | n.a.                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |    |
| Federal Funds Rate      |                        |    |                                                                                                                        |                |    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |           |                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |    |
|                         | Target                 |    |                                                                                                                        | 0 to ¼ percent |    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              | unchanged |                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |    |
| Guidance                |                        |    | highly accommodative policy
for a considerable time after
economic recovery
strengthens…                               |                |    | highly accommodative policy for a considerable
time after [substantial improvement in outlook for
labor market, asset purchase program ends, and]
economic recovery strengthens…                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |           |                                                        | highly accommodative policy for
[a considerable | some] time after
economic recovery
strengthens…                                                                                                                    |    |
|                         |                        |    | n.a.                                                                                                                   |                |    | quantitative thresholds:
at least as long as unemployment rate above
[A: 6 | B: 6½] percent, inflation one- to two-years
ahead is no more than ½ percentage point above 2
percent, and longer-term inflation expectations
remain well anchored; [B: these thresholds are
consistent with earlier date-based guidance;] will
also consider other information; when begin to
remove accommodation, will take balanced
approach consistent with [satisfactory progress
toward objectives | longer-run goals]
OR |           |                                                        | qualitative thresholds:
until observe substantial
improvement in labor market
conditions, provided inflation
over the medium term will be
close to [2 percent] objective and
inflation expectations remain
stable
OR |    |
|                         |                        |    | date-based:
at least through mid-2015                                                                                  |                |    | n.a.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |           | unchanged                                              | at least through
[late 2014 | mid-2014 | late 2013]                                                                                                                                                                  |    |


## Page_19_Table_2


| accommodation, economic    |
|----------------------------|
| growth might not be strong |


## Page_19_Table_3


| accommodation, economic    |
|----------------------------|
| growth might not be strong |


## Page_19_Table_4


| gradually; unemployment rate   |
|--------------------------------|
| will continue to decline at a  |


## Page_41_Table_1


| Growth Rates for the Monetary Base                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |               |               |               |                       |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|-----------------------|
| Date                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Alternative B | Alternative A | Alternative C | October
Alternative B |
| Percent, annual rate
Monthly
Apr-12 -12.2 -12.2 -12.2 -12.3
May-12 -8.7 -8.7 -8.7 -8.7
Jun-12 -5.1 -5.1 -5.1 -5.1
Jul-12 7.7 7.7 7.7 7.7
Aug-12 7.8 7.8 7.8 7.7
Sep-12 -12.4 -12.4 -12.4 -12.4
Oct-12 -8.9 -8.9 -8.9 1.1
Nov-12 32.6 32.5 32.5 28.9
Dec-12 37.9 37.8 38.5 23.1
Quarterly
2011 Q3 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0
2011 Q4 -5.9 -5.9 -5.9 -5.9
2012 Q1 5.5 5.5 5.5 5.5
2012 Q2 -3.9 -3.9 -3.9 -3.9
2012 Q3 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8
2012 Q4 6.6 6.5 6.6 7.5
2013 Q1 36.4 38.2 24.0 28.3
2013 Q2 30.2 38.6 -4.2 30.1
Annual - Q4 to Q4
2010 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9
2011 32.9 32.9 32.9 32.9
2012 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.5
2013 25.7 40.4 5.5 25.1
2014 -0.6 2.5 -1.0 -0.6
2015 -1.3 -1.5 -6.6 -2.4
2016 -13.2 -12.5 -16.7 -14.3
2017 -16.5 -15.9 -18.3 -16.9
2018 -23.4 -22.8 -8.5 -23.9
2019 -7.4 -21.3 4.4 -6.2
2020 4.6 4.6 4.6 4.4
2021 4.6 4.6 4.6 4.4
2022 4.6 4.6 4.6 4.5
2023 4.7 4.7 4.7 4.6
2024 4.7 4.7 4.7 4.7
2025 4.7 4.7 4.7 4.7 |               |               |               |                       |
| Note: Not seasonally adjusted.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |               |               |               |                       |


## Page_46_Table_1


| Growth Rates for M2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                               |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| (Percent, seasonally adjusted annual rate)                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                               |
| Monthly Growth Rates                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Tealbook Forecast*                                                                                                            |
| Apr-12
May-12
Jun-12
Jul-12
Aug-12
Sep-12
Oct-12
Nov-12
Dec-12
Jan-13
Feb-13
Mar-13
Quarterly Growth Rates
2012 Q3
2012 Q4
2013 Q1
2013 Q2
2013 Q3
2013 Q4
2014 Q1
2014 Q2
2014 Q3
2014 Q4
2015 Q1
2015 Q2
2015 Q3
2015 Q4
Annual Growth Rates
2012
2013
2014
2015 | 5.5
3.8
5.1
9.0
4.5
10.1
11.2
5.9
7.3
-7.5
-4.0
2.0
6.7
8.7
-0.9
1.6
2.1
2.0
2.0
2.3
2.5
2.6
2.8
2.4
0.9
-0.4
7.3
1.2
2.4
1.4 |
| * This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest
rates in the Tealbook forecast. Actual data through
November 26, 2012; projections thereafter.                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                               |


## Page_62_Table_1


| 10-Year Treasury Term Premium Effect                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |               |               |               |                       |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|-----------------------|
| Date                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Alternative B | Alternative A | Alternative C | October
Alternative B |
| Basis Points
Quarterly Averages
2012 Q4 -113 -113 -69 -93
2013 Q1 -104 -110 -65 -90
2013 Q2 -94 -107 -61 -86
2013 Q3 -83 -103 -57 -81
2013 Q4 -78 -98 -53 -76
2014 Q1 -73 -92 -49 -72
2014 Q2 -69 -86 -45 -67
2014 Q3 -64 -81 -41 -62
2014 Q4 -59 -75 -38 -57
2015 Q1 -55 -70 -34 -53
2015 Q2 -51 -64 -31 -49
2015 Q3 -47 -59 -28 -44
2015 Q4 -43 -54 -25 -40
2016 Q4 -29 -37 -17 -27
2017 Q4 -20 -24 -11 -17
2018 Q4 -14 -16 -9 -10
2019 Q4 -11 -11 -9 -7
2020 Q4 -10 -9 -8 -5
2021 Q4 -9 -8 -7
2022 Q4 -8 -6 -6
2023 Q4 -6 -5 -5
2024 Q4 -4 -4 -4
2025 Q4 -3 -3 -3 |               |               |               |                       |