# 20120620_tealbook.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:41:31*
*Pages: 63, Tables: 7*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that
material was received on a confidential basis. Redacted material is indicated by
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content. All redacted
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of
Information Act.
Content last modified 01/05/2018.

--- Page 2 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR)
Report to the FOMC
on Economic Conditions
and Monetary Policy
Book B
Monetary Policy:
Strategies and Alternatives
June 14, 2012
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
by the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

--- Page 3 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
Monetary Policy Strategies
s
e
i
g
The top panel of the first exhibit, “Policy Rules and the Staff Projection,” e
t
a
provides near-term prescriptions for the federal funds rate from five selected policy rules: r
t
S
the Taylor (1993) rule, the Taylor (1999) rule, the outcome-based rule, the first-
difference rule, and the nominal income targeting rule.1 These prescriptions take the
staff’s baseline projections for real activity and inflation as given; medium-term
prescriptions derived from dynamic simulations of each rule are considered on
subsequent pages. As shown in the left-hand columns, the near-term prescriptions from
all but one of the rules keep the federal funds rate at the effective lower bound in both the
third and fourth quarters of this year. The exception is the Taylor (1993) rule, which
embeds a smaller response to the output gap; it prescribes a policy rate of around 155
basis points for the second half of the year. The right-hand columns display the rule
prescriptions that arise in the absence of the lower-bound constraint. The outcome-based
rule and the first-difference rule prescribe fund rates that are close to zero for the next
two quarters, whereas the Taylor (1999) rule and the nominal income targeting rule
prescribe rates well below zero. The more accommodative prescription under these two
rules arises from their stronger, non-inertial response to the staff’s large negative output
gap estimates. The Tealbook baseline projections for the output gap and inflation are
shown in the bottom half of the exhibit, titled “Key Elements of the Staff Projection.”
Compared with the previous Tealbook, the staff foresees slightly lower inflation and a
more delayed narrowing of the output gap.2 As a result, the near-term prescriptions from
all rules other than the nominal income targeting rule have decreased slightly.
The first exhibit also reports the Tealbook-consistent estimate of short-run r*,
which is generated by the FRB/US model when conditioned on the staff’s outlook for the
economy. The short-run r* estimate corresponds to the real federal funds rate that, if
maintained, would return output to its potential in twelve quarters. Reflecting the staff’s
weaker projection for real activity, short-run r* is now estimated at 2.9 percent, 40 basis
points lower than in the April Tealbook. The r* estimate is considerably below the
1 Details for each rule appear in Explanatory Note A.
2 The estimated output gap for the first half of 2012 is slightly narrower than in April due to the
staff’s modest downward revision to the level of potential output. A full description of the changes to the
staff projection is provided in Book A of the Tealbook.
Page 1 of 61

--- Page 4 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
Policy Rules and the Staff Projection
s
e
g i Near-Term Prescriptions of Selected Policy Rules
e
t
a
r Constrained Policy Unconstrained Policy
t
S
2012Q3 2012Q4 2012Q3 2012Q4
Taylor (1993) rule 1.52 1.59 1.52 1.59
Previous Tealbook 1.60 1.85 1.60 1.85
Taylor (1999) rule 0.13 0.13 -0.73 -0.64
Previous Tealbook 0.13 0.13 -0.67 -0.32
Outcome-based rule 0.13 0.13 0.04 -0.08
Previous Tealbook Outlook 0.13 0.17 0.11 0.17
First-difference rule 0.13 0.13 -0.07 -0.24
Previous Tealbook Outlook 0.26 0.40 0.26 0.40
Nominal income targeting rule 0.13 0.13 -0.41 -0.86
Previous Tealbook Outlook 0.13 0.13 -0.43 -0.85
Memo: Equilibrium and Actual Real Federal Funds Rate
Current Previous
Tealbook Tealbook
Tealbook-consistent FRB/US r* estim ate -2.9 -2.5
Actual real federal funds rate -1.8 -1.8
Key Elements of the Staff Projection
GDP Gap PCE Prices ex. Food and Energy
Percent Four-quarter percent change
3 3 3.0 3.0
Current Tealbook
2 Previous Tealbook 2
1 1 2.5 2.5
0 0
2.0 2.0
-1 -1
-2 -2
1.5 1.5
-3 -3
-4 -4
1.0 1.0
-5 -5
-6 -6 0.5 0.5
-7 -7
-8 -8 0.0 0.0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Note: For rules which have the lagged policy rate as a right-hand-side variable, the lines denoted "Previous Tealbook
Outlook" report rule prescriptions based on the previous Tealbook’s staff outlook, but jumping off from the average value
for the policy rate thus far in the quarter.
Page 2 of 61

--- Page 5 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
estimated actual real federal funds rate of 1.8 percent, which has remained essentially
constant since April.
s
e
i
The second exhibit, “Policy Rule Simulations,” reports dynamic simulations using g
e
t
FRB/US that incorporate the endogenous responses of inflation and the output gap to the a
r
t
S
different paths of the federal funds rate prescribed by the constrained versions of the five
policy rules described above. The model is first adjusted to match the staff’s baseline
outlook for the economy. The model is then simulated assuming that each policy rule is
implemented from now onward and that private agents fully understand and anticipate the
implications of each rule for future real activity, inflation, and interest rates.3 For
comparison, the exhibit also displays the Tealbook baseline paths, which are conditioned
on the prescriptions of the outcome-based rule.
In the Tealbook baseline, which employs the outcome-based policy rule, the
federal funds rate is at the effective lower bound until the third quarter of 2014, two
quarters later than in the April Tealbook, and then increases gradually to just above 4
percent by the end of the decade. The Taylor (1999) rule leads to a very similar path for
the federal funds rate, except that lift-off from the effective lower bound occurs one
quarter later, in the fourth quarter of 2014.4 The two rules therefore produce very similar
economic conditions, characterized by a slow convergence of the unemployment rate to
the staff’s estimate of the effective natural rate of unemployment by 2020 and a gradual
return of inflation to the 2 percent goal, following an initial decline to the 1 to 1.5 percent
range that results from the transitory effects of movements in energy prices.5
3 The staff’s baseline forecast incorporates the effects of the large-scale asset purchase programs
that the FOMC undertook in past years, as well as the effects of the current maturity extension program and
the modifications to the Federal Reserve’s reinvestment policies that were announced last September. Via
this procedure, the policy rule simulations incorporate the effects of these balance sheet policies; the rules
themselves are not directly adjusted for the effects of balance sheet policies. The simulations, like the
Tealbook baseline, do not incorporate a further MEP or LSAP.
4 The outcome-based rule and the Taylor (1999) rule have similar longer-run properties, especially
with respect to the response to the level of the output gap; however, their short-run responses are typically
more distinct. Currently, two offsetting forces lead to the similar funds rate prescriptions: On the one
hand, the outcome-based rule includes a term for the change in the output gap which, because of the
projected pickup in output growth in 2014 and beyond, tends to prescribe increases in the funds rate
relative to the Taylor (1999) rule. On the other hand, the outcome-based rule includes lags of the federal
funds rate whose presence tends to slow the pace of increase in the funds rate. Currently, these two forces
are almost exactly offsetting each other, leading, on net, to similar funds rate prescriptions.
5 The staff’s estimate of the effective natural rate of unemployment falls from 6.2 percent in the
second quarter of 2012 to 5.25 percent by the end of 2017.
Page 3 of 61

--- Page 6 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
Policy Rule Simulations
s
e
i
g Nominal Federal Funds Rate Real Federal Funds Rate
e
t Percent Percent
a
r 7 7 4 4
S t Taylor (1993) rule
Taylor (1999) rule
6 Nominal income targeting rule 6
3 3
First-difference rule
Tealbook baseline
5 5
2 2
4 4
1 1
3 3
0 0
2 2
-1 -1
1 1
-2 -2
0 0
-1 -1 -3 -3
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Unemployment Rate PCE Inflation
Percent Four-quarter average Percent
1 0 10 3.0 3.0
9 9 2.5 2.5
8 8 2.0 2.0
7 7 1.5 1.5
6 6 1.0 1.0
5 5 0.5 0.5
4 4 0.0 0.0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Note: The policy rule simulations in this exhibit are based on rules that respond to core inflation. This choice
of rule specification was made in light of the tendency for current and near-term core inflation rates to outperform
headline inflation rates as predictors of the medium-term behavior of headline inflation.
Page 4 of 61

--- Page 7 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
Under the nominal income targeting rule, the initial tightening of the funds rate
occurs at the beginning of 2015, and policy subsequently remains more accommodative
than under the other rules for several years. This more accommodative policy is reflected s
e
i
g
in a more rapid decline in unemployment with inflation hovering near 2 percent from e
t
a
mid-2013 onward. r
t
S
As both the Taylor (1993) rule and the first-difference rule lead to earlier
increases in the federal funds rate than under the other rules, they are associated with a
higher path for the unemployment rate and with lower inflation through the end of the
decade. Because the Taylor (1993) rule does not respond strongly to the level of the
output gap, this rule implies an immediate departure of the funds rate from its effective
lower bound. While the first-difference rule does not prescribe an increase in the funds
rate until early 2014 in this set of simulations, it implies policy rates for the following
years that run a bit higher than under the other rules. Reflecting the forward-looking
price- and wage-setting behavior embedded in the FRB/US model, the Taylor (1993) and
the first-difference rule thus generate fairly similar outcomes for inflation, despite the
differences in their funds rate prescriptions over the next two years.
As shown in the third exhibit, “Constrained vs. Unconstrained Optimal Control
Policy,” the staff’s downward revisions to the paths of real activity and inflation over the
projection period imply that funds rate prescriptions from optimal control simulations of
the FRB/US model are more accommodative than those reported in April.6 In these
simulations, policymakers are assumed to place equal weights on keeping headline PCE
inflation close to the Committee’s 2 percent inflation goal, on keeping the unemployment
rate close to the staff’s estimate of the effective natural rate of unemployment, and on
minimizing changes in the federal funds rate. The simulations indicate that, with policy
constrained to remain positive, the optimal path for the federal funds rate does not rise
above the effective lower bound until the second quarter of 2016, three quarters later than
in the optimal path reported in the April Tealbook.7
6 The optimal policy simulations incorporate the assumptions about underlying economic
conditions used in the staff’s baseline forecast, including the assumptions about balance sheet policy
described in footnote 3.
7 Although the loss function uses headline inflation instead of core inflation, the real federal funds
rate shown in the upper right panel of the exhibit is calculated as the difference between the nominal funds
rate and a four-quarter moving average of core PCE inflation. Core PCE inflation is used to compute the
real rate for this illustrative purpose because it provides a less volatile measure of inflation expectations
than does a four-quarter moving average of headline inflation.
Page 5 of 61

--- Page 8 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
Constrained vs. Unconstrained Optimal Control Policy
s
e
g i Nominal Federal Funds Rate Real Federal Funds Rate
e
t Percent Percent
a
r 8 8 4 4
S t Current Tealbook: Constrained
Previous Tealbook: Constrained
7 7
Current Tealbook: Unconstrained 3 3
Tealbook baseline
6 6
2 2
5 5
1 1
4 4
3 3 0 0
2 2 -1 -1
1 1
-2 -2
0 0
-3 -3
-1 -1
-4 -4
-2 -2
-3 -3 -5 -5
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Unemployment Rate PCE Inflation
Percent Four-quarter average Percent
1 0 10 3.0 3.0
9 9 2.5 2.5
8 8 2.0 2.0
7 7 1.5 1.5
6 6 1.0 1.0
5 5 0.5 0.5
4 4 0.0 0.0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Page 6 of 61

--- Page 9 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
The optimal constrained control policy keeps the funds rate lower for longer than
any of the other policy approaches discussed above. As a consequence, this policy would
promote a faster pace of economic recovery than in the staff’s baseline outlook, as well as s
e
i
g
keep inflation close to the FOMC’s goal of 2 percent. In this optimal control simulation, e
t
a
the gap between the unemployment rate and the staff’s estimate of the effective natural r
t
S
rate of unemployment is closed by mid-2016, and the unemployment rate runs slightly
below its natural rate over the next few years. Inflation initially exhibits a decline similar
to that in the Tealbook baseline before increasing to the 2 percent target by mid-2013 and
then overshooting slightly, peaking at 2.3 percent in 2018 and then gradually returning to
the 2 percent target. The more rapid convergence to the Committee’s assumed objectives
occurs because policymakers respond to the lower bound constraint by promising to keep
interest rates low for an extended period of time. As this policy is assumed to be
completely credible, it boosts inflation expectations and reduces real interest rates during
the first years of the simulation.8
If the nominal federal funds rate could fall below zero, the funds rate, under the
optimal unconstrained policy, would decrease to 2.4 percent in the third quarter of 2013
and return to positive territory by the second half of 2015, implying a slightly steeper and
more persistent drop than in the April Tealbook.9 Under these conditions, the
unemployment rate would decline more rapidly than under the optimal constrained policy
and close the gap with the estimated natural rate of unemployment by early 2015.
Inflation would rise back to 2 percent by mid-2013, a pattern much like that in the
constrained simulation. In subsequent years, inflation would slightly overshoot the 2
8 As discussed in “Monetary Policy Strategies” in the March 2012 Tealbook, the optimal control
outcomes shown here are based on the assumption that policymakers can credibly commit to future policy
actions. If instead, policymakers were assumed to reoptimize at every point in time, their scope to affect
the real funds rate via changes in inflation expectations would be severely limited. In addition, the extent
to which policymakers use inflation expectations as a policy tool depends on the structure of inflation
dynamics. Compared with the other principal staff models (EDO and SIGMA), the FRB/US model embeds
relatively strong inertia in inflation; this factor reduces the extent to which policymakers optimally seek to
raise inflation expectations when faced with the effective lower bound on the funds rate.
9 The hypothetical stimulus provided by negative funds rates in these optimal control simulations
indicates the extent to which optimal policy remains constrained by the lower bound on the federal funds
rate. As noted above, these exercises hold balance sheet policy at an assumed baseline. In the presence of
the lower bound, the stimulus called for by the optimal unconstrained policy simulation could be provided
by taking actions, such as additional large-scale asset purchases, that would make balance sheet policy
more accommodative than under the baseline assumption. Of course, the potential economic benefits of
such an action would have to be balanced against the costs associated with a further elevation of the
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. These considerations are discussed further in two memos sent to the
Committee on April 17, 2012, “A Summary of the Costs and Benefits of Large-Scale Asset Purchases” and
“Extending the Maturity Extension Program.”
Page 7 of 61

--- Page 10 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
percent target—but less persistently than in the constrained case—moving up to 2.25
percent by mid-decade before returning to the 2 percent mark by the beginning of 2020.
s
e
g i The fourth exhibit, “Outcomes under Alternative Policies,” tabulates the
e
t
a simulation results for key variables under the selected policy rules described above.
r
t
S
The fifth exhibit, “Unconstrained Optimal Control Policy: Alternative Weights on
Policy Objectives,” reports the unconstrained optimal control simulations shown in the
third exhibit along with simulations that attach alternative weights to the different policy
objectives. Under the first alternative, policymakers are assumed to place a weight on
keeping the unemployment rate close to the staff’s natural rate estimate that is one-tenth
of the weight in the baseline simulation (while not changing the weights on keeping
headline PCE inflation close to the Committee’s 2 percent inflation goal and on
minimizing changes in the federal funds rate). The federal funds rate does not fall much
in this case, reaching –0.63 percent by the end of 2013 compared with –2.4 percent in the
baseline case, and it rises above the effective lower bound by mid-2015. As a result,
unemployment declines at a slower pace than in the other optimal control simulations,
and inflation remains a bit closer to the 2 percent mark. That said, the large change to the
relative weight on the unemployment gap yields only modest differences in outcomes.
Under a second alternative setting of the objective function, policymakers assign a
weight on keeping headline PCE inflation close to the Committee’s 2 percent inflation
goal that is one-tenth of the weight in the baseline simulation (while not changing the
weights on keeping the unemployment rate close to the staff’s natural rate estimate and
on minimizing changes in the federal funds rate). Inflation in this case rises more
substantially above the 2 percent mark, peaking at 2.5 percent in 2017 before decreasing
to 2.2 percent by the end of 2020. Through mid-decade, the path for the nominal federal
funds rate is essentially the same as that prescribed when equal weights are placed on
stabilizing real activity and inflation. Subsequently, the path is slightly higher. Because
inflation is higher than under the equal-weights case, the real interest rate is slightly
lower over the entire simulation period. As a result, the unemployment rate drops
marginally below the path implied by the unconstrained optimal control baseline.10
Again, this simulation illustrates that outcomes under optimal control in the FRB/US
10 In the simulation, the unemployment rate remains somewhat below its path in the baseline
optimal-control case for a number of years beyond 2020. Given the forward-looking nature of expectations
in the model, this extended period of slightly tighter resource utilization helps to explain why inflation runs
somewhat higher than in the baseline case from 2013 through 2020.
Page 8 of 61

--- Page 11 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
Outcomes under Alternative Policies
(Percent change, annual rate, from end of preceding period except as noted)
2011 s
e
Measure and scenario 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 i
g
H2 e
t
a
r
t
Real GDP S
Extended Tealbook baseline 2.4 1.9 2.2 3.1 3.5 3.4
Taylor (1993) 2.4 1.7 1.6 2.8 3.6 3.7
Taylor (1999) 2.4 1.9 2.2 3.1 3.5 3.4
First-difference 2.4 1.8 1.9 2.8 3.4 3.4
Nominal income targeting 2.4 2.0 2.7 3.6 3.8 3.4
Constrained optimal control 2.4 2.1 3.1 3.9 4.0 3.5
Unemployment rate1
Extended Tealbook baseline 8.7 8.2 8.0 7.7 7.1 6.5
Taylor (1993) 8.7 8.2 8.3 8.2 7.6 6.9
Taylor (1999) 8.7 8.2 8.0 7.7 7.1 6.5
First-difference 8.7 8.2 8.1 8.0 7.5 6.8
Nominal income targeting 8.7 8.2 7.8 7.2 6.4 5.8
Constrained optimal control 8.7 8.2 7.6 6.9 6.0 5.3
Total PCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline 1.8 1.2 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.7
Taylor (1993) 1.8 1.1 1.3 1.3 1.4 1.5
Taylor (1999) 1.8 1.2 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.7
First-difference 1.8 1.1 1.3 1.2 1.3 1.4
Nominal income targeting 1.8 1.4 1.9 1.9 2.0 2.1
Constrained optimal control 1.8 1.4 2.0 2.1 2.1 2.2
Core PCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline 1.7 1.7 1.6 1.6 1.7 1.8
Taylor (1993) 1.7 1.6 1.4 1.4 1.5 1.6
Taylor (1999) 1.7 1.7 1.6 1.6 1.7 1.8
First-difference 1.7 1.6 1.4 1.3 1.4 1.5
Nominal income targeting 1.7 1.9 2.0 2.0 2.1 2.2
Constrained optimal control 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.2 2.2 2.3
Federal funds rate1
Extended Tealbook baseline 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.5 1.6 2.6
Taylor (1993) 0.1 1.4 1.0 1.3 2.0 2.7
Taylor (1999) 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.5 1.6 2.6
First-difference 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.9 1.8 2.8
Nominal income targeting 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.9 2.0
Constrained optimal control 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 1.0
1. Percent, average for the final quarter of the period.
Page 9 of 61

--- Page 12 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
Unconstrained Optimal Control Policy: Alternative Weights on Policy Objectives
s
e
g i Nominal Federal Funds Rate Real Federal Funds Rate
e
t Percent Percent
a
r 8 8 4 4
S t Equal weights (baseline)
7 Low weight on unemployment gap 7 3 3
variability
6 6
Low weight on inflation deviation from 2% 2 2
No weight on initial change in funds rate
5 5
1 1
4 4
0 0
3 3
-1 -1
2 2
1 1 -2 -2
0 0
-3 -3
-1 -1
-4 -4
-2 -2
-5 -5
-3 -3
-6 -6
-4 -4
-7 -7
-5 -5
-6 -6 -8 -8
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Unemployment Rate PCE Inflation
Percent Four-quarter average Percent
1 0 10 3.0 3.0
9 9 2.5 2.5
8 8 2.0 2.0
7 7 1.5 1.5
6 6 1.0 1.0
5 5 0.5 0.5
4 4 0.0 0.0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Page 10 of 61

--- Page 13 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
model are only modestly sensitive to changes in the relative weights placed on stabilizing
unemployment and inflation, at least given the current economic outlook.11
s
e
The final variation on the objective function removes the penalty on the initial g i
e
t
change in the funds rate while keeping all other weights (including those on funds rate a
r
t
S
changes in subsequent periods) the same as in the baseline optimal control exercise. This
simulation illustrates the hypothetical case in which policymakers, following a period in
which the policy rate was constrained by the lower bound, implement unconstrained
optimal policy given current economic conditions. Policymakers might therefore view
the initial drop in the funds rate as a reasonable measure of how much additional stimulus
is currently called for according to the model estimate of optimal unconstrained policy.
For this setting of policymaker objectives, the funds rate immediately declines to –4.7
percent, gradually returns to zero by mid-2015, and then increases to just above 4 percent
by the end of 2019. Unemployment initially declines at a more rapid pace while inflation
evolves in much the same way as under the unconstrained optimal control baseline.
11 The economic outcomes are similar because the currently high rate of unemployment and low
forecasted inflation rate both call for broadly similar policy prescriptions, and because the rules in both
cases penalize large movements in the federal funds rate.
Page 11 of 61

--- Page 14 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
s
e
i
g
e
t
a
r
S
t (This page is intentionally blank.)
Page 12 of 61

--- Page 15 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
Monetary Policy Alternatives
This Tealbook presents three policy alternatives (but four draft statements—labeled
A, B, B′, and C) for the Committee’s consideration. The statements offer a range of
possible policy actions, from providing more policy stimulus by undertaking new purchases
of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) in Alternative A, to continuing the maturity
extension program (MEP) in the B Alternatives, to revising the forward guidance for the
federal funds rate in Alternative C. As always, the Committee could blend elements of the
draft statements to construct its desired statement.
Alternatives B and B′ include identical policy actions and present similar
characterizations of current conditions, the economic outlook, and the risks to that outlook. s
e
v
However, while Alternative B follows the format that the Committee has used in its recent t i
a
n
statements, Alternative B′ follows a somewhat different format that is intended to link the r
e
t
Committee’s policy action—in this case, the continuation of the MEP—more explicitly to A l
its assessment of the outlook for economic growth, employment, and inflation and to the
risks associated with its projections for those variables.1
Inasmuch as real GDP appears to be growing at about the same rate in the second
quarter as in the first—or perhaps a little more slowly—all four draft statements begin with
the same characterization of the incoming data as the April statement, namely that the
economy has been “expanding moderately.” However, the B alternatives characterize
employment growth as having slowed in recent months, and Alternative A states that this
pace has slowed “notably;” these three alternatives also note that the unemployment rate
remains elevated. In contrast, Alternative C takes a somewhat longer view and points out
that the labor market has improved “on balance, this year.” Alternatives A, B, and B′ note
that business fixed investment has “continued to advance,” but that household spending
“appears to be rising at a somewhat slower pace than earlier in the year.” Alternative C
simply states that private domestic demand has continued to advance. Alternative A and
the two B alternatives remark, as in the April statement, that the housing sector remains
depressed, while Alternative C drops this reference. All of the alternatives mention the
recent decline in inflation and attribute it mainly to lower prices of crude oil and gasoline.
Alternative C downplays the move by saying that inflation has “declined somewhat,” while
1 Alternative B′ takes as its point of departure the changes to the statement proposed in the memo by
Presidents Kocherlakota, Plosser and Williams, “A State-Contingent Approach to the FOMC Statement,”
distributed to the Committee on June 9, 2012.
Page 13 of 61

--- Page 16 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
Alternative A gives it greater emphasis by saying that inflation has “declined somewhat
more than anticipated.” Each statement notes that longer-term inflation expectations have
remained stable.
The alternatives also differ in their characterizations of the medium-term outlook for
real activity. Alternative B downgrades the forecast modestly relative to April by
predicting that growth will remain moderate in coming quarters and then will pick up “very
gradually,” and that unemployment will decline “only slowly.” Alternative B′ offers the
option of emphasizing the modal nature of the forecast by saying that this is the outlook the
Committee “sees as … most likely.” Alternative A does not mention a possible pickup in
economic growth, and, like Alternative B, states that the Committee expects unemployment
to decline “only slowly.” Alternative C retains the language of the April statement,
s indicating that the Committee “expects economic growth to remain moderate over coming
e
v
i quarters and then to pick up gradually” and that unemployment is therefore likely to
t
a
n
r “decline gradually.”
e
t
l
A
With respect to the outlook for inflation, Alternatives A and B state that the
Committee expects that inflation will “run at or below the rate that it judges consistent with
its dual mandate” over the medium term. Alternative B′ again provides the option of
characterizing this forecast as the “most likely” outcome. Alternative C includes a
projection that “inflation over the medium term will run at about” the mandate-consistent
level.
As in the April statement, all four alternatives highlight the risks to the outlook from
strains in global financial markets. Alternative B′ calls more attention to these strains—
stating that they have increased since earlier this year—and places them within a new
paragraph that is devoted exclusively to the risks to the outlook and which gives the
Committee’s assessment of the balance of risks to its projections for growth and for
inflation. This paragraph also notes that the risk of a sharp increase in commodity prices
has eased.
Under all four alternatives the Committee would maintain the 0 to ¼ percent target
range for the federal funds rate at this meeting. The B and B′ versions of the statement
make no change to the guidance regarding the anticipated period of exceptionally low
federal funds rates. Alternative A alters the forward guidance by removing the specific
reference to “low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation,” which
some may find too negative in tone, and offers the option of extending the expected date of
Page 14 of 61

--- Page 17 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
policy liftoff to mid-2015. Under Alternative C the Committee could alter the forward
guidance either by making the anticipated date of the first increase in the funds rate earlier
or by replacing the current forward guidance—including the date—with new language
describing the factors the Committee considers in setting the forward guidance.
In light of the modest deterioration in the economic outlook summarized in the draft
statement for Alternatives B and B′, the Committee would, under those alternatives,
continue the MEP through the end of 2012. The transactions under this program would
proceed “at the current pace” of about $44 billion per month, so that the additional
purchases of long-term Treasuries would ultimately accumulate to about $267 billion, with
an equal amount of sales or redemptions at the short end of the maturity spectrum. 2, 3
Under Alternative A, with its more-downbeat view of the medium-term outlook, the
Committee would provide additional stimulus either by launching a new program to
s
e
v
purchase $500 billion of agency MBS by June of 2013, or by announcing an open-ended i
t
a
n
program to purchase agency MBS at an initial rate of $40 billion per month with the
r
e
intention of adjusting this rate at future meetings as conditions warrant. 4 In addition, the A l t
A
and B alternatives would specifically mention that promoting “improvement in labor
market conditions” could be a reason for the Committee to “take further action.”
Alternative C would simply complete the existing $400 billion MEP at the end of this
month.
2 In a slight difference from the previous MEP, the Committee would now sell securities with
“approximately three years” of remaining maturity or less, rather than exactly three years or less, to allow the
Desk greater flexibility as it runs down its holdings of shorter-term Treasury securities. In another difference,
the Desk would cease rolling over maturing Treasury securities while the MEP continues; this step would
allow the Desk to achieve the objectives of the program while simplifying the sales operations required.
3 $267 billion is essentially the total quantity of Treasury securities currently in the SOMA portfolio
that will have remaining maturities of three years or less by the end of 2012 and, thus, is about the maximum
size possible for the MEP continuation as it is envisioned in the B alternatives. The Committee could
announce a somewhat larger MEP, say $300 billion, but doing so would require either extending the
completion date beyond the end of the year or selling securities with remaining maturities significantly in
excess of three years. The Committee could also phrase the announcement of this program, as it has with
previous balance-sheet programs, in terms of its ultimate size, rather than in terms of its monthly pace. For
example, the Committee might announce that it “intends to purchase, by the end of 2012, about $270 billion
of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years and to sell an equal amount of Treasury
securities with remaining maturities of approximately 3 years or less.”
4 The size of an MBS LSAP program would be importantly informed by the expected gross
production of newly issued MBS. Those securities are the most liquid, but the production of new agency
MBS securities would likely not be sufficient to conduct a purchase program like that in Alternative A in an
amount substantially larger than $500 billion, unless the program were spread over a long enough period of
time. The Desk can also purchase existing MBS in addition to newly issued securities to increase the size of a
purchase program. In addition, if the Committee wished to engage in a larger or more rapid asset-purchase
program, it could do so by purchasing a mix of MBS and Treasury securities.
Page 15 of 61

--- Page 18 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
In assessing the likely impact of these various balance-sheet policies, the Committee
could draw on two memos it received prior to the April meeting.5 In those memos, the staff
estimated that increasing the SOMA’s holdings of agency MBS by an additional $500
billion, or conducting a $400 billion MEP over nine months, would each reduce the
unemployment rate by about ¼ percentage point after two years and raise inflation by
almost the same amount. The estimated macroeconomic effects of expanding the MEP by
about $267 billion, as in the B Alternatives, would likely be about two-thirds of that size.
Alternatives A, B, and B′ also offer additional language that the Committee may
wish to include in its statement if the financial strains stemming from tensions in Europe
worsen appreciably before next week’s FOMC meeting ends. This language announces
that the Committee is monitoring the situation and that the Federal Reserve “will deploy its
s tools as necessary” to address any potential domestic impact.
e
v
i
t
a
n The following table highlights key elements of the differences in the policy actions
r
e
t associated with the alternative statements. The table is followed by complete draft
l
A
statements and then by a summary of the arguments for each alternative.
5 “Extending the Maturity Extension Program” and “A Summary of the Costs and Benefits of Large-
Scale Asset Purchases,” distributed to the Committee on April 17. Note that the hypothetical MEP extension
analyzed in the former memo was $400 billion in size, 50 percent larger than the program proposed in
Alternatives B and B´ at this meeting.
Page 16 of 61

--- Page 19 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
Table 1: Overview of Policy Alternatives for the June 20FOMC Statement
June Alternatives
Selected April
Elements Statement
A B and B′ C
Forward Rate Guidance
at least through late 2014
OR
at least through late 2013
at least through OR
late 2014 consider range of factors,
at least through
Guidance OR unchanged including actual and
late 2014
at least through projected labor market
mid-2015 conditions, medium-term
outlook for inflation, &
risks to achievement
of …objectives
Balance Sheet
s
continue to purchase at e
v
continue its program as current pace Treasury i
t
a
announced in securities with remaining n
September maturities of 6 to 30 years complete the program that r
complete the program that e
MEP and sell or redeem equal it announced in September t
it announced in September A l
($400 billion; amount with remaining
complete by maturities of approx. 3
end of June 2012) years or less, by end of
2012
purchase an additional
$500 billion of agency
MBS by the end of June
Additional 2013
none none none
Purchases OR
begin purchasing agency
MBS, initially at a rate of
$40 billion per month
principal payments of
principal payments of
agency debt and MBS
Reinvestment agency debt and MBS into
into agency MBS; unchanged unchanged
Policies agency MBS; (suspend
Treasuries into
Treasury rollovers)
Treasuries
Future Policy Action
regularly review size and
composition of securities
holdings; prepared to take
regularly review the further action as
prepared to take further regularly review size and
size and composition of appropriate to promote a
action as appropriate to composition of securities
securities holdings; stronger economic recovery
promote a stronger holdings; prepared to
prepared to adjust & more rapid improvement
Future Actions economic recovery & adjust holdings as
holdings as appropriate in labor market conditions
sustained improvement in necessary to promote
to promote stronger in context of price stability
labor market conditions in maximum employment &
recovery in context of OR
context of price stability price stability
price stability will adjust pace of
purchases and determine
ultimate size of program as
needed to…
Page 17 of 61

--- Page 20 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
APRIL FOMC STATEMENT
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March
suggests that the economy has been expanding moderately. Labor market conditions
have improved in recent months; the unemployment rate has declined but remains
elevated. Household spending and business fixed investment have continued to
advance. Despite some signs of improvement, the housing sector remains depressed.
Inflation has picked up somewhat, mainly reflecting higher prices of crude oil and
gasoline. However, longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects economic growth to remain
moderate over coming quarters and then to pick up gradually. Consequently, the
Committee anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline gradually toward
levels that it judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. Strains in global financial
markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook. The
s
e increase in oil and gasoline prices earlier this year is expected to affect inflation
v
t i only temporarily, and the Committee anticipates that subsequently inflation will run
a
n at or below the rate that it judges most consistent with its dual mandate.
r
e
t
l
A
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee expects to
maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy. In particular, the
Committee decided today to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of
resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through
late 2014.
4. The Committee also decided to continue its program to extend the average maturity
of its holdings of securities as announced in September. The Committee is
maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings
of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. The
Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings
and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate to promote a stronger
economic recovery in a context of price stability.
Page 18 of 61

--- Page 21 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
JUNE FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March April
suggests that the economy has been expanding moderately this year. Labor market
conditions have improved However, growth in employment has slowed notably
in recent months, and the unemployment rate has declined but remains elevated.
Household spending and Business fixed investment have has continued to advance.
Household spending appears to be rising at a somewhat slower pace than
earlier in the year. Despite some signs of improvement, the housing sector
remains depressed. Inflation has picked up declined somewhat more than
anticipated, mainly reflecting higher lower prices of crude oil and gasoline,
However, while longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects economic growth to
remain moderate over coming quarters and then to pick up gradually.
s
Consequently, the Committee anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline e
v
gradually only slowly toward levels that it judges to be consistent with its dual t i
a
mandate. Furthermore, strains in global financial markets continue to pose n
r
e
significant downside risks to the economic outlook. The increase in oil and gasoline t
l
A
prices earlier this year is expected to affect inflation only temporarily, and The
Committee anticipates that subsequently inflation over the medium term will run
at or below the rate that it judges most consistent with its dual mandate.
3. The Committee expects to maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary
policy. In particular, the Committee decided today to will keep the target range for
the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that economic
conditions—including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for
inflation over the medium run—are likely to warrant maintaining exceptionally low
levels for the federal funds rate at least through [ late 2014 | mid-2015 ] in order to
support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is
at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate.
4. The Committee also decided to continue its purchase an additional [ $500 ] billion
of agency mortgage-backed securities by the end of June 2013. This program
should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage
markets, and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative.
The Committee will complete this month the program to extend the average
maturity of its holdings of securities as that it announced in September. The
Committee is maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its
securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings take further action as
appropriate to promote a stronger economic recovery and more rapid
improvement in labor market conditions in a context of price stability.
OR
Page 19 of 61

--- Page 22 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
4′. The Committee also decided to continue its begin purchasing additional agency
mortgage-backed securities, initially at a rate of about [ $40 ] billion per
month. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its
securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate adjust
the pace of purchases and determine the ultimate size of the program as needed
to promote a stronger economic recovery and more rapid improvement in labor
market conditions in a context of price stability. This program should put
downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets,
and help to make broader financial conditions more accommodative. The
Committee will complete this month the program to extend the average maturity
of its holdings of securities as that it announced in September. The Committee is
maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings
of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction.
5. [ The situation in Europe remains a source of stress in global financial markets.
e s The Committee will continue to closely monitor European developments and
v
i their potential consequences for the economic recovery. The Federal Reserve
t
a
n will deploy its tools as necessary to address the effects of global financial strains
r
e on the U.S. financial system and economy. ]
t
l
A
Page 20 of 61

--- Page 23 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
JUNE FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March April
suggests that the economy has been expanding moderately this year. Labor market
conditions have improved However, growth in employment has slowed in recent
months, and the unemployment rate has declined but remains elevated. Household
spending and Business fixed investment have has continued to advance.
Household spending appears to be rising at a somewhat slower pace than
earlier in the year. Despite some signs of improvement, the housing sector
remains depressed. Inflation has picked up somewhat declined, mainly reflecting
higher lower prices of crude oil and gasoline, However, and longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects economic growth to
remain moderate over coming quarters and then to pick up very gradually.
s
Consequently, the Committee anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline e
v
gradually only slowly toward levels that it judges to be consistent with its dual t i
a
mandate. Furthermore, strains in global financial markets continue to pose n
r
e
significant downside risks to the economic outlook. The increase in oil and gasoline t
l
A
prices earlier this year is expected to affect inflation only temporarily, and The
Committee anticipates that subsequently inflation over the medium term will run
at or below the rate that it judges most consistent with its dual mandate.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee expects to
maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy. In particular, the
Committee decided today to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of
resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through
late 2014.
4. The Committee also decided to continue through the end of the year its program
to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in
September. Specifically, the Committee intends to purchase Treasury securities
with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years at the current pace and to sell
or redeem an equal amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of
approximately 3 years or less. This continuation of the maturity extension
program should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and help
to make broader financial conditions more accommodative. The Committee is
maintaining its existing policies policy of reinvesting principal payments from its
holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its
securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings take further action as
appropriate to promote a stronger economic recovery and sustained improvement
in labor market conditions in a context of price stability.
Page 21 of 61

--- Page 24 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
5. [ The situation in Europe remains a source of stress in global financial markets.
The Committee will continue to closely monitor European developments and
their potential consequences for the economic recovery. The Federal Reserve
will deploy its tools as necessary to address the effects of global financial strains
on the U.S. financial system and economy. ]
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
Page 22 of 61

--- Page 25 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
JUNE FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE B′
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March April
suggests that the economy has been expanding moderately this year. Labor market
conditions have improved However, growth in employment has slowed in recent
months, and the unemployment rate has declined but remains elevated. Household
spending and Business fixed investment have has continued to advance.
Household spending appears to be rising at a somewhat slower pace than
earlier in the year. Despite some signs of improvement, the housing sector
remains depressed.
2. The Committee [ expects | sees it as most likely ] that economic growth to will
remain moderate over coming quarters and then to pick up very gradually.
Consequently, the Committee anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline
gradually only slowly toward levels that it judges to be consistent with its dual
mandate.
s
e
v
3. Inflation has picked up somewhat declined, mainly reflecting higher lower prices of t i
a
crude oil and gasoline. However, Longer-term inflation expectations have remained n
r
e
stable. The increase in oil and gasoline prices earlier this year is expected to affect t
l
A
inflation only temporarily and The Committee [ anticipates | views it as most
likely ] that subsequently inflation over the medium term will run at or below the
rate that it judges most consistent with its dual mandate.
4. In the Committee’s assessment, the risks to the outlook for growth in output
and employment are primarily to the downside, while the risks to the outlook
for inflation are roughly balanced. Strains in global financial markets continue to
pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook for economic activity;
these risks have become somewhat greater since earlier this year. The risk of a
sharp increase in the prices of oil and other commodities, which could lead to
temporarily higher inflation and temporarily weaker growth, has diminished
recently.
5. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the Committee expects to
maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy. In particular, The
Committee decided today to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of
resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through
late 2014.
6. The Committee also decided to continue through the end of the year its program
to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in
September. Specifically, the Committee intends to purchase Treasury securities
with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years at the current pace and to sell
or redeem an equal amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of
approximately 3 years or less. This continuation of the maturity extension
Page 23 of 61

--- Page 26 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
program should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and help
to make broader financial conditions more accommodative. The Committee is
maintaining its existing policies policy of reinvesting principal payments from its
holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction.
7. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee’s action today is intended to
support a stronger economic recovery and mitigate downside risks, thereby
fostering a faster return of the unemployment rate to mandate-consistent
levels, while maintaining inflation near its 2 percent objective in the medium
term. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its
securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings take further action as
appropriate to promote a stronger economic recovery and sustained improvement
in labor market conditions in a context of price stability.
s
e
v 8. [ The situation in Europe remains a source of stress in global financial markets.
i
t
a The Committee will continue to closely monitor European developments and
n
r
e their potential consequences for the economic recovery. The Federal Reserve
t
A l will deploy its tools as necessary to address the effects of global financial strains
on the U.S. financial system and economy. ]
Page 24 of 61

--- Page 27 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
JUNE FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in March April
suggests that the economy has been expanding moderately, and labor-market
conditions have improved, on balance, this year in recent months. The
unemployment rate has declined but remains elevated. Household spending and
business fixed investment have Private domestic demand has continued to
advance. Despite some signs of improvement, the housing sector remains
depressed. Inflation has picked up declined somewhat, mainly reflecting higher
lower prices of crude oil and gasoline, However, and longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects economic growth to
remain moderate over coming quarters and then to pick up gradually.
Consequently, the Committee anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline
s
gradually toward levels that it judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. Strains e
v
in global financial markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the t i
a
economic outlook. The increase in oil and gasoline prices earlier this year is n
r
e
expected to affect inflation only temporarily, and The Committee anticipates that t
l
A
subsequently inflation over the medium term will run at or below about the rate
that it judges most consistent with its dual mandate.
3. To support a stronger sustainable economic recovery and to help ensure that
inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the
Committee expects to maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy.
In particular, the Committee decided today to keep the target range for the federal
funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions—
including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over
the medium run—are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds
rate at least through late [ 2014 | 2013 ].
OR
3'. To support a stronger sustainable economic recovery and to help ensure that
inflation, over time, is at the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, the
Committee expects to maintain a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy.
In particular, the Committee decided today to keep the target range for the federal
funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions—
including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over
the medium run—are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds
rate at least through late 2014. As rates of resource utilization rise toward levels
consistent with maximum employment, the Committee eventually will need to
make monetary policy less accommodative in order to ensure that the economy
expands at a sustainable pace and to prevent inflation from persistently
exceeding its longer-run objective. In determining the appropriate time to
increase its target for the federal funds rate, the Committee will consider a
range of factors, including actual and projected labor market conditions, the
Page 25 of 61

--- Page 28 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
medium-term outlook for inflation, and the risks to the achievement of the
Committee’s objectives.
4. The Committee also decided to continue its complete at the end of this month the
program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as that it
announced in September. The Committee is maintaining its existing policies of
reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency
mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling
over maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee will regularly review
the size and composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those
holdings as appropriate necessary to promote a stronger economic recovery in a
context of maximum employment and price stability.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
Page 26 of 61

--- Page 29 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B OR B′
Policymakers might view the information received since their last meeting as
pointing to both a somewhat weaker modal economic outlook and an increase in downside
risks to the outlook. Accordingly, they may think it appropriate to provide some further
accommodation at this meeting as in Alternative B or B′, both of which would continue the
MEP through the end of 2012. More specifically, FOMC participants, like the staff, may
see the recent economic and financial data as supporting a modal forecast in which
economic growth is likely to be about equal to potential growth in coming quarters and,
absent further policy action, to pick up only very gradually thereafter. Given the apparent
lack of sustained progress in the labor market, the meager rise in real disposable personal
income in recent quarters, and the deceleration in consumer spending, policymakers may
view the likely trajectory for economic growth as inadequate to return the unemployment
s
e
rate to mandate-consistent levels within the next few years. In addition, participants may v
i
t
a
see inflation pressures as muted in light of the weaker outlook for the economy and the n
r
e
recent decline in the prices of oil and gasoline, and they might therefore have greater l t
A
confidence that inflation will run at rates at or below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run
goal over coming years. With an outlook that falls short of the Committee’s objectives,
members may wish to undertake addition monetary policy stimulus through an extension of
the MEP.
Regardless of whether participants’ modal outlook for economic growth has
worsened since the April meeting, they might view the risks to the medium-run outlook as
skewed more substantially to the downside. In particular, they may judge that the strains in
global financial markets have intensified in recent weeks, as a result of the political
uncertainty in Greece and the pressures on Spanish banks, and see a significant potential for
adverse spillovers to U.S. financial markets and the U.S. economy. Accordingly,
participants may place non-negligible odds on an adverse outcome in Europe driving the
U.S. economy into a new downturn, along the lines of the “European Crisis with Severe
Spillovers” alternative simulation. To mitigate these risks, Committee members may wish
to provide some additional accommodation at this meeting through an extension of the
MEP. These policymakers could also conclude that the upward movements in inflation
observed earlier this year are unlikely to be sustained or to feed into longer-term
expectations, given the recent declines in oil and gas prices, and thus might see little if any
upside risks to inflation resulting from continuing the MEP for six months.
Page 27 of 61

--- Page 30 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
While policymakers may judge that the economic outlook has darkened or that
downside risks have increased, they may view the outlook as significantly more uncertain
than usual and conclude that it would not be appropriate to undertake a sizeable further
expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet as in Alternative A unless they see clearer
indications that subpar growth is likely to persist. In particular, policymakers might see
some chance that the situation in Europe will be resolved in a favorable manner, or they
might worry that the recent slowdown in employment gains and in consumer and business
spending could prove to be the temporary result of seasonal or other factors. Some
participants may judge that the Committee has only limited scope to provide further
monetary stimulus and so might choose to take relatively modest measures for the time
being in order to reserve greater action for the event that the economy is hit by a major
adverse shock or if the risk of deflation were to rise. Such an approach might seem
e s appropriate if participants thought that a large change in policy would have a particularly
v
t i positive effect on business and consumer confidence in such circumstances.6 Moreover, if
a
n
e r policymakers are concerned that additional outright asset purchases could complicate the
t
l
A Federal Reserve’s ability to exit from its extraordinarily accommodative policy stance at the
appropriate time and pace, they may nonetheless be comfortable with the MEP extension in
Alternatives B and B′, because it would not expand the overall size of the Federal Reserve’s
balance sheet appreciably.
If the Committee views the situation in Europe as having deteriorated significantly,
or the associated strains in global financial markets as posing an imminent threat to U.S.
economic activity, it may wish to include language along the lines of the final paragraph in
B and B′. (An identical paragraph is offered at the end of the draft statement in Alternative
A.) This paragraph would signal that the Committee is concerned about, and paying careful
attention to, developments in Europe and that the Federal Reserve stands ready to deploy its
tools as necessary to support the U.S. financial system and economy. These actions might
include, in addition to or instead of further adjustments to the SOMA portfolio, the
introduction of emergency lending facilities and other measures to bolster the functioning
of financial markets and the liquidity positions of financial institutions in the event of a new
crisis.
6 Some participants could even feel that, with the level of uncertainty unusually high at the moment,
it would be prudent to await further information before taking any action, and so not see a continuation of the
MEP as a necessary step at this meeting. If so, they could adopt a statement similar to B, but omitting the
policy action and including additional language to make clear that they are prepared to act if the outlook or
risks were to worsen further.
Page 28 of 61

--- Page 31 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
As noted above, Alternatives B and B′ differ chiefly in their approaches to the
organization and emphasis of the statement. The structure of recent statements, which is
maintained in Alternative B, provides an opening paragraph with an assessment of the
recent economic data and a second paragraph summarizing the Committee’s expectations
for the economy over the medium term and the risks to that projection, before going on to
describe the Committee’s policy stance. The revision proposed in Alternative B′ would
first describe both current conditions and the outlook for the real economy, next it would
discuss inflation and inflation expectations as well as the outlook for inflation, and then it
would discuss the risks to the outlook. Finally, after announcing the policy decision, the
statement in B′ would include language that links the Committee’s decision more explicitly
to its outlook and policy objectives. Of course, a similar structure could also be applied to
the policy stances envisioned in Alternatives A and C.
s
e
v
Committee members may feel that the revised structure would enhance i
t
a
communication with the public. 7 Members may see a statement similar to Alternative B′ as n
r
e
t
potentially providing more information about the factors that have led the Committee to its l
A
policy decisions and improved guidance about which factors are likely to influence the
course of monetary policy going forward. They may view such a statement as more clearly
linking the Committee’s policy decisions to its projections of economic activity and its
assessment of risks. Other members may prefer the current structure or may judge that the
benefits of changing the structure are not sufficient to justify potentially confusing market
participants.
A policy decision along the lines of Alternatives B and B′ would be largely in line
with the expectations of market participants. Many respondents to the Desk’s latest survey
of primary dealers expect the Committee to update its characterization of economic
conditions to recognize the disappointing labor-market data and increased tensions in
European financial markets, but they do not expect the Committee to change its forward
guidance at this meeting. As in April, the dealers anticipate that the first increase in the
target federal funds rate will most likely occur in the second half of 2014, and they see a
slightly higher probability that lift-off will come later rather than earlier. Moreover, while
the dealers place relatively low odds on the Committee altering its forward guidance at this
meeting, market participants appear to have already priced in a significant chance of further
balance-sheet action. Specifically, in the Desk’s survey, respondents saw about a 50
percent probability of some type of easing through the size or composition of the SOMA
7 See the memo cited in footnote 1.
Page 29 of 61

--- Page 32 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
portfolio at this meeting and attached about a 40 percent probability specifically to an
increase in the duration of the SOMA portfolio. Still, continuing the MEP for another six
months would probably not be viewed as a sizable step by most market participants, so the
market reaction to the extension of the MEP proposed in Alternatives B and B′ would likely
be muted. Indeed, if markets inferred that the continuation of the MEP could be the full
extent of the accommodation that the Committee was likely to provide for some time, the
announcement could cause longer-term interest rates to rise some and equity prices to fall.
Similarly, because markets seem to be pricing in some probability of purchases of agency
MBS at this meeting, MBS spreads could widen if expanding the MEP was interpreted as
ruling out subsequent MBS purchases. In contrast, if market participants read the language
in the statement as substantially increasing the odds of future asset purchases, longer-term
interest rates might fall modestly, equity prices would rise, and the foreign-exchange value
e s of the dollar would decline.8
v
i
t
a
n
r THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A
e
t
l
A
Some participants may see the shortfall of employment from their assessments of its
maximum sustainable level as large and as likely to diminish only very slowly absent
appreciable further policy stimulus and so prefer the larger policy move contained in
Alternative A. These participants may be concerned that the recent slower pace of
consumer and business spending is likely to persist. They may also be concerned that the
housing sector remains depressed even if it has turned up a bit, and that the continuing
overhang of foreclosed and vacant properties will restrain recovery in this sector for some
time to come. Some participants may, like the staff, also expect that inflation will run
persistently below the Committee’s longer-run target now that the temporary effects of
earlier increases in oil and gasoline prices have ebbed. These policymakers might note that
the unconstrained optimal control simulations and three of five of the unconstrained near-
term policy rule prescriptions presented in the “Monetary Policy Strategies” section of the
Tealbook continue to call for further policy accommodation, even under the staff’s baseline
scenario. As a result the Committee might push back its expected timing of the first
increase in the target federal funds rate and change the forward guidance in the statement
8 If the continuation of the MEP contained in the B alternatives appeared to put substantial upward
pressure on money market interest rates (as discussed in the box “Overnight Money Market Rates and the
Maturity Extension Program” in Tealbook A), policymakers could subsequently consider possible measures to
offset this effect. For example, the Board of Governors could vote to lower the remuneration rate on excess
reserve balances from its current level of 25 basis points, or the Committee could instruct the Desk to execute
repurchase agreements while the MEP continues. Engaging in repurchase agreements, however, would
expand the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.
Page 30 of 61

--- Page 33 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
accordingly. However, participants may worry that a projection for the path of policy
appreciably further ahead may not be viewed as credible by markets and may thus have
only a limited impact on longer-term interest rates. Thus, they may judge that a new large-
scale asset purchase (LSAP) program is a better choice than either an expansion of the MEP
or an extension of the forward guidance. Such a judgment would reflect an assessment that
an LSAP would have somewhat larger macroeconomic effects and that it would signal a
willingness by the Committee to expand its balance sheet, suggesting that additional action
might be more likely than previously expected. In this case, policymakers may also be
inclined to move out the expected date of the first rise in the target federal funds rate.
These considerations may lead them to favor Alternative A. Of course, additional asset
purchases and an extension of the forward guidance are not mutually exclusive, and
Alternative A provides the option of moving the expected liftoff date further out in addition
to introducing a new LSAP program. s
e
v
i
t
a
n
In addition to judging that the baseline outlook for the economy is unsatisfactory,
r
e
t
policymakers may also view the downside risks to that outlook as having increased l
A
substantially in recent weeks. As discussed above, they may see non-trivial odds that the
European crisis could ultimately impose a very substantial drag on the U.S. recovery. In
addition, some policymakers may also see a significant probability that the Congress will be
unable to resolve contentious fiscal issues before the turn of the year and that uncertainty
about fiscal policy is likely to restrain household spending and business investment later
this year. Furthermore, with a substantial fraction of unemployed workers having been
jobless for long periods, some FOMC participants might want to guard against the risk that
this high level of long-term unemployment, if it were to persist long enough, will depress
labor supply and potential output, as in the “Future Labor-Market Damage” scenario in the
Tealbook. With the inflationary effects of the earlier run-up in oil and gasoline prices
having subsided, and with inflation expectations well anchored, participants may judge that
the upside risks to inflation are small, and indeed they may forecast, like the staff, that the
inflation rate will remain somewhat below the Committee’s long-run objective of 2 percent
for a few years. Accordingly, policymakers may see both the likelihood and the costs of
weaker-than-expected economic outcomes as larger than those of stronger-than-expected
outcomes, and thus they may be inclined to provide significant additional monetary policy
stimulus.
Some participants may concur that the economic outlook has deteriorated but may
view uncertainty about the outlook as unusually large and so may be inclined to take a
smaller step at this meeting and await additional information on economic and financial
Page 31 of 61

--- Page 34 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
developments. However, other participants could see this uncertainty itself as a reason to
act aggressively—both to reduce the likelihood that severely adverse scenarios will emerge
and to provide greater assurance to the public that policymakers are willing to act as needed
to support the recovery. This perspective could be reinforced if policymakers also saw the
risks to the economic outlook as asymmetric and weighted substantially to the downside.
Although participants may be concerned that further asset purchases could involve
additional risks to the Federal Reserve, they may judge those risks to be manageable. For
example, if participants worry that expanding the balance sheet would impede the
Committee’s ability to exit from its extraordinarily accommodative policy stance at the
appropriate time, they may take some reassurance from the multiple tools that have been
developed to remove accommodation when it becomes appropriate to do so.
s Should the Committee decide to provide further monetary stimulus, it might prefer
e
v
i to increase the SOMA’s holdings of agency MBS with the aim of putting downward
t
a
n
r pressure on longer-term interest rates in general while also directly supporting mortgage
e
t
A l markets. The Committee could choose to implement this plan by announcing a single
program to purchase an additional $500 billion over 12 months, as in paragraph 4 of
Alternative A. Alternatively, the Committee could choose to implement an incremental,
open-ended purchase program by specifying an initial monthly rate of purchases—perhaps
$40 billion per month—and stating that it would adjust the pace of purchases and determine
the ultimate size of the program as needed to foster its objectives, as in paragraph 4′ of
Alternative A. The Committee might prefer to implement a large, discrete purchase
program if it believes that investor uncertainty about the ultimate size of an open-ended
program would make it less effective than a discrete program. But members might opt for
an open-ended purchase program if they believe that more flexibility would allow them to
better tailor the ultimate amount of purchases to evolving economic conditions. In addition,
an open-ended program could boost market sentiment if market participants interpreted it to
mean that the Committee would continue to expand the balance sheet as long as economic
growth was insufficiently robust.
In the Desk’s survey, dealers placed only about 25 percent odds on the Committee
expanding the SOMA portfolio through additional securities purchases at this meeting and
about 50 percent odds on such an expansion sometime within the next year, so a statement
along the lines of Alternative A would come as something of a surprise to the markets.
Longer-term interest rates would likely fall modestly, MBS spreads would likely tighten,
and the foreign-exchange value of the dollar would likely decline. Equity prices probably
would increase; however, the more-downbeat characterization of the economic outlook
Page 32 of 61

--- Page 35 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
contained in paragraph 2 of Alternative A could damp that rise. Investors appear to be
placing only a relatively low probability on an extension of the expected liftoff date in the
forward guidance, so if the Committee decided to adopt that option, the decrease in interest
rates would likely be somewhat larger. The reaction could be larger still if market
participants viewed the statement as signaling the Committee’s willingness to undertake
further actions to buttress the domestic economy against the impact of an adverse outcome
in Europe. Markets do not appear to expect an open-ended purchase program along the
lines of paragraph A.3′, and they would probably find such a statement difficult to interpret
because it would be a notable departure from past purchase programs. Thus, if the
Committee were to announce such an action, market volatility and risk premiums could
rise, particularly if market participants lacked clarity about the ultimate size of the program.
Of course, the Chairman could help to resolve any such uncertainty by explaining the
Committee’s approach more thoroughly in his press conference. s
e
v
i
t
a
n
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE C
r
e
t
l
A
Policymakers may judge that, smoothing through the month-to-month fluctuations
in the data, information received this year indicates that the economic recovery is on a
sustainable course, as argued in the “Faster Recovery” alternative scenario. Although the
recent labor-market and spending data have been weaker than the information received
through the April meeting, participants may view this deterioration as primarily having to
do with temporary factors, including possible seasonal and weather-related distortions, and
they may note that the unemployment rate is still down nearly a full percentage point since
last summer. Household spending and business fixed investment have continued to
advance, and some indicators of conditions in the housing sector have turned up in recent
months. Conditions in debt and capital markets improved substantially late last year and
early this year; FOMC participants may judge that overall financial conditions remain
supportive of economic growth even though some financial strains have reemerged in
recent weeks. Thus, participants may conclude that the underlying pace of growth in output
is at or above their assessment of that of potential output and so might view the pace of
improvement in the labor market as adequate. If so, they may prefer to maintain a policy
stance similar to that at the previous meeting and make no further changes to the Federal
Reserve’s balance sheet or the Committee’s forward guidance, or they may even wish to
begin scaling back the public’s expectations for the duration of the current low range of the
federal funds rate. These possibilities would be consistent with a statement like that in
Alternative C.
Page 33 of 61

--- Page 36 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
Although some Committee members might see the economic outlook as having
worsened or the downside risks as having increased since the April meeting, they may
judge that the balance-sheet actions at the Committee’s disposal would, at this stage, have
limited potential to effect noticeable progress toward its objectives, especially because
interest rates and other asset prices have lately been influenced primarily by shifting
expectations regarding the European situation. These members may view the potential
costs associated with further accommodation, including a possible increase in the difficulty
of exiting smoothly from the current very accommodative stance of policy, as too great to
justify the likely modest benefits. Moreover, with or without an extension of the MEP,
policymakers may be concerned about the potential for unwanted inflation pressures to
build on a number of fronts. For example, they may believe that the levels of potential
output and the NAIRU have shifted adversely in recent years, as in the “Damaged Labor
e s Market” scenario, posing a sizable risk that providing further policy stimulus—or
v
i
t maintaining the current stance of policy through 2014—would push resource utilization
a
n
e r above its sustainable level. They may also see upside risks to inflation from the expansion
t
l
A of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet in recent years or from a long period of
exceptionally low interest rates. They may judge that additional balance-sheet measures
would be likely to add to these pressures if the current downside risks to the outlook do not
materialize. Other participants may worry about the implications for financial stability of a
sustained low-interest-rate environment and wish to reduce the incentives for market
participants to take on unusual levels of risk. In these cases, Committee members might
conclude that additional accommodation would be imprudent at this stage or that moving
toward a somewhat less accommodative stance of policy appreciably earlier than indicated
by the Committee’s April statement would be appropriate.
Committee members whose outlook for the economy has not changed significantly
since the April meeting, or who see risks to the outlook that might make it imprudent to
change policy substantially at this juncture, may prefer to leave the forward guidance
unchanged, as offered in one option in paragraph C.3. On the other hand, participants
whose evolving views on the economic outlook and the appropriate path for the federal
funds rate have led them to anticipate a significantly earlier first increase in the funds rate
than was indicated by the Committee’s statements so far this year, and who see the
downside risks to the outlook as manageable, might want to adjust the forward guidance at
this meeting. The Committee could, as in the other option of paragraph C.3, state that in
light of the improved economic outlook it now anticipates that economic conditions will
warrant a substantially shorter period of exceptionally low interest rates than it previously
Page 34 of 61

--- Page 37 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
expected. Alternatively, as in paragraph 3´, it could eliminate the calendar date from its
forward guidance and replace it with new language that describes in somewhat greater
detail the key economic factors that the Committee will consider in deciding when to first
increase its target for the funds rate. If the public understood this new language, investors
would modify their assessments of the likely timing of the first increase in the target funds
rate as the key factors change over time.
A statement like those included in Alternative C, even the option that retains the late
2014 date, would probably garner a negative reaction in financial markets. The language
likely would strike market participants as unexpectedly upbeat and as hinting toward a
faster removal of policy accommodation, resulting in higher interest rates and a decline in
equity prices. A statement that moved forward the expected date of policy liftoff—or that
included language that investors read as indicating that the date was likely to be
s
e
v
substantially earlier—would greatly surprise financial market participants. According to i
t
a
n
the Desk’s survey, the primary dealers see zero probability that the Committee will move
r
e
t
forward its expected date of liftoff at this meeting. Hence, moving projected liftoff closer l
A
would likely cause a sizable adjustment in market participants’ expectations of the policy
rate path, leaving market interest rates significantly higher at maturities beyond a year or so.
If the Committee were to drop the date from its forward guidance, investors might well be
quite uncertain about the Committee’s intentions, at least until policymakers provided
additional information about the likely path for policy. Furthermore, participants have
priced in significant odds of additional asset purchases or an extension of the MEP at this
meeting or in the near future, and the statement in Alternative C (with or without a change
in the expected liftoff date) would be read as a signal that such action was unlikely to be
forthcoming, putting further upward pressure on longer-term rates and dragging equity
prices lower. Any statement along the lines of Alternative C would likely lead to an
appreciation of the dollar.
Page 35 of 61

--- Page 38 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
LONG-RUN PROJECTIONS OF THE BALANCE SHEET AND MONETARY BASE
The staff has prepared three scenarios for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. The
first scenario incorporates a continuation of the maturity extension program (MEP) that is
consistent with Alternatives B and B’. The second scenario corresponds to Alternative A,
incorporating a $500 billion agency MBS purchase program as noted in paragraph 4 of the
draft statement. This scenario is also consistent with the open-ended purchase program in
paragraph 4’ of that statement if purchases last, and are expected to last, for one year. The
third scenario reflects Alternative C, in which the current MEP is completed at the end of
this month and no additional balance sheet action is taken in the near term, with the federal
funds rate rising above the current target range in late 2013. Projections under each
scenario are based on assumptions about the trajectory of various components of the
balance sheet. Details of these assumptions, as well as projections for each major
s
e
v component of the balance sheet, can be found in Explanatory Note D.
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
For the balance sheet scenario that corresponds to Alternatives B and B’, the
Committee is assumed to continue the MEP at its current pace through the end of 2012
instead of ending it at the end of this month as scheduled. The total amount of additional
purchases under the extension of the MEP is $267 billion. The expansion of the MEP
changes the parameters of the program slightly; instead of selling the same dollar amount of
securities with remaining maturities of three years or less, all Treasury securities in the
Page 36 of 61

--- Page 39 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
portfolio that have remaining maturities of approximately three years or less are either
allowed to mature without reinvestment or are sold. The Committee’s program to reinvest
principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and MBS into agency MBS remains
unchanged. These policy choices would keep the System Open Market Account (SOMA)
securities holdings roughly constant at about $2.6 trillion until mid-2014.
In this scenario, consistent with the statement language that the federal funds rate is
expected to be at exceptionally low levels “at least through late 2014,” we assume that the
first increase in the target funds rate is in October 2014.9 The date of liftoff is a key
determinant of the trajectory of the balance sheet. In April 2014, six months before the first
increase in the target federal funds rate, all reinvestment is assumed to cease, and the
balance sheet therefore begins to contract. Because essentially all short-dated Treasury
securities in the portfolio are assumed to be sold or redeemed under the expanded MEP, in
s
e
v
2014 and 2015 only agency MBS and agency debt securities holdings decrease. In April i
t
a
n
2015, six months after the initial increase in the target federal funds rate, the Committee
r
e
t
begins to sell its holdings of agency securities at a pace that reduces the amount of these l
A
securities in the portfolio to zero in five years, that is, by March 2020.10 Through these
redemptions and sales, the size of the balance sheet is normalized by March 2018.11,12 The
balance sheet then begins to expand, with increases in SOMA holdings essentially matching
the growth of Federal Reserve Bank capital and currency in circulation. The balance sheet
reaches a size of $2 trillion by the end of 2020.13 Compared to Alternative B from the April
Tealbook, the size of the balance sheet normalizes about half a year later because the
continuation of the MEP leads to the accumulation of more longer-dated Treasury
securities, which mature and roll off the portfolio later than the short-dated securities they
replace, and hence the balance sheet shrinks somewhat less rapidly. From March 2018
9 This liftoff date for the federal funds rate is the same as in the balance sheet projections from the
April Tealbook Book B, but it is later than the July 2014 date assumed in the staff forecast.
10 Consistent with the exit principles the Committee announced in the minutes of the June 2011
FOMC meeting, we assume the Committee directs the Desk to only sell agency securities during the exit
period in order to promote a timely return to an all-Treasury SOMA portfolio.
11 The tools to drain reserve balances (reverse repurchase agreements and term deposits) are not
modeled in any of the scenarios presented. Use of these tools would result in a shift in the composition of
Federal Reserve liabilities—a decline in reserve balances and a corresponding increase in reverse repurchase
agreements or term deposits—but would not produce an overall change in the size of the balance sheet.
12 The projected timing of the normalization of the size of the balance sheet depends importantly on
the level of reserve balances that is assumed to be necessary to conduct monetary policy; currently, we assume
that level of reserve balances to be $25 billion. A higher demand for reserve balances would, all else equal,
lead to an earlier normalization of the size of the balance sheet.
13 Projections of Federal Reserve income for this scenario are similar to those reported in the April
2012 FOMC memo “Extending the Maturity Extension Program” prepared by staff at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York and the Board of Governors.
Page 37 of 61

--- Page 40 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
onward, under all scenarios, the paths for total assets in the current projections are close to
the Alternative B path in the April Tealbook.
In the scenario for Alternative A, the Committee is assumed to complete the current
MEP this month, to purchase an additional $500 billion of agency MBS at a pace of about
$40 billion per month beginning in July 2012 and ending in June 2013, and to continue the
current reinvestment strategy. In this scenario, total assets peak at $3.4 trillion in
September 2013. As in Alternative B, in April 2014, six months before the first increase in
the target federal funds rate, all reinvestment is assumed to cease, and the balance sheet
begins to contract. Normalization of the size of the balance sheet occurs in February 2018,
one month prior to the date of normalization under Alternatives B and B’.14 The later date
of normalization in the B Alternatives reflects the fact that the longer-dated Treasury
s securities are held to maturity and remain in the portfolio longer than it takes to complete
e
v
i sales of MBS.
t
a
n
r
e
t For the scenario that corresponds to Alternative C, the Committee completes the
l
A
current MEP at the end of this month and undertakes no further balance sheet expansion or
maturity extension. In this scenario, the federal funds rate is assumed to lift off in the
fourth quarter of 2013, one year earlier than in the other alternatives. Correspondingly,
reinvestment of principal from maturing or prepaying securities ends in April 2013, and
sales of agency securities commence in April 2014.15 Because of the earlier redemptions
and sales, the size of the balance sheet is normalized in February 2017, more than one year
earlier than under Alternative B.
On the liability side of the balance sheet, the forecasted path for reserve balances for
Alternatives B and B’ remains at roughly the same $1.5 trillion level as in the April
Tealbook’s Alternative B until the exit strategy begins. Thereafter, and until the balance
sheet normalizes in size, the longer-maturity portfolio under Alternatives B and B’ for this
meeting contracts more slowly than projected under Alternative B from the April Tealbook,
and therefore implies that the level of reserve balances is, for some time, higher than in the
previous Tealbook. The level of reserves under Alternative A peaks at $2 trillion—
14 If the first increase in the target federal funds rate was pushed later, the date of normalization
would likewise be delayed.
15 To simplify the projections, the prepayment paths for legacy agency MBS holdings and the
premiums associated with MBS reinvestment calculated under Alternative C match those for Alternative B.
This simplifying assumption likely overstates somewhat both prepayments on MBS, which are reinvested into
new MBS, and the associated premiums under Alternative C. As a result, the size of the balance sheet is
likely somewhat larger, and the date of normalization is likely a little later than would be the case if the
interest rate path was recalibrated based on this scenario.
Page 38 of 61

--- Page 41 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
noticeably higher than in Alternative B—because of the MBS purchase program. Under
Alternative C, reserve balances start to decline earlier than in Alternative B because the exit
from exceptionally accommodative policy is assumed to begin sooner.
In the scenario corresponding to Alternatives B and B’, the monetary base is
roughly flat from 2012 to 2014, given the trajectory for the portfolio. Once exit begins, the
monetary base shrinks through the second quarter of 2018, primarily reflecting a decline in
reserve balances as the balance sheet contracts. Starting in the third quarter of 2018, after
reserve balances are assumed to have stabilized at $25 billion, the monetary base begins to
expand again, in line with the growth of Federal Reserve notes in circulation. The
monetary base under Alternative A expands more rapidly in the near term than under
Alternative B due to the MBS LSAP and then declines at a faster pace beginning in 2014
because of a larger amount of securities redemptions and a larger volume of sales. The
s
e
v
resumption in the expansion of the monetary base in Alternative A begins in the third i
t
a
n
quarter of 2018. Under Alternative C, the monetary base begins to contract slightly sooner
r
e
t
than under Alternative B because of the assumed earlier liftoff. l
A
Page 39 of 61

--- Page 42 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
Growth Rates for the Monetary Base
Alternatives B Memo: April
Date Alternative A Alternative C
and B' Alternative B
Percent, annual rate
Monthly
Jan-12 9.2 9.2 9.2 9.2
Feb-12 17.8 17.8 17.8 17.8
Mar-12 3.1 3.1 3.1 3.1
Apr-12 -12.2 -12.2 -12.2 -23.8
May-12 -8.8 -8.8 -8.8 2.5
Jun-12 7.9 7.4 7.2 13.8
s Jul-12 22.5 19.3 19.3 1.3
e
v
i Aug-12 10.7 9.9 5.7 5.7
t
a
n Sep-12 -3.4 4.7 -8.3 -6.2
r
e
t
l
A
Quarterly
2011 Q1 36.8 36.8 36.8 36.8
2011 Q2 69.3 69.3 69.3 69.3
2011 Q3 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0
2011 Q4 -5.9 -5.9 -5.9 -5.9
2012 Q1 5.5 5.5 5.5 5.5
2012 Q2 -2.5 -2.6 -2.6 -3.3
2012 Q3 10.3 9.9 7.4 4.4
2012 Q4 -0.5 10.8 -5.1 -5.3
Annual - Q4 to Q4
2010 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9
2011 32.9 32.9 32.9 32.9
2012 3.2 6.0 1.3 0.3
2013 0.2 13.9 -3.8 -0.2
2014 -1.0 -3.0 -9.8 -2.4
2015 -6.6 -11.9 -13.1 -10.8
2016 -16.6 -20.2 -21.0 -19.6
2017 -18.1 -22.2 -3.3 -15.9
2018 -6.3 -4.5 5.0 5.2
Note: Not seasonally adjusted.
Page 40 of 61

--- Page 43 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
DEBT, BANK CREDIT, AND MONEY FORECASTS
Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to expand at an annual rate of 4¾
percent this year, driven by a significant expansion in federal government debt and a
modest rise in private nonfinancial debt. Over the next two years, we expect growth of
domestic nonfinancial debt to slow to an average of about 4 percent as federal debt
advances less rapidly and private debt accelerates only gradually. Nonfinancial business
debt is forecasted to increase at a modest pace over the projection period, reflecting
favorable financing conditions and increasing capital expenditures. We project home
mortgage debt to decline again this year and to edge up only a little in the next two years, as
financing conditions are expected to remain tight, weakness in housing demand is expected
to continue, and house prices are expected to increase only slowly. Meanwhile, consumer
credit is projected to expand throughout the forecast period, with its growth rate rising from
s
e
5¾ percent in the first half of 2012 to about 7½ percent in 2014, driven by increasing v
i
t
a
student loans and rising expenditures on consumer durables as well as a gradual easing in n
r
e
credit conditions for such loans. l t
A
Commercial bank credit is expected to increase at a moderate pace over the forecast
period. Core loans—the sum of commercial and industrial (C&I), real estate, and consumer
loans—grow modestly through the remainder of 2012, supported mainly by continued
strength in C&I lending. Though C&I loans grow more slowly after this year, total core
loan growth picks up somewhat in 2013 and 2014 as improvements in borrowers’ credit
quality and a further gradual easing of lending standards and terms lead to a small
acceleration in residential real estate loans and moderate growth in consumer loans.
Commercial real estate loans are projected to contract through mid-2013, and only edge up
thereafter; high vacancy rates, depressed prices for commercial properties, and the poor
credit quality of existing loans are likely to suppress activity in this sector. We project that
banks’ securities holdings will rise at a moderate pace, with growth in this category slowing
in 2013 and 2014 as deposit growth ebbs and the expansion in bank loans strengthens.
We project M2 to continue to grow faster than nominal income during the second
half of 2012. Increasing uncertainty about European financial developments will likely
encourage investors to add to their elevated holdings of safe assets included in M2. In the
near term, a continued shift of deposits from offshore bank branches to onshore entities also
will boost M2 growth.16 In 2013 and 2014, M2 is projected to grow less rapidly than
16 Offshore deposits have been captured by the FDIC’s assessment base since April of 2011, negating
the benefit to banks of booking these deposits abroad.
Page 41 of 61

--- Page 44 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
nominal income. We expect that some portion of elevated M2 balances will begin to
unwind in 2013 following the expiration of the unlimited FDIC insurance on noninterest-
bearing transactions deposits.17 M2 growth is projected to slow further in 2014, in line with
the projected firming in monetary policy and an assumed shift of investor portfolios away
from M2 assets and toward riskier investments as the economic outlook improves.
Turning to the components of M2, liquid deposits are projected to grow at a brisk
pace for the remainder of 2012 but much less rapidly in 2013 and 2014. In contrast, retail
money market funds and small time deposits decline throughout the forecast period.
Currency growth is projected to slow gradually to a pace consistent with its historical
average of 6 percent by mid-2013 and to continue at that pace through the end of the
projection period.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
17 The Dodd-Frank Act provides temporary unlimited deposit insurance coverage for noninterest-
bearing transaction accounts from December 31, 2010, through December 31, 2012. Deposits insured under
this provision have grown by $500 billion to reach $1.5 trillion since the Act went into effect, and now
comprise 15 percent of M2.
Page 42 of 61

--- Page 45 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
Growth Rates for M2
(Percent, seasonally adjusted annual rate)
Monthly Growth Rates Tealbook Forecast*
Jan-12 15.9
Feb-12 3.1
Mar-12 3.6
Apr-12 5.3
May-12 4.0
Jun-12 7.8
Jul-12 4.5
Aug-12 4.2
Sep-12 4.2
Oct-12 3.9
Nov-12 4.0
s
Dec-12 4.0 e
v
i
t
a
Quarterly Growth Rates n
r
e
2012 Q1 8.4 t
l
A
2012 Q2 4.7
2012 Q3 5.1
2012 Q4 4.0
2013 Q1 1.9
2013 Q2 2.3
2013 Q3 3.2
2013 Q4 3.2
2014 Q1 3.4
2014 Q2 3.3
2014 Q3 0.5
2014 Q4 -1.4
Annual Growth Rates
2012 5.7
2013 2.7
2014 1.4
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the
Tealbook Book A baseline forecast. Actual data through May 2012;
projections thereafter.
Page 43 of 61

--- Page 46 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
DIRECTIVE
The directive that was issued in April appears on the next page, followed by drafts
for a June directive that correspond to each of the policy alternatives.
The directives for Alternative C would instruct the Desk to leave the total face value
of domestic securities in the SOMA about unchanged and to take appropriate steps to
complete by the end of June 2012 the $400 billion maturity extension program that was
announced last September. The directive for Alternatives A, B, and B′ also would instruct
the Desk to complete the maturity extension program that was announced last September.
In addition, under Alternative A, the Committee would direct the Desk either to execute
purchases of agency MBS in order to raise the total face value of the domestic securities
holdings to about $3.1 trillion ($500 billion more than the SOMA’s current holdings) by the
s
e
v end of June 2013 or to begin purchasing MBS at a pace of about $40 billion per month.
i
t
a
n Under Alternatives B and B′, the Committee would direct the Desk to undertake a second
r
e
t maturity extension program in the amount of about $267 billion from July 2012 through
l
A
December 2012. Each of the draft directives would also instruct the Desk to continue the
current practice of reinvesting principal payments on all agency debt and agency MBS in
agency MBS, and Alternatives A and C would also continue the practice of rolling over
maturing Treasury securities at auction. Alternatives B and B′ would suspend the practice
of rolling of maturing Treasuries while the maturity extension program was in place, to
allow a portion of the SOMA’s holdings of short-term Treasury securities to be redeemed
as a part of this program.
Page 44 of 61

--- Page 47 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
April 2012 Directive
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal funds
trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to continue the
maturity extension program it began in September to purchase, by the end of June 2012,
Treasury securities with remaining maturities of approximately 6 years to 30 years with a
total face value of $400 billion, and to sell Treasury securities with remaining maturities of
3 years or less with a total face value of $400 billion. The Committee also directs the Desk
to maintain its existing policies of rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues
and of reinvesting principal payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed
securities in the System Open Market Account in agency mortgage-backed securities in
s
e
order to maintain the total face value of domestic securities at approximately $2.6 trillion. v
i
t
a
The Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll transactions as necessary to n
r
e
facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve's agency MBS transactions. The System Open t
l
A
Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing
developments regarding the System's balance sheet that could affect the attainment over
time of the Committee's objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
Page 45 of 61

--- Page 48 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
June 2012 Directive—Alternative A
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal funds
trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to continue the
maturity extension program it began in September to purchase, by the end of June 2012,
Treasury securities with remaining maturities of approximately 6 years to 30 years with a
total face value of $400 billion, and to sell Treasury securities with remaining maturities of
3 years or less with a total face value of $400 billion. [ The Committee also directs the
Desk to execute purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities by the end of June
2013 in order to increase the total face value of domestic securities held in the System
Open Market Account to approximately $3.1 trillion. | The Committee also directs the
s
e
v Desk to execute purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities in order to increase
i
t
a
n the total face value of domestic securities held in the System Open Market Account by
r
e
t approximately $40 billion per month. ] The Committee also directs the Desk to maintain
l
A
its existing policies of rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues and of
reinvesting principal payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities
in the System Open Market Account in agency mortgage-backed securities in order to
maintain the total face value of domestic securities at approximately $2.6 trillion. The
Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve's agency MBS transactions. The
System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee
informed of ongoing developments regarding the System's balance sheet that could affect
the attainment over time of the Committee's objectives of maximum employment and price
stability.
Page 46 of 61

--- Page 49 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
June 2012 Directive—Alternative B or B'
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal funds
trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to continue the
maturity extension program it began in September to purchase, by the end of June 2012,
Treasury securities with remaining maturities of approximately 6 years to 30 years with a
total face value of $400 billion, and to sell Treasury securities with remaining maturities of
3 years or less with a total face value of $400 billion. Following the conclusion of these
purchases, the Committee directs the Desk to purchase Treasury securities with
remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years with a total face value of about $267 billion
by the end of December 2012, and to sell or redeem Treasury securities with
s
e
remaining maturities of approximately 3 years or less with a total face value of about v
i
t
a
$267 billion. For the duration of this program, the Committee directs the Desk to n
r
e
suspend its current policy The Committee also directs the Desk to maintain its existing t
l
A
policies of rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues. and The Committee
directs the Desk to maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments on all
agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in the System Open Market Account in
agency mortgage-backed securities. in order to These actions should maintain the total
face value of domestic securities at approximately $2.6 trillion. The Committee directs the
Desk to engage in dollar roll transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal
Reserve's agency MBS transactions. The System Open Market Account Manager and the
Secretary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the
System's balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee's
objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
Page 47 of 61

--- Page 50 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
June 2012 Directive—Alternative C
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal funds
trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to continue the
maturity extension program it began in September to purchase, by the end of June 2012,
Treasury securities with remaining maturities of approximately 6 years to 30 years with a
total face value of $400 billion, and to sell Treasury securities with remaining maturities of
3 years or less with a total face value of $400 billion. The Committee also directs the Desk
to maintain its existing policies of rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues
and of reinvesting principal payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed
securities in the System Open Market Account in agency mortgage-backed securities in
s
e
v order to maintain the total face value of domestic securities at approximately $2.6 trillion.
i
t
a
n The Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll transactions as necessary to
r
e
t facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve's agency MBS transactions. The System Open
l
A
Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing
developments regarding the System's balance sheet that could affect the attainment over
time of the Committee's objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
Page 48 of 61

--- Page 51 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
Explanatory Notes
A. Policy Rules Used in “Monetary Policy Strategies”
The table below gives the expressions for the selected policy rules used in “Monetary
Policy Strategies.” In the table, ܴ denotes the nominal federal funds rate for quarter t, while the
௧
right-hand-side variables include the staff’s projection of trailing four-quarter core PCE inflation
for the current quarter and three quarters ahead (ߨ and ߨ ), the output gap estimate for the
௧ ௧ାଷ|௧
current period as well as its one-quarter-ahead forecast (gap and gap ) and the forecast of the
t t+1|t
three-quarter-ahead annual change in the output gap (4gap ). The value of policymakers’
t+3|t
long-run inflation objective, denoted π*, is 2 percent. The nominal income targeting rule
responds to the nominal income gap, which is defined as the difference between nominal income
ݕ݊ (100 times the log of the level of nominal GDP) and a target value ݕ݊כ (100 times the log of
௧ ௧
potential nominal GDP), where potential nominal GDP is defined as potential real GDP
multiplied by a price target equal to the actual GDP deflator in the fourth quarter of 2007 and
growing thereafter at a steady rate of 2 percent per year.1
Taylor (1993) rule ܴ ൌ 2.25 ൅ߨ ൅ 0.5 ሺߨ െ ߨ כ ሻ ൅ 0.5݃ ܽ݌
௧ ௧ ௧ ௧
Taylor (1999) rule ܴ ൌ 2.25 ൅ߨ ൅ 0.5 ሺߨ െ ߨ כ ሻ ൅ ݃ܽ݌
௧ ௧ ௧ ௧
ܴ ൌ 1.2ܴ െ 0.39 ܴ ൅ 0.19ሾ 0.79 ൅ 1.73ߨ
௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ିଶ ௧
Outcome-based rule
൅ 3.66݃ ܽ݌ െ 2.72݃ ܽ݌ ሿ
௧ ௧ିଵ
s
e
First-difference rule ܴ ௧ ൌ ܴ ௧ ିଵ ൅ 0.5൫ ߨ ௧ାଷ|௧ െߨ כ ൯൅0 .5Δ ସ ݃ܽ݌ ௧ାଷ|௧ o t
N
Nominal income y
ܴ ൌ 0.75ܴ ൅ 0.25 ሺ2.25 ൅ ߨ כ ൅ ݕ ݊ െݕ ݊ כሻ r
targeting rule ௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ ௧ o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
The first two of the selected rules were studied by Taylor (1993, 1999). The outcome- E
based rule uses policy reactions estimated using real-time data over the sample
1988:Q12006:Q4. The intercept of the outcome-based rule was chosen so that the real interest
rate consistent with normal resource utilization over the medium term implied by the rule
corresponded to the 2¼ percent rate that is embedded in the FRB/US model. The intercepts of
the Taylor (1993, 1999) rules are set at 2¼ percent—instead of Taylor’s original value of
1 See Christopher Erceg, Michael T. Kiley, and J. David López-Salido (2011) for analysis of this
rule. The nominal GDP targeting rule in “Monetary Policy Strategies” differs slightly from the rule studied
in that memo in setting the target equal to potential nominal GDP (rather than applying a growth rate to
actual nominal GDP for the final quarter of 2007) and in having an interest-rate smoothing coefficient of
0.75 (a more standard value than the 0.9 value employed in the memo). Background on the relationship
between simple interest-rate rules and nominal income targeting is provided in Bennett T. McCallum and
Edward Nelson (1999) and Athanasios Orphanides (2003).
Page 49 of 61

--- Page 52 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
2 percent—for the same reason. The 2¼ percent real rate estimate also enters the long-run
intercept of the nominal income targeting rule. The prescriptions of the first-difference rule do
not depend on assumptions regarding r* or the level of the output gap; see Orphanides (2003).
Near-term prescriptions from these rules are calculated using Tealbook projections for
inflation and the output gap. The first-difference rule, the estimated outcome-based rule, and the
nominal income targeting rule include the lagged policy rate as a right-hand-side variable. When
the Tealbook is published early in the quarter, the lines denoted “Previous Tealbook” report rule
prescriptions based on the previous Tealbook’s staff outlook, jumping off from the actual value of
the lagged funds rate in the previous quarter. When the Tealbook is published late in the quarter,
the lines denoted “Previous Tealbook Outlook” report rule prescriptions based on the previous
Tealbook’s staff outlook, but jumping off from the average value for the policy rate thus far this
quarter.
REFERENCES
Erceg, Christopher, Michael Kiley, and David López-Salido (2011). “Alternative
Monetary Policy Frameworks.” Memo sent to the Committee on October 6, 2011.
McCallum, Bennett T., and Edward Nelson (1999). “Nominal Income Targeting in an
Open-Economy Optimizing Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 43 (June), pp. 553–
578.
Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor
Rule,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 50 (July), pp. 9831022.
s
e
t
o Taylor, John B. (1993). “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
N
Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 39 (December), pp. 195214.
y
r
o
t
a
n Taylor, John B. (1999). “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B.
a
p l Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules. University of Chicago Press, pp. 319341.
x
E
Page 50 of 61

--- Page 53 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
B. Estimates of the Equilibrium and Actual Real Rates
An estimate of the equilibrium real rate appears as a memo item in the first exhibit,
“Policy Rules and the Staff Projection.” The concept of the short-run equilibrium real rate
underlying the estimate corresponds to the level of the real federal funds rate that is consistent
with output reaching potential in twelve quarters using the projection for the economy of
FRB/US, the staff’s large-scale econometric model of the U.S. economy. This estimate depends
on a very broad array of economic factors, some of which take the form of projected values of the
model’s exogenous variables. The estimate reported is the “Tealbook-consistent” estimate of r*,
which is generated after the paths of exogenous variables in the FRB/US model are adjusted so
that they match those in the extended Tealbook forecast. Model simulations then determine the
value of the real federal funds rate that closes the output gap conditional on the exogenous
variables in the extended baseline forecast.
The estimated actual real federal funds rate reported in the exhibit is constructed as the
difference between the federal funds rate and the trailing four-quarter change in the core PCE
price index. The federal funds rate is specified as the midpoint of the target range for the federal
funds rate on the Tealbook Book B publication date.
s
e
t
o
N
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
Page 51 of 61

--- Page 54 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
C. FRB/US Model Simulations
The exhibits of “Monetary Policy Strategies” that report results from simulations of
alternative policies are derived from dynamic simulations of the FRB/US model. The simulated
policy rule is assumed to be in force over the whole period covered by the simulation. For the
optimal control simulations, the dotted line labeled “Previous Tealbook” is derived from the
optimal control simulations, when applied to the previous Tealbook projection.
s
e
t
o
N
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
Page 52 of 61

--- Page 55 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
D. Long-Run Projections of the Balance Sheet and Monetary Base
This explanatory note presents the assumptions underlying the projections provided in the
section titled “Long-Run Projections of the Balance Sheet and Monetary Base,” as well as
projections for each major component of the balance sheet.
GENERAL ASSUMPTIONS
The balance sheet projections are constructed at a monthly frequency from June 2012 to
December 2020. The few balance sheet items that are not discussed below are assumed to be
constant over the projection period at the level observed on May 31, 2012. The projections for all
major asset and liability categories under each scenario are summarized in the tables that follow
the bullet points.
The Tealbook projections for the scenarios corresponding to Alternatives A, B, and B’
assume that the target federal funds rate begins to increase in October 2014, consistent with the
forward guidance in the FOMC’s statement that the federal funds rate is expected to be at
exceptionally low levels “at least through late 2014.” This date of liftoff is the same as that used
in the April Tealbook for the Alternative A1, A2, and B balance sheet projections, but later than
that assumed in the June Tealbook staff forecast.2 The projection for the scenario corresponding
to Alternative C assumes the target rate lifts off in October 2013. The balance sheet projections
assume that no use of short-term draining tools is necessary to achieve the projected path for the
federal funds rate.3
s
e
t
o
N
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
2 In the balance sheet forecast, the federal funds rate remains below 25 basis points through
September 2014, then moves up gradually over time and converges to the projection assumed in the June
Tealbook staff forecast by the end of the forecast horizon. The projected path of the 10-year Treasury yield
in these alternatives is the yield assumed in the June Tealbook staff forecast adjusted for the expectations
effect of a later target federal funds rate liftoff (see the box on “Forward Rate Guidance and Policy
Expectations” from the January Tealbook Book B) and for the reduction in term premiums caused by the
extension of the MEP (the staff forecast is not conditioned on an extended MEP) as well as the later liftoff
date for the federal funds rate and associated later beginning of asset redemptions and sales.
3 If term deposits or reverse repurchase agreements were used to drain reserves prior to raising the
federal funds rate, the composition of liabilities would change: Increases in term deposits and reverse
repurchase agreements would be matched by corresponding declines in reserve balances. Presumably,
these draining tools would be wound down as the balance sheet returns to its steady state growth path, so
that the projected paths for Treasury securities presented in the Tealbook remain valid.
Page 53 of 61

--- Page 56 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
ASSETS
Treasury Securities, Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS), and Agency Debt
Securities
 The assumptions under Alternatives B and B’ are:
o Over the nine months beginning in October 2011, the FOMC is assumed to purchase
$400 billion in par value of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of six years
or more and sell the same par amount of Treasury securities with remaining
maturities of three years or less, as part of its ongoing maturity extension program
(MEP).
o In addition, the FOMC is assumed to continue the MEP at its current pace through
the end of 2012, directing the Desk to purchase Treasury securities with remaining
maturity of 6 years to 30 years and to sell or redeem Treasury securities with
remaining maturity of approximately 3 years or less. In total, the FOMC purchases
an additional $267 billion in longer-term Treasury securities as a result of the MEP
extension.
o The FOMC continues to reinvest the proceeds from principal payments on its agency
securities holdings in agency MBS until April 2014—six months prior to the
assumed increase in the target federal funds rate.4 The Federal Reserve begins to sell
agency MBS and agency debt securities in April 2015, roughly six months after the
assumed date of the first increase in the target federal funds rate. Holdings of agency
securities are reduced over five years and reach zero by March 2020.
o For agency MBS, the rate of prepayment is based on staff models using estimates of
housing market factors from one of the program’s analytical providers, long-run
s average prepayment speeds of MBS, and interest rate projections from the Tealbook.
e
t
o The projected rate of prepayment is sensitive to these underlying assumptions.
N
y
r
o  In the scenario corresponding to Alternative A, the Committee is assumed to begin a
t
a
n $500 billion LSAP program in July 2012 under which it purchases current coupon agency
a
p l MBS at a rate of about $40 billion per month through June 2013. In addition, the
x
E Committee is expected to complete the MEP in June and, unlike in Alternatives B and B’,
is assumed to follow current reinvestment policies. Beginning in April 2014, six months
prior to the assumed increase in the federal funds rate in October 2014, principal
payments from securities are allowed to roll off the portfolio. Sales of agency securities
begin in April 2015 and continue for five years.
 In the scenario corresponding to Alternative C, the Committee is expected to complete
the current MEP in June of this year and no further balance sheet action is undertaken in
the near term. Principal payments from Treasury securities continue to be reinvested at
auction, and principal payments from agency MBS and agency debt securities are
reinvested in agency MBS until April 2013, six months prior to the assumed increase in
4 Projected prepayments of agency MBS reflect interest rate projections as of June 13, 2012.
Page 54 of 61

--- Page 57 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
the federal funds rate in October 2013. Sales of agency securities begin in April 2014
and continue for five years.
 Because current and expected rates in the near term are below the average coupon rate on
outstanding Treasury securities, the market value at which these securities are purchased
will generally exceed their face value, with a larger premium for longer-maturity
securities. As a result, although the par value of securities holdings remains constant
under the current MEP, premiums associated with securities purchases and sales in this
program, and hence total assets, will have risen on net by about $70 billion by the end of
this program. A continuation of the MEP, as in B and B’, will boost premiums on net an
additional $60 billion by the end of the year.
 The large-scale asset purchase program in Alternative A would put downward pressure
on market interest rates, in particular primary and secondary mortgage rates.
 The current and near-term market value of agency MBS is assumed to be four percent
above its face value. As a result, for Alternative A, the $500 billion LSAP program will
cause unamortized premiums on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to rise by roughly
$20 billion relative to a scenario without this program. The increase in premiums is
reflected in higher total assets and in higher reserve balances.
 The level of central bank liquidity swaps is assumed to decline gradually, as the recent
foreign central bank swap auctions mature, and then return to zero in January 2014.
 In all scenarios, a minimum level of $25 billion is set for reserve balances. Once reserve
balances drop to this level, the Desk first purchases Treasury bills to maintain this level
of reserve balances going forward. Purchases of bills continue until such securities
comprise one-third of the Federal Reserve’s total Treasury securities holdings—about the
s
e
average share prior to the crisis. Once this share is reached, the Federal Reserve buys t
o
N
coupon securities in addition to bills to maintain an approximate composition of the
y
portfolio of one-third bills and two-thirds coupon securities. r
o
t
a
Liquidity Programs and Credit Facilities n
a
l
p
 Credit through the Term Asset Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) declines to zero x
E
by the end of 2015, reflecting loan maturities and prepayments.
 The assets held by TALF LLC remain at about $1 billion through 2014 before declining
to zero the following year. Assets held by TALF LLC consist of investments of
commitment fees collected by the LLC and the U.S. Treasury’s initial funding. In this
projection, the LLC does not purchase any asset-backed securities received by the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York in connection with a decision of a borrower not to
repay a TALF loan.
 The assets held by Maiden Lane LLC and Maiden Lane III LLC decline to zero gradually
over time. The last historical month included in the analysis is May 2012. As a result,
recent sales from Maiden Lane LLC and Maiden Lane III LLC are not taken into account.
Page 55 of 61

--- Page 58 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
LIABILITIES AND CAPITAL
 Federal Reserve notes in circulation grow in line with the staff forecast for money stock
currency through the last quarter of 2014. Afterwards, Federal Reserve notes in
circulation grow at the same rate as nominal GDP, as in the extended Tealbook
projection.
 The level of reverse repurchase agreements (RRPs) is assumed to remain around $70
billion, about the average level of RRPs associated with foreign official and international
accounts observed over the past three years.
 Balances held in the U.S. Treasury’s General Account (TGA) follow recent patterns until
the assumed increase in the target federal funds rate in each alternative. At that point, the
TGA slowly drops back to its historical target level of $5 billion as it is assumed that the
Treasury will implement a new cash management system and invest funds in excess of $5
billion. The TGA remains constant at $5 billion over the remainder of the forecast period.
 We maintain the Supplementary Financing Account (SFA) balance at its current level of
zero throughout the forecast.
 Federal Reserve capital grows 15 percent per year, in line with the average rate of the
past ten years.5
 In general, increases in the level of Federal Reserve assets are matched by higher levels
of reserve balances. All else equal, increases in the levels of liability items, such as
Federal Reserve notes in circulation or other liabilities, or increases in the level of
Reserve Bank capital, drain reserve balances. When increases in these liability or capital
items would otherwise cause reserve balances to fall below $25 billion, purchases of
s
e
t Treasury securities are assumed in order to maintain that level of reserve balances.
o
N
y  In the event that a Federal Reserve Bank’s earnings fall short of the amount necessary to
r
o cover operating costs, pay dividends, and equate surplus to capital paid-in, a deferred
t
a
n asset would be recorded. This deferred asset is recorded in lieu of reducing the Reserve
a
p l Bank’s capital and is reported on the liability side of the balance sheet as “Interest on
x
E Federal Reserve notes due to U.S. Treasury.” This liability takes on a positive value
when weekly cumulative earnings have not yet been distributed to the Treasury and takes
on a negative value when earnings fall short of the expenses listed above. In the
projections, System-wide earnings are always sufficient to cover these expenses, and this
line item is set to zero.
5 The annual growth rate of capital impacts the date of normalization of the size of the balance
sheet and the size of the SOMA portfolio. Growth in Reserve Bank capital has been modest over the past
two years; however, even if Federal Reserve capital were assumed to be constant, normalization only
would be pushed later by about a quarter.
Page 56 of 61

--- Page 59 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
TERM PREMIUM EFFECTS
6
 Under Alternatives B and B’, the current staff estimates of the contemporaneous term
premium effect on the yield of the ten-year Treasury note is negative 71 basis points.
Based on the projection for the balance sheet, that term premium effect converges slowly
toward zero over the forecast period as the portfolio normalizes. The path of the term
premium effect is more negative than in the April Tealbook Alternative B because of the
assumed continuation of the MEP.
 Under Alternative A, the term premium effect is a bit larger than in Alternatives B and
B’, at negative 77 basis points. The larger term premium effect is a result of the assumed
balance sheet program.
 Under Alternative C, the term premium effect is somewhat smaller than under
Alternatives B and B’, at negative 53 basis points. The smaller term premium effect is a
result of no continuation of the MEP and the earlier assumed increase in the federal funds
rate that, in turn, leads to earlier asset sales.
s
e
t
o
N
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
6 Staff estimates use the model outlined in the appendix of the January 18, 2012, memo “Possible
MBS Large-Scale Asset Purchase Program” written by staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and
the Board of Governors. More details of the model can be found in “Term Structure Modeling with Supply
Factors and the Federal Reserve’s Large Scale Asset Purchase Programs” by Li and Wei, FEDS working
paper # 37, 2012.
Page 57 of 61

--- Page 60 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
10-Year Treasury Term Premium Effect
Alternatives Memo: April
Date Alternative A Alternative C
B and B' Alternative B
Basis Points
Quarterly Averages
2012 Q2 -71 -77 -53 -61
2012 Q3 -68 -74 -50 -58
2012 Q4 -65 -71 -46 -55
2013 Q1 -62 -68 -43 -51
2013 Q2 -58 -64 -39 -48
2013 Q3 -54 -60 -36 -45
2013 Q4 -50 -56 -33 -41
2014 Q1 -47 -51 -30 -38
2014 Q2 -43 -47 -27 -35
2014 Q3 -40 -43 -25 -32
2014 Q4 -37 -39 -23 -29
2015 Q1 -34 -36 -21 -27
2015 Q2 -31 -33 -19 -24
2015 Q3 -28 -29 -17 -22
2015 Q4 -26 -27 -15 -20
2016 Q1 -24 -24 -14 -18
2016 Q2 -22 -21 -13 -16
2016 Q3 -20 -19 -12 -15
s
e 2016 Q4 -18 -17 -11 -13
t
o
N 2017 Q1 -16 -16 -10 -12
y 2017 Q2 -15 -14 -9 -11
r
o
t 2017 Q3 -14 -13 -9 -10
a
n 2017 Q4 -13 -11 -9 -10
a
l
p 2018 Q1 -12 -10 -8 -9
x
E
2018 Q2 -11 -10 -8 -8
2018 Q3 -10 -9 -8 -8
2018 Q4 -10 -8 -8 -8
2019 Q1 -9 -8 -7 -7
2019 Q2 -9 -7 -7 -7
2019 Q3 -8 -7 -7 -7
2019 Q4 -8 -7 -6 -6
2020 Q1 -7 -6 -6 -6
2020 Q2 -7 -6 -6 -5
2020 Q3 -6 -5 -5 -5
2020 Q4 -6 -5 -5 -5
Page 58 of 61

--- Page 61 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Alternative B
Billions of dollars
May 31, 2012 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
Total assets 2,849 2,894 2,798 2,190 1,800 2,000
Selected assets
Liquidity programs for financial firms 22 15 0 0 0 0
Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 22 15 0 0 0 0
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 5 3 1 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, 19 19 15 12 7 4
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC
Securities held outright 2,606 2,593 2,547 1,986 1,636 1,860
U.S. Treasury securities 1,661 1,653 1,653 1,430 1,426 1,860
Agency debt securities 93 77 39 16 2 0
Agency mortgage-backed securities 852 863 855 539 207 0
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1 1 1 0 0 0
Total other assets 195 264 234 192 157 135
s
e
t
o
Total liabilities 2,794 2,833 2,716 2,081 1,657 1,810 N
y
Selected liabilities r
o
t
a
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 1,068 1,111 1,253 1,390 1,539 1,693 n
a
l
Reverse repurchase agreements 70 70 70 70 70 70 p
x
E
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,636 1,633 1,375 604 30 30
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 1,499 1,543 1,370 599 25 25
U.S. Treasury, General Account 112 90 5 5 5 5
Other Deposits 25 0 0 0 0 0
Interest on Federal Reserve Notes due 2 0 0 0 0 0
to U.S. Treasury
Total capital 55 62 82 108 143 189
Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
Page 59 of 61

--- Page 62 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Alternative A
Billions of dollars
May 31, 2012 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
Total assets 2,849 3,019 3,176 2,246 1,800 2,000
Selected assets
Liquidity programs for financial firms 22 15 0 0 0 0
Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 22 15 0 0 0 0
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 5 3 1 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, 19 19 15 12 7 4
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC
Securities held outright 2,606 2,771 2,962 2,078 1,670 1,892
U.S. Treasury securities 1,661 1,652 1,597 1,223 1,345 1,892
Agency debt securities 93 77 39 16 2 0
Agency mortgage-backed securities 852 1,042 1,327 839 323 0
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1 1 1 0 0 0
Total other assets 195 211 197 156 123 104
s
e
t
o
N Total liabilities 2,794 2,957 3,095 2,138 1,657 1,811
y
r Selected liabilities
o
t
a
n Federal Reserve notes in circulation 1,068 1,111 1,253 1,390 1,539 1,693
a
l
p Reverse repurchase agreements 70 70 70 70 70 70
x
E
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,636 1,757 1,754 660 30 30
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 1,499 1,667 1,749 655 25 25
U.S. Treasury, General Account 112 90 5 5 5 5
Other Deposits 25 0 0 0 0 0
Interest on Federal Reserve Notes due 2 0 0 0 0 0
to U.S. Treasury
Total capital 55 62 82 108 143 189
Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
Page 60 of 61

--- Page 63 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) June 14, 2012
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Alternative C
Billions of dollars
May 31, 2012 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
Total assets 2,849 2,830 2,399 1,685 1,800 2,000
Selected assets
Liquidity programs for financial firms 22 15 0 0 0 0
Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 22 15 0 0 0 0
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 5 3 1 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, 19 19 15 12 7 4
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC
Securities held outright 2,606 2,591 2,211 1,535 1,680 1,893
U.S. Treasury securities 1,661 1,652 1,537 1,182 1,641 1,893
Agency debt securities 93 77 39 16 1 0
Agency mortgage-backed securities 852 863 635 336 37 0
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1 1 1 0 0 0
Total other assets 195 201 171 138 113 103
s
e
t
o
Total liabilities 2,794 2,768 2,317 1,576 1,657 1,811 N
y
Selected liabilities r
o
t
a
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 1,068 1,111 1,253 1,390 1,539 1,693 n
a
l
Reverse repurchase agreements 70 70 70 70 70 70 p
x
E
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,636 1,569 976 99 30 30
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 1,499 1,478 971 94 25 25
U.S. Treasury, General Account 112 90 5 5 5 5
Other Deposits 25 0 0 0 0 0
Interest on Federal Reserve Notes due 2 0 0 0 0 0
to U.S. Treasury
Total capital 55 62 82 108 143 189
Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
Page 61 of 61

# Tables

## Page_11_Table_1


| 2011   | 2012   | 2013   | 2014   | 2015   |
|--------|--------|--------|--------|--------|
| H2     |        |        |        |        |


## Page_19_Table_1


| Selected
Elements     | April
Statement                                                                                                                                                         | June Alternatives                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                        |                            |    |
|-----------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------|----|
|                       |                                                                                                                                                                         | A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | B and B′                                                                                                                                                                                                 | C                                                                                                                                                      |                            |    |
| Forward Rate Guidance |                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                        |                            |    |
| Guidance              | at least through
late 2014                                                                                                                                              | at least through
late 2014
OR
at least through
mid-2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | unchanged                                                                                                                                                                                                |                                                                                                                                                        | at least through late 2014 |    |
|                       |                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                        | OR                         |    |
|                       |                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                        | at least through late 2013 |    |
|                       |                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                        | OR                         |    |
|                       |                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                        | consider range of factors, |    |
|                       |                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                        | including actual and       |    |
|                       |                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                        | projected labor market     |    |
|                       |                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                        | conditions, medium-term    |    |
|                       |                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                        | outlook for inflation, &   |    |
|                       |                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                        | risks to achievement       |    |
|                       |                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                        | of …objectives             |    |
| Balance Sheet         |                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                        |                            |    |
| MEP                   | continue its program as
announced in
September
($400 billion;
complete by
end of June 2012)                                                                             | complete the program that
it announced in September                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | continue to purchase at
current pace Treasury
securities with remaining
maturities of 6 to 30 years
and sell or redeem equal
amount with remaining
maturities of approx. 3
years or less, by end of
2012 | complete the program that
it announced in September                                                                                                    |                            |    |
| Additional
Purchases  | none                                                                                                                                                                    | purchase an additional
$500 billion of agency
MBS by the end of June
2013
OR
begin purchasing agency
MBS, initially at a rate of
$40 billion per month                                                                                                                                                                       | none                                                                                                                                                                                                     | none                                                                                                                                                   |                            |    |
| Reinvestment
Policies | principal payments of
agency debt and MBS
into agency MBS;
Treasuries into
Treasuries                                                                                   | unchanged                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | principal payments of
agency debt and MBS into
agency MBS; (suspend
Treasury rollovers)                                                                                                                  | unchanged                                                                                                                                              |                            |    |
| Future Policy Action  |                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                        |                            |    |
| Future Actions        | regularly review the
size and composition of
securities holdings;
prepared to adjust
holdings as appropriate
to promote stronger
recovery in context of
price stability | regularly review size and
composition of securities
holdings; prepared to take
further action as
appropriate to promote a
stronger economic recovery
& more rapid improvement
in labor market conditions
in context of price stability
OR
will adjust pace of
purchases and determine
ultimate size of program as
needed to… | prepared to take further
action as appropriate to
promote a stronger
economic recovery &
sustained improvement in
labor market conditions in
context of price stability                                  | regularly review size and
composition of securities
holdings; prepared to
adjust holdings as
necessary to promote
maximum employment &
price stability |                            |    |


## Page_19_Table_2


| at least through   |
|--------------------|
| late 2014          |
| OR                 |
| at least through   |
| mid-2015           |


## Page_19_Table_3


| at least through   |
|--------------------|
| late 2014          |


## Page_42_Table_1


| Growth Rates for the Monetary Base                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                       |               |               |                           |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|---------------|---------------|---------------------------|
| Date                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | Alternatives B
and B' | Alternative A | Alternative C | Memo: April
Alternative B |
| Percent, annual rate
Monthly
Jan-12 9.2 9.2 9.2 9.2
Feb-12 17.8 17.8 17.8 17.8
Mar-12 3.1 3.1 3.1 3.1
Apr-12 -12.2 -12.2 -12.2 -23.8
May-12 -8.8 -8.8 -8.8 2.5
Jun-12 7.9 7.4 7.2 13.8
Jul-12 22.5 19.3 19.3 1.3
Aug-12 10.7 9.9 5.7 5.7
Sep-12 -3.4 4.7 -8.3 -6.2
Quarterly
2011 Q1 36.8 36.8 36.8 36.8
2011 Q2 69.3 69.3 69.3 69.3
2011 Q3 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.0
2011 Q4 -5.9 -5.9 -5.9 -5.9
2012 Q1 5.5 5.5 5.5 5.5
2012 Q2 -2.5 -2.6 -2.6 -3.3
2012 Q3 10.3 9.9 7.4 4.4
2012 Q4 -0.5 10.8 -5.1 -5.3
Annual - Q4 to Q4
2010 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9
2011 32.9 32.9 32.9 32.9
2012 3.2 6.0 1.3 0.3
2013 0.2 13.9 -3.8 -0.2
2014 -1.0 -3.0 -9.8 -2.4
2015 -6.6 -11.9 -13.1 -10.8
2016 -16.6 -20.2 -21.0 -19.6
2017 -18.1 -22.2 -3.3 -15.9
2018 -6.3 -4.5 5.0 5.2 |                       |               |               |                           |
| Note: Not seasonally adjusted.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                       |               |               |                           |


## Page_45_Table_1


| Growth Rates for M2                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |                                                                                                               |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| (Percent, seasonally adjusted annual rate)                                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                               |
| Monthly Growth Rates                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Tealbook Forecast*                                                                                            |
| Jan-12
Feb-12
Mar-12
Apr-12
May-12
Jun-12
Jul-12
Aug-12
Sep-12
Oct-12
Nov-12
Dec-12
Quarterly Growth Rates
2012 Q1
2012 Q2
2012 Q3
2012 Q4
2013 Q1
2013 Q2
2013 Q3
2013 Q4
2014 Q1
2014 Q2
2014 Q3
2014 Q4
Annual Growth Rates
2012
2013
2014 | 15.9
3.1
3.6
5.3
4.0
7.8
4.5
4.2
4.2
3.9
4.0
4.0
8.4
4.7
5.1
4.0
1.9
2.3
3.2
3.2
3.4
3.3
0.5
-1.4
5.7
2.7
1.4 |
| * This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the
Tealbook Book A baseline forecast. Actual data through May 2012;
projections thereafter.                                                                             |                                                                                                               |


## Page_60_Table_1


| 10-Year Treasury Term Premium Effect                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                       |               |               |                           |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------|---------------|---------------|---------------------------|
| Date                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | Alternatives
B and B' | Alternative A | Alternative C | Memo: April
Alternative B |
| Basis Points
Quarterly Averages
2012 Q2 -71 -77 -53 -61
2012 Q3 -68 -74 -50 -58
2012 Q4 -65 -71 -46 -55
2013 Q1 -62 -68 -43 -51
2013 Q2 -58 -64 -39 -48
2013 Q3 -54 -60 -36 -45
2013 Q4 -50 -56 -33 -41
2014 Q1 -47 -51 -30 -38
2014 Q2 -43 -47 -27 -35
2014 Q3 -40 -43 -25 -32
2014 Q4 -37 -39 -23 -29
2015 Q1 -34 -36 -21 -27
2015 Q2 -31 -33 -19 -24
2015 Q3 -28 -29 -17 -22
2015 Q4 -26 -27 -15 -20
2016 Q1 -24 -24 -14 -18
2016 Q2 -22 -21 -13 -16
2016 Q3 -20 -19 -12 -15
2016 Q4 -18 -17 -11 -13
2017 Q1 -16 -16 -10 -12
2017 Q2 -15 -14 -9 -11
2017 Q3 -14 -13 -9 -10
2017 Q4 -13 -11 -9 -10
2018 Q1 -12 -10 -8 -9
2018 Q2 -11 -10 -8 -8
2018 Q3 -10 -9 -8 -8
2018 Q4 -10 -8 -8 -8
2019 Q1 -9 -8 -7 -7
2019 Q2 -9 -7 -7 -7
2019 Q3 -8 -7 -7 -7
2019 Q4 -8 -7 -6 -6
2020 Q1 -7 -6 -6 -6
2020 Q2 -7 -6 -6 -5
2020 Q3 -6 -5 -5 -5
2020 Q4 -6 -5 -5 -5 |                       |               |               |                           |