# 20160727_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:38:07*
*Pages: 14, Tables: 4*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
July 26–27, 2016
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, July 26, 2016, at Market Account
10:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, July 27, 2016,
at 9:00 a.m.1 Robert deV. Frierson, Secretary of the Board, Office of
the Secretary, Board of Governors
PRESENT:
Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve
Janet L. Yellen, Chair
Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman
Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division
Lael Brainard
of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of
James Bullard
Governors; Nellie Liang, Director, Division of
Stanley Fischer
Financial Stability, Board of Governors
Esther L. George
Loretta J. Mester
James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of
Jerome H. Powell
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Daniel M.
Eric Rosengren
Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of Research and
Daniel K. Tarullo
Statistics, Board of Governors
Charles L. Evans, Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan,
Andrew Figura, David Reifschneider, and Stacey
Neel Kashkari, and Michael Strine, Alternate
Tevlin, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Board Members, Board of Governors
Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and John C.
Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office
Williams, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Board Members, Board of Governors
of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,
respectively
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
Brian F. Madigan, Secretary
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary
Fabio M. Natalucci and Gretchen C. Weinbach,3 Senior
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Board of Governors; Michael G. Palumbo, Senior
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel
Associate Director, Division of Research and
Steven B. Kamin, Economist
Statistics, Board of Governors; Beth Anne Wilson,
Thomas Laubach, Economist
Senior Associate Director, Division of
David W. Wilcox, Economist
International Finance, Board of Governors
Thomas A. Connors, Troy Davig, Michael P. Leahy,
Michael T. Kiley, Senior Adviser, Division of Research
David E. Lebow, Stephen A. Meyer, Ellis W.
and Statistics, and Senior Associate Director,
Tallman, Christopher J. Waller, and William
Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors
Wascher, Associate Economists
1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the 3 Attended the discussion of the long-run monetary policy im-
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. plementation framework.
2 Attended the discussions of the long-run monetary policy
implementation framework and financial developments.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Antulio N. Bomfim and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Long-Run Monetary Policy Implementation
Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Framework
Governors; Brian M. Doyle,3 Senior Adviser, The staff provided several briefings that reviewed pro-
Division of International Finance, Board of gress on a long-term effort begun in July 2015 to evalu-
Governors ate potential long-run frameworks for monetary policy
implementation. The briefings highlighted some foun-
Jane E. Ihrig,3 Associate Director, Division of dational considerations that are relevant for such an
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors evaluation. The staff described the recent experience of
several central banks of advanced foreign economies
John J. Stevens, Deputy Associate Director, Division of (AFEs) in implementing monetary policy, noting that
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors they use a wide variety of frameworks to control short-
term interest rates and that their approaches have
Glenn Follette and Steven A. Sharpe, Assistant evolved over time. For example, foreign central banks
Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, vary in their choice of the interest rate used to communi-
Board of Governors; Elizabeth Klee,3 Assistant cate monetary policy; in their approach to the provision
Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of of reserve balances; and in their use of policies, such as
Governors large-scale asset purchases, various funding programs,
and negative interest rates, to supplement more tradi-
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of tional means of policy implementation. The staff also
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors described the Federal Reserve’s experience in imple-
menting monetary policy during the recent financial cri-
Elmar Mertens, Principal Economist, Division of sis. Before the financial crisis, traditional implementa-
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors tion tools—relatively small-sized open market opera-
tions and discount window lending—were adequate for
Valerie Hinojosa, Information Manager, Division of interest rate control even during periods of stress. But
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors the evidence from the period of the crisis and its after-
math suggested that the Federal Reserve’s pre-crisis
Marie Gooding, First Vice President, Federal Reserve framework did not enable close control over the federal
Bank of Atlanta funds rate when liquidity programs were expanded sig-
nificantly and subsequently was unable to generate suf-
David Altig and Ron Feldman, Executive Vice ficiently accommodative financial conditions to support
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and economic recovery without the use of new policy tools.
Minneapolis, respectively Finally, the staff noted that various aspects of U.S.
money markets, which determine short-term interest
Tobias Adrian, Michael Dotsey, Stephanie Heller, rates and are important for transmitting monetary policy,
Susan McLaughlin,3 Julie Ann Remache,3 and John have changed since the financial crisis. The differences
A. Weinberg, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal include changes the Federal Reserve has made to its pol-
Reserve Banks of New York, Philadelphia, New icy tools and balance sheet, changes in market partici-
York, New York, New York, and Richmond, pants’ business practices, and the regulatory changes
respectively made around the globe to strengthen the financial sys-
tem. Taken together, these factors may, for example,
John Duca, Jonas D. M. Fisher, Deborah L. Leonard,3 raise the long-run demand for safe assets, including re-
Antoine Martin,3 Ed Nosal,3 Anna Paulson,3 Joe serve balances, and they should help make U.S. money
Peek, and Patricia Zobel,3 Vice Presidents, Federal markets more stable than they were before and during
Reserve Banks of Dallas, Chicago, New York, New the financial crisis.
York, Chicago, Chicago, Boston, and New York,
In the discussion that followed the staff presentations,
respectively
policymakers agreed that decisions regarding an appro-
priate long-run implementation framework would not
John Fernald, Senior Research Advisor, Federal
be necessary for some time. Furthermore, their judg-
Reserve Bank of San Francisco
ments regarding a future framework would benefit from
accruing additional experience with recently developed

--- Page 3 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_ g_ _o_f _J_u_ly_ 2_6_–_2_7_,_ 2_0_1_6_________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
policy tools, such as the payment of interest on reserves, perceived stigma associated with borrowing at the dis-
and accumulating more information about some im- count window, particularly in periods of financial strain,
portant considerations that are still evolving, including would need further careful consideration. In addition, it
financial regulations and market participants’ responses was noted that the dollar is a principal reserve currency
to them. and that monetary transmission in the United States oc-
curs through funding markets that are quite globally con-
One key consideration discussed by policymakers was
nected. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Chair
the appropriate amount of flexibility that an implemen-
asked the staff to continue its work and noted that poli-
tation framework might have—for example, the extent
cymakers would review further analysis at a future meet-
to which a framework could readily enable interest rate
ing.
control under a wide range of economic and financial
circumstances. With neutral interest rates potentially re- Developments in Financial Markets and Open
maining quite low, policymakers also observed that, in Market Operations
order to promote the Federal Reserve’s policy objec- The deputy manager of the System Open Market Ac-
tives, the framework should have the capacity to supple- count (SOMA) reported on developments in financial
ment conventional policy accommodation with other markets and open market operations during the period
measures when short-term nominal interest rates are since the Committee met on June 14–15, 2016. Follow-
near zero. Policymakers emphasized that the relation- ing the outcome of the June 23 referendum in the United
ship between the monetary policy implementation Kingdom in which a majority indicated a preference to
framework and financial stability considerations would leave the European Union (EU), yields on U.S. Treasury
require careful attention. Importantly, the policy imple- securities fell sharply, U.S. equity prices declined, and the
mentation framework would need to be consistent with foreign exchange value of the dollar increased. How-
recent changes in regulation designed to enhance the sta- ever, these changes generally reversed in subsequent
bility of the financial system. Also, because episodes of weeks. On balance, Treasury yields were down only
financial stress can arise with little warning, policymakers slightly over the intermeeting period, equity prices were
noted the advantage of being operationally ready for higher, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar was
such situations; however, they also recognized that such little changed. Although the expected path of the federal
operational readiness could entail some costs. Partici- funds rate implied by market prices was about un-
pants observed that various choices associated with pol- changed on net, the Open Market Desk’s Survey of Pri-
icy implementation frameworks—such as the selection mary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants indi-
of counterparties or types of collateral to accept, and the cated that the median responses for the most likely path
overall size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s of the federal funds rate over coming quarters had de-
balance sheet—may both be influenced by, and them- clined.
selves influence, incentives and activity in financial mar-
During the intermeeting period, federal funds continued
kets. Moreover, they indicated that the implications of
to trade at rates well within the FOMC’s ¼ to ½ percent
the implementation framework for the efficiency of the
target range. However, the average effective federal
financial system needed to be taken into account.
funds rate was modestly higher than in the previous in-
Meeting participants commented on several other con- termeeting period. The slightly firmer conditions in the
siderations that they saw as being relevant for evaluating federal funds market were supported by higher rates in
possible implementation frameworks. Other major cen- money markets for secured transactions, which appeared
tral banks have successfully employed a range of policy to reflect at least in part more cautious liquidity manage-
rates, including both administered rates and market ment by some money market participants in the wake of
rates, suggesting that either type of rate can be effective the U.K. referendum. Take-up at the System’s overnight
in communicating and implementing policy. However, reverse repurchase agreement facility rose somewhat.
the factors affecting market rates, as well as the relation- The increase seemed to be in part the result of shifts in
ships between the policy interest rate and other short- investments by money market funds in advance of the
term interest rates, would need to be well understood in scheduled implementation in October of changes to the
deciding on a particular policy rate. The potential bene- regulation of the money market fund industry.
fits of improving the functioning of certain policy tools
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
were noted; for example, approaches to reducing the
domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- new orders diffusion indexes from national and regional
cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- manufacturing surveys, suggested only modest gains in
riod. factory output over the next few months.
Staff Review of the Economic Situation Growth in real personal consumption expenditures
The information reviewed for the July 26–27 meeting in- (PCE) appeared to have picked up in the second quarter.
dicated that labor market conditions generally improved The components of the nominal retail sales data used by
in June and that growth in real gross domestic product the Bureau of Economic Analysis to construct its esti-
(GDP) was moderate in the second quarter. Consumer mate of PCE continued to rise at a solid pace in June.
price inflation continued to run below the Committee’s Although sales of light motor vehicles declined in June,
longer-run objective of 2 percent, restrained in part by the average pace for the second quarter as a whole was
earlier decreases in energy prices and in prices of non- essentially the same as in the first quarter. The apparent
energy imports. Most survey-based measures of longer- pickup in real PCE growth was consistent with recent
run inflation expectations were little changed, on bal- readings on key factors that influence consumer spend-
ance, while market-based measures of inflation compen- ing, including continued gains in real disposable personal
sation remained low. income and in households’ net worth. Also, consumer
sentiment as measured by the University of Michigan
Total nonfarm payroll employment increased briskly in
Surveys of Consumers remained reasonably upbeat in
June, but the increase for the second quarter as a whole
the second quarter and in early July.
was noticeably slower than in the first quarter. The un-
employment rate rose to 4.9 percent in June, partly re- Recent information on housing activity suggested that
versing its decline in the previous month. The labor the pace of the gradual recovery in the sector had slowed
force participation rate edged up in June, while the in recent months. Starts for new single-family homes
employment-to-population ratio edged down. The were little changed, on average, in May and June at a level
share of workers employed part time for economic rea- below that in the first quarter, while starts for multifam-
sons declined in June after a similarly sized increase in ily units moved up, on net, and were above their first-
May. The rate of private-sector job openings declined in quarter average. Building permit issuance for both
May, albeit from an elevated level, and the rates of hires single-family and multifamily units remained essentially
and of quits were both unchanged. The four-week mov- flat in the second quarter and pointed to little improve-
ing average of initial claims for unemployment insurance ment in the rate of starts over the next few months.
benefits remained low through mid-July. Average Sales of new and existing homes both increased, on net,
hourly earnings for all employees increased 2½ percent in May and June.
over the 12 months ending in June.
Real private expenditures for business equipment and in-
The unemployment rates for African Americans and for tellectual property appeared to have declined for a third
Hispanics stayed above the rate for whites, although the consecutive quarter. Nominal shipments of nondefense
differentials in jobless rates across the different groups capital goods excluding aircraft decreased in May and
were similar to those before the most recent recession. June, and orders for these goods also declined on bal-
A similar pattern among demographic groups held for a ance. However, recent readings from national and re-
broader measure of labor underutilization that also in- gional surveys of business conditions suggested some
cludes persons who were marginally attached to the la- pickup in business equipment spending in the near term.
bor force and those who were employed part time for Firms’ nominal spending for nonresidential structures
economic reasons. excluding drilling and mining declined in May. The
number of oil and gas rigs in operation, an indicator of
Total industrial production rose modestly, on net, in
spending for structures in the drilling and mining sector,
May and June, primarily reflecting an increase in the out-
fell through late May but edged up through mid-July.
put of utilities in June related to unseasonably warm
weather during that month. Manufacturing production Nominal outlays for defense through June pointed to a
was little changed, on balance, in May and June, and min- decline in real federal government purchases in the sec-
ing output edged up following a string of steep declines. ond quarter. Real state and local government purchases
Automakers’ assembly schedules pointed to an increase also appeared to have declined. Although payrolls for
in motor vehicle production during the third quarter, but state and local governments expanded over the quarter,
other indicators of manufacturing production, such as

--- Page 5 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_ g_ _o_f _J_u_ly_ 2_6_–_2_7_,_ 2_0_1_6_________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
nominal construction spending by these governments the Brexit vote, and corporate bond spreads declined on
declined noticeably in April and May. balance. Conditions in business and consumer credit
markets were about unchanged. The expected policy
The U.S. international trade deficit widened in May, as
path of the federal funds rate implied by market quotes
imports rose and exports declined slightly. The export
was little changed, on net, but fluctuated notably over
decline was led by decreased exports of capital goods
the intermeeting period.
and automotive products. For imports, increased im-
ports of industrial supplies and consumer goods more In the days immediately following the Brexit vote, asset
than offset decreased imports of capital goods. These prices were volatile, and some financial markets, partic-
recent indicators, combined with data from earlier in the ularly certain foreign exchange markets, experienced
year, suggested that net exports made a near-neutral con- brief periods of strained liquidity. Global stock indexes
tribution to the growth of real GDP in the first half of fell notably, credit spreads widened, and safe-haven as-
2016. sets appreciated substantially. However, broad-based
market dislocations did not develop, apparently because
Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE
market participants had prepared for a significant risk
price index, increased about 1 percent over the
event. Market analysts also pointed to the communica-
12 months ending in May, partly restrained by earlier de-
tions and actions by advanced-economy authorities both
clines in consumer energy prices. Core PCE price infla-
before and after the vote as helping to reassure investors.
tion, which excludes changes in food and energy prices,
Overall, negative sentiment surrounding the Brexit out-
was a little above 1½ percent over the same 12-month
come early in the intermeeting period was subsequently
period, held down in part by decreases in the prices of
alleviated by expectations for greater policy accommo-
non-energy imports over much of this period and the
dation in some AFEs, some resolution of near-term po-
pass-through of the declines in energy prices to the
litical uncertainty in the United Kingdom, and positive
prices of other goods and services. Over the 12 months
U.S. economic data releases. Nevertheless, several
ending in June, total consumer prices as measured by the
longer-term global risks related to Brexit remained.
consumer price index (CPI) rose 1 percent, while core
CPI inflation was about 2¼ percent. The Michigan sur- Federal Reserve communications released in conjunc-
vey measure of longer-run inflation expectations edged tion with the June FOMC meeting were interpreted by
up in June and was unchanged in early July. Other market participants as more accommodative than ex-
measures of longer-run inflation expectations—includ- pected. The expected path of the federal funds rate im-
ing those from the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and plied by market quotes declined in response to the re-
Survey of Market Participants—were generally little lease of forecasts collected for the June Summary of
changed, on balance, in recent months. Economic Projections, which showed larger-than-
expected downward revisions to projections of the fed-
The pace of foreign real GDP growth appeared to slow
eral funds rate. The expected policy path implied by
in the second quarter, driven in large part by temporary
market quotes fell further in the aftermath of the Brexit
factors such as wildfires in Canada and, to a lesser extent,
vote, but it later retraced most of the earlier declines,
by a deceleration of activity in the euro area. In the
supported by better-than-expected domestic data re-
emerging market economies (EMEs), a pickup in growth
leases—particularly the employment and retail sales re-
in China in the second quarter, supported by policy stim-
ports for June—as well as improved sentiment regarding
ulus, appeared to be more than offset by slower growth
the possible near-term implications of Brexit. The me-
in Latin America. In the United Kingdom, early indica-
dian respondents to the Desk’s Survey of Primary Deal-
tors following the June 23 referendum on exit from the
ers and Survey of Market Participants saw one rate hike
EU (“Brexit”) pointed to a slowdown in economic
in 2016 as most likely, the same as in the June surveys.
growth. Inflation in the AFEs picked up in the second
quarter, largely reflecting some increase in energy prices, The nominal Treasury yield curve flattened slightly, on
but generally remained low. Inflation also remained sub- net, over the intermeeting period. Longer-term nominal
dued in the EMEs. Treasury yields fell sharply in the two weeks following
the Brexit vote. Market participants attributed the de-
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
cline in Treasury yields to a variety of factors, including
Domestic financial conditions remained accommodative
expectations for a more accommodative stance of mon-
over the intermeeting period. Equity price indexes in-
etary policy by major central banks; an intensification of
creased, on net, despite an initial sharp decline following
demand for safe-haven assets immediately following the

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Brexit vote; and strong demand by global institutional some indicators suggested that the pace of deterioration
investors for higher-yielding U.S. fixed-income assets was subsiding. The net volume of bonds downgraded in
following decreases in sovereign yields in Europe and the second quarter was notably smaller than in the pre-
Japan, in some cases further into negative territory. vious quarter. Even so, default rates on bonds issued by
Most of the decline in nominal Treasury yields was re- nonfinancial corporations and expected year-ahead de-
versed later in the period. The small net decline in fault rates for nonfinancial firms both remained elevated
longer-term nominal Treasury yields over the period was relative to the ranges that typically prevail during expan-
attributable to a comparable drop in real yields, as sions.
longer-term inflation compensation measures based on
Financing conditions for commercial real estate (CRE)
Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities and inflation
stayed fairly accommodative, on balance, and bank lend-
swaps were little changed on net. Spreads of yields on
ing in all major CRE categories was strong through June.
agency mortgage-backed securities over yields on Treas-
Spreads on U.S. commercial mortgage-backed securities
ury securities narrowed slightly.
(CMBS) did not appear to have been affected by the
Broad stock price indexes increased, on net, over the in- Brexit vote. They remained elevated, however, a factor
termeeting period. One-month-ahead option-implied that likely contributed to depressed CMBS issuance so
volatility on the S&P 500 index—the VIX—fell, return- far this year. Meanwhile, CMBS delinquency rates edged
ing to the lower end of its distribution of the past few up for the third consecutive month. A significant net
years. U.S. bank stock prices dropped sharply after the fraction of respondents to the July SLOOS indicated
Brexit vote but then retraced that decrease, buoyed by that, during the second quarter, they had tightened their
better-than-expected earnings reports from some of the CRE lending standards for construction and land devel-
largest domestic banks. Declines in European bank opment loans and loans secured by multifamily residen-
stock prices following the Brexit vote also reversed later tial properties, and a moderate net fraction of respond-
in the intermeeting period. Spreads of yields on ents reported tightening their lending standards for loans
investment-grade corporate bonds over those on secured by nonfarm nonresidential properties.
comparable-maturity Treasury securities ended the pe-
Credit conditions in municipal bond markets remained
riod somewhat lower, on net, and spreads on
solid. Gross issuance of municipal bonds in June was
speculative-grade corporate bonds declined notably.
strong, credit quality continued to be stable overall, and
Near-term forward spreads on speculative-grade issues
the ratio of yields on general obligation bonds to those
dropped substantially more than their far-term forward
on comparable-maturity Treasury securities was little
counterparts, suggesting that the overall decline in
changed on net. The default by Puerto Rico and the
speculative-grade spreads was due in part to a less nega-
downgrade of the general obligation bonds of Illinois
tive credit outlook and not just an increase in investors’
both appeared to have only a limited effect on the
risk appetite.
broader municipal bond market.
Overall financing conditions for nonfinancial firms re-
Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market
mained accommodative. Gross issuance of corporate
became more accommodative, on balance, since the
bonds stayed robust in June, particularly in the
June FOMC meeting. Interest rates on 30-year fixed-
investment-grade sector. Issuance slowed significantly
rate mortgages decreased further, partly reflecting the
in early July for both investment- and speculative-grade
declines in yields on Treasury securities. A number of
bonds, in part reflecting seasonal factors. The growth of
large banks noted in the July SLOOS an easing of stand-
commercial and industrial (C&I) lending on banks’
ards for home-purchase loans eligible for purchase by
books slowed in June, but expansion of such loans con-
the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs). Banks
tinued through early July. This pattern was consistent
also reported a broad-based pickup in demand across
with the responses to the July 2016 Senior Loan Officer
most major categories of home-purchase loans. Indica-
Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), in
tors suggested a pickup in refinancing activity in re-
which modest net fractions of respondents indicated
sponse to the drop in mortgage rates.
that they had tightened their C&I lending standards and
experienced weaker demand for such loans during the Financing conditions in consumer credit markets were
second quarter. little changed and remained largely accommodative
against a backdrop of stable credit performance across
On balance, the credit quality of nonfinancial corpora-
debt categories. Growth of auto loans remained robust
tions continued to weaken in recent months, although

--- Page 7 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_ g_ _o_f _J_u_ly_ 2_6_–_2_7_,_ 2_0_1_6_________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
even though a modest net fraction of respondents to the in the previous assessment. Although upcoming regula-
July SLOOS indicated that they had tightened their tory changes were expected to improve the stability of
standards for such loans. Credit card balances continued money market funds in the longer run, the staff noted
to grow moderately on balance. Yield spreads for secu- the potential for large withdrawals by investors in antic-
rities backed by credit card and auto loans over Treasury ipation of those changes to lead to some disruptions in
securities remained largely stable, and market partici- the short run. Vulnerabilities emanating from leverage
pants reportedly expected asset-backed security issuance in the nonfinancial private sector remained moderate:
to pick up in the coming weeks. While business debt ratios stayed elevated, household
debt-to-income ratios continued to inch down. Valua-
As in the United States, global financial market develop-
tion pressures also remained at a moderate level. Al-
ments during the intermeeting period were driven, in
though term premiums on Treasury securities became
large part, by reactions to the U.K. referendum on EU
more deeply negative and CRE valuation pressures re-
membership on June 23 and to the release of U.S. eco-
mained appreciable, corporate bond and equity risk pre-
nomic data. Immediately after the Brexit vote, the Brit-
miums were unchanged on net.
ish pound depreciated sharply against other major cur-
rencies, while the U.S. dollar and the Japanese yen Staff Economic Outlook
strengthened on what appeared to be safe-haven flows. In the U.S. economic projection prepared by the staff
Prices of risky assets and advanced-economy bond yields for the July FOMC meeting, real GDP growth was esti-
also fell in response to the heightened uncertainty and mated to have picked up in the second quarter, con-
expectations of slower economic growth. Later in the sistent with the forecast in June. However, the projected
period, however, investors’ concerns eased substantially step-up in real GDP growth over the second half of this
on the resolution of some of the near-term political un- year was marked down a little, partly reflecting softer
certainty in the United Kingdom, increased expectations news on construction. The forecast for real GDP
for additional policy stimulus in Europe and Japan, and growth in 2017 and 2018 was little revised, as the posi-
U.S. data on employment and retail sales in June that ex- tive effects of a slightly lower assumed path for interest
ceeded market expectations. Some AFE sovereign rates and a stronger trajectory for household wealth were
yields recovered partially from their post-Brexit lows, mostly offset by the restraint from a weaker outlook for
but U.K. long-term yields remained low on expectations foreign GDP growth and a slightly stronger path for the
of slower growth there and further monetary policy ac- foreign exchange value of the dollar. The staff contin-
commodation. Global equity indexes ended higher, on ued to forecast that real GDP would expand at a mod-
net, over the intermeeting period. However, European estly faster pace than potential output in 2016 through
bank equities, especially those of Italian banks, under- 2018, supported primarily by increases in consumer
performed, reflecting investor fears that lower interest spending and, to a lesser degree, by a projected pickup
rates will continue to weigh on profitability. Emerging in business and residential investment. The unemploy-
market asset prices were generally resilient over the in- ment rate was expected to remain flat over the second
termeeting period; the dollar was weaker against most half of this year and then to gradually decline through
emerging market currencies, and flows into emerging the end of 2018. Over this period, the unemployment
market assets surged. Although the Chinese renminbi rate was projected to run somewhat below the staff’s es-
depreciated against both the U.S. dollar and the broader timate of its longer-run natural rate.
currency basket referenced by the Chinese government,
The staff’s forecast for consumer price inflation over the
this development elicited little market reaction. The un-
second half of 2016 was a little lower than in the previ-
successful coup attempt in Turkey on July 15 left little
ous projection, as recent declines in crude oil prices were
imprint on global financial markets.
expected to hold down consumer energy prices. There-
In its latest report on potential risks to the stability of the after, the forecast for inflation was essentially unrevised.
U.S. financial system, the staff continued to judge that The staff continued to project that inflation would in-
vulnerabilities overall remained at a moderate level and crease over the next several years, as energy prices and
noted that the financial system had been resilient to the the prices of non-energy imports were expected to begin
Brexit vote. While vulnerabilities stemming from steadily rising this year and as resource utilization was
financial-sector leverage were assessed as still low, those expected to tighten further. However, inflation was still
from maturity and liquidity transformation were judged projected to be slightly below the Committee’s longer-
by the staff to be somewhat higher in the near term than run objective of 2 percent in 2018.

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
The staff viewed the uncertainty around its July projec- clines in energy and import prices dissipated and the la-
tions for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and bor market strengthened further. Participants viewed
inflation as similar to the average of the past 20 years. the near-term risks to the U.S. economic outlook as hav-
The risks to the forecast for real GDP were seen as tilted ing diminished. However, some noted that the Brexit
to the downside, reflecting the staff’s assessment that vote had created uncertainty about the medium- to
both monetary and fiscal policy appeared to be better longer-run outlook for foreign economies that could af-
positioned to offset large positive shocks than adverse fect economic and financial conditions in the United
ones. In addition, the staff continued to see the risks to States. Participants generally agreed that the Committee
the forecast from developments abroad as skewed to the should continue to closely monitor inflation indicators
downside. Consistent with the downside risks to aggre- and global economic and financial developments.
gate demand, the staff viewed the risks to its outlook for
Growth in consumer spending was estimated to have re-
the unemployment rate as tilted to the upside. The risks
bounded in the second quarter from the slow pace in the
to the projection for inflation were still judged as
first quarter, as monthly gains in retail sales were strong
weighted to the downside, reflecting the possibility that
through June. Sales of new motor vehicles remained at
longer-term inflation expectations may have edged
a high level, on average, in the second quarter, although
lower.
sales appeared to be supported by substantial incentives
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the for consumers and by business fleet purchases. With the
Economic Outlook second-quarter pickup in spending, real PCE appeared
In their discussion of the economic situation and the to have risen over the first half of the year at a rate con-
outlook, meeting participants agreed that the infor- sistent with the positive trends in fundamental determi-
mation received over the intermeeting period indicated nants of household spending. Participants cited a num-
that the labor market had strengthened and that eco- ber of factors that had likely been supporting household
nomic activity had been expanding at a moderate rate. spending, including solid real income growth, gains in
Job gains were strong in June following weak growth in house and equity values, low gasoline prices, and favor-
May. On balance, payrolls and other labor market indi- able levels of consumer confidence.
cators pointed to some increase in labor utilization in re-
Residential investment posted a strong increase in the
cent months. Household spending had been growing
first quarter of the year, but data on starts of new single-
strongly, but business fixed investment had been soft.
family homes indicated that outlays likely edged down in
Inflation had continued to run below the Committee’s
the second quarter. Data on permit issuance through
2 percent longer-run objective, partly reflecting earlier
June suggested that new-home building activity might
declines in energy prices and in prices of non-energy im-
rise only slowly in the near term. However, participants
ports. Market-based measures of inflation compensa-
commented on a number of factors suggesting that the
tion remained low; most survey-based measures of
housing sector was likely to continue to improve, albeit
longer-run inflation expectations were little changed, on
gradually: Rising sales of existing homes, responses to
balance, in recent months. Domestic and global asset
the July SLOOS pointing to stronger demand for resi-
prices were volatile early in the intermeeting period fol-
dential mortgage loans, and the steady increase in house
lowing the vote by the United Kingdom to leave the EU,
prices were seen as evidence of rising demand. In addi-
but they subsequently recovered their earlier declines,
tion, credit conditions remained favorable: Mortgage
and, on net, U.S. financial conditions eased over the in-
rates had fallen further, and the SLOOS reported easier
termeeting period.
terms for loans eligible for purchase by the GSEs.
Participants generally indicated that their economic fore- Moreover, several participants noted positive reports on
casts had changed little over the intermeeting period. residential construction activity from business contacts
They continued to anticipate that, with gradual adjust- in their Districts, with a few suggesting that shortages of
ments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activ- lots and skilled labor, rather than low demand, might be
ity would expand at a moderate pace and labor market contributing to the recent slowing.
indicators would strengthen. Inflation was expected to
Business fixed investment appeared to have declined
remain low in the near term, in part because of earlier
further during the second quarter, with broad-based
declines in energy prices, but to rise to 2 percent over
weakness in equipment and another steep drop in drill-
the medium term as the transitory effects of past de-
ing and mining structures. Participants noted that the

--- Page 9 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_ g_ _o_f _J_u_ly_ 2_6_–_2_7_,_ 2_0_1_6_________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
recent rise in energy prices had spurred an uptick in drill- more than reversed its increase in May, and the broader
ing activity, suggesting that if energy prices firm over U-6 measure of labor underutilization continued to
time as expected, the drag on investment from declining move down. Some participants noted that recent signs
energy-sector activity should diminish. In addition, it of a moderate step-up in wage increases provided further
was pointed out that the upward trend in investment in evidence of improving labor market conditions. Al-
intellectual property products was a positive in the out- though most participants judged that labor market con-
look for investment. Several participants commented on ditions were at or approaching those consistent with
favorable reports from their business contacts on com- maximum employment, their views on the implications
mercial construction. Based on conversations with their for progress on the Committee’s policy objectives var-
contacts, participants discussed a number of factors that ied. Some of them believed that a convergence to a
may have been contributing to businesses’ cautious ap- more moderate, sustainable pace of job gains would
proach to investment spending, including concern about soon be necessary to prevent an unwanted increase in
the likelihood of an extended period of slow economic inflationary pressures. Other participants continued to
growth, both in the United States and abroad; narrowing judge that labor utilization remained below that con-
profit margins; and uncertainty about prospects for gov- sistent with the Committee’s maximum-employment
ernment policies. objective. These participants noted that progress in re-
ducing slack in the labor market had slowed, citing rela-
In their discussion of business conditions in their Dis-
tively little change, on net, since the beginning of the year
tricts, many participants reported that their contacts an-
in the unemployment rate, the number of persons work-
ticipated that the U.K. referendum would have little ef-
ing part time for economic reasons, the employment-to-
fect on their businesses. Activity in the manufacturing
population ratio, labor force participation, or rates of job
sector continued to be mixed: Several participants indi-
openings and quits.
cated that manufacturing in their Districts was still quite
weak, while several others reported that their Banks’ Available information on inflation suggested that the
June surveys showed that manufacturing activity had change in headline PCE prices for the 12 months ending
picked up or stabilized. The available surveys indicated in June continued to run well below the Committee’s
that service-sector activity continued to expand. How- longer-run objective and that the 12-month change in
ever, economic activity continued to be depressed in ar- core PCE prices likely remained near its May level of
eas affected by the downturn in the energy sector and 1.6 percent. On a 12-month-change basis, core PCE in-
falling agricultural commodity prices, although several flation had risen from 1.3 percent a year earlier, but it
participants noted that the recent firming in crude oil continued to be held down by the pass-through of earlier
prices had led to a modest increase in drilling activity. declines in energy prices and by soft prices of imports.
Businesses in the energy industry were reported to be Core PCE inflation over the first half of 2016 was ex-
highly leveraged, and additional restructurings and bank- pected to have been close to an annual rate of 2 percent,
ruptcies were seen as likely. Farm loans continued to but it was noted that some of the increase likely reflected
increase, and banks had seen some rise in delinquencies transitory effects that would be in part reversed during
on such credits. the second half of the year. Longer-run inflation expec-
tations, as reported in the Michigan survey, were little
The labor market report for June appeared to confirm
changed in June and early July. The reading from the
participants’ earlier assessments that the small gain in
Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of Con-
payroll employment in May likely had substantially un-
sumer Expectations for inflation three years ahead
derstated its underlying pace. The sharp rebound in pay-
moved up further in June, returning to near its level of a
roll employment gains put the average monthly increase
year earlier. Most market-based measures of longer-run
in jobs over the three months ending in June at about
inflation compensation remained low.
150,000. Although this pace was noticeably slower than
the average rate during 2015 and the first quarter of Participants also discussed recent developments in fi-
2016, many participants viewed it as consistent with con- nancial markets and issues related to financial stability.
tinued strengthening in labor market conditions and The vote by the United Kingdom to leave the EU led to
with a further gradual decline in the unemployment rate. sharp declines in risk asset prices and a spike in volatility
The unemployment rate rose in June after having de- in financial markets early in the intermeeting period. But
clined in May, but the labor force participation rate those price moves were subsequently reversed, likely in
ticked up, the rate of involuntary part-time employment

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
response to expectations for policy actions by some ma- job gains in June had alleviated two key uncertainties
jor central banks, the resolution of some of the political about the outlook that they had faced at the June meet-
uncertainty in the United Kingdom, and better-than- ing. Brexit now appeared likely to have little effect on
expected data on U.S. economic activity. Financial mar- the U.S. economic outlook in the near term. Moreover,
kets and institutions were generally resilient in the after- the employment report for June, along with other recent
math of the vote, apparently reflecting in part advance information that suggested that real GDP rose at a mod-
preparations by key market participants and communi- erate rate in the second quarter, provided some reassur-
cations from advanced-economy central banks before ance that a sharp slowdown in employment and eco-
and after the vote that they would take the steps neces- nomic activity was not under way. Participants judged
sary to provide liquidity to support the orderly function- that the incoming information, on the whole, had low-
ing of markets. Overall, U.S. financial conditions eased ered the downside risks to the near-term economic out-
during the intermeeting period: Major equity indexes look. Most participants anticipated that economic
rose, longer-term interest rates fell, credit spreads nar- growth would move up to a rate somewhat above its
rowed, and the broad index of the foreign exchange longer-run trend during the second half of 2016 and that
value of the dollar was little changed. the labor market would strengthen further. However,
several noted that while the outlook for consumer
In the discussion of developments related to financial
spending remained positive, continued weakness in busi-
stability, it was noted that while the capital and liquidity
ness investment and the possibility of slower improve-
positions of U.S. banks remained strong, European
ment in the housing sector posed some downside risks
banks, particularly Italian banks, were under pressure—
to their forecasts.
as evidenced by the sharp declines in their equity
prices—from a weaker economic outlook for that re- Although the near-term risks to the outlook associated
gion, thin interest margins, and concerns about the qual- with Brexit had diminished over the intermeeting period,
ity of their loan portfolios. In U.S. markets, overall fi- participants generally agreed that they should continue
nancial vulnerabilities were judged to remain moderate, to closely monitor economic and financial developments
as nonfinancial debt had continued to increase roughly abroad. As a consequence of Brexit, economic growth
in line with nominal GDP and valuation pressures were in the United Kingdom and, to a lesser extent, in the
not widespread. However, during the discussion, several euro area would likely be slower than previously antici-
participants commented on a few developments, includ- pated. Moreover, the exit process was expected to entail
ing potential overvaluation in the market for CRE, the an extended period of negotiations that, in the view of
elevated level of equity values relative to expected earn- most participants, had the potential to increase the po-
ings, and the incentives for investors to reach for yield litical and economic uncertainties in that region; several
in an environment of continued low interest rates. Re- also saw the possibility that complications during the exit
garding CRE, it was noted that the recent SLOOS re- process could result in spells of elevated volatility in
ported that a significant fraction of banks tightened global financial markets. Some participants noted that
lending standards in the first and second quarters of the the weak capital positions and high levels of nonper-
year and that overvaluation did not appear to be wide- forming loans at some European banks could also weigh
spread across markets. It was also pointed out that in- on economic growth in the region. In addition to the
vestors potentially were becoming more comfortable situation in Europe, some participants continued to see
locking in current yields in an environment in which low a number of other downside risks to the medium-term
interest rates were expected to persist, rather than engag- economic and financial outlook from abroad, including
ing in the type of speculative behavior that could pose weakness in the global economy more broadly, uncer-
financial stability concerns. tainty about the outlook for China’s foreign exchange
policy, and the implications of China’s run-up in debt to
Participants discussed the implications of recent eco-
support its economy. A few others noted uncertainty
nomic and financial developments for the economic out-
about the strength of domestic economic activity going
look and the risks attending the outlook. They indicated
forward. However, some other participants indicated
that their forecasts for economic growth, the labor mar-
that they did not view the uncertainties attending the
ket, and inflation had changed little over the intermeet-
outlook to be unusually elevated and continued to see
ing period. Regarding the near-term outlook, partici-
the risks to their economic forecasts as balanced.
pants generally agreed that the prompt recovery in finan-
cial markets following the Brexit vote and the pickup in

--- Page 11 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_ g_ _o_f _J_u_ly_ 2_6_–_2_7_,_ 2_0_1_6________________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
In discussing the outlook for the labor market, most par- it was appropriate to wait for additional information that
ticipants viewed some further strengthening in labor would allow them to evaluate the underlying momentum
market indicators as consistent with achieving the Com- in economic activity and the labor market and whether
mittee’s maximum-employment objective. With infla- inflation was continuing to rise gradually to 2 percent as
tion still below the Committee’s longer-run objective expected. Several suggested that the Committee would
and likely to continue to respond only slowly to some- likely have ample time to react if inflation rose more
what tighter labor markets, most also saw relatively low quickly than they currently anticipated, and they pre-
risk that a further gradual strengthening of the labor ferred to defer another increase in the federal funds rate
market would generate an unwanted increase in infla- until they were more confident that inflation was moving
tionary pressures. Nevertheless, a few participants con- closer to 2 percent on a sustained basis. In addition, al-
tinued to caution about the risks to the inflation outlook though near-term downside risks to the outlook had di-
from overshooting the natural rate of unemployment. minished over the intermeeting period, some partici-
Some indicated that a step-down in monthly job gains pants stressed that the Committee needed to consider
seemed appropriate as labor market conditions ap- the constraints on the conduct of monetary policy asso-
proached those consistent with the Committee’s ciated with proximity to the effective lower bound on
maximum-employment objective and that a more mod- short-term interest rates. These participants concluded
erate pace of hiring could still be consistent with further that the Committee should wait to take another step in
increases in labor utilization. However, several others removing accommodation until the data on economic
were concerned that if labor market slack diminished activity provided a greater level of confidence that eco-
more slowly than they had previously anticipated, pro- nomic growth was strong enough to withstand a possi-
gress on the Committee’s maximum-employment and ble downward shock to demand. However, some other
inflation objectives could be delayed. participants viewed recent economic developments as
indicating that labor market conditions were at or close
Regarding the outlook for inflation, incoming infor-
to those consistent with maximum employment and ex-
mation appeared to be broadly in line with most partici-
pected that the recent progress in reaching the Commit-
pants’ earlier expectations that inflation would gradually
tee’s inflation objective would continue, even with fur-
rise to 2 percent over the medium term. Most noted that
ther steps to gradually remove monetary policy accom-
the firming in various indicators of core inflation over
modation. Given their economic outlook, they judged
the past year, together with signs that the direct and in-
that another increase in the federal funds rate was or
direct effects of earlier declines in energy prices and
would soon be warranted, with a couple of them advo-
prices of non-oil imports had begun to fade, provided
cating an increase at this meeting. A few participants
support for their forecasts. Several added that recent in-
pointed out that various benchmarks for assessing the
dications of a pickup in wage increases were evidence of
appropriate stance of monetary policy supported taking
the effect of tightening resource utilization. However,
another step in removing policy accommodation. A few
other participants expressed greater uncertainty about
also emphasized the risk to the economic expansion that
the trajectory of inflation. They saw little evidence that
would be associated with allowing labor market condi-
inflation was responding much to higher levels of re-
tions to tighten to an extent that could lead to an un-
source utilization and suggested that the natural rate of
wanted buildup of inflation pressures and thus eventu-
unemployment, and the responsiveness of inflation to
ally require a rapid increase in the federal funds rate. In
labor market conditions, may be lower than most current
addition, several expressed concern that an extended pe-
estimates. Several viewed the risks to their inflation
riod of low interest rates risked intensifying incentives
forecasts as weighted to the downside, particularly in
for investors to reach for yield and could lead to the mis-
light of the still-low level of measures of longer-run in-
allocation of capital and mispricing of risk, with possible
flation expectations and inflation compensation and the
adverse consequences for financial stability.
likelihood that disinflationary pressures from abroad
would persist. Committee Policy Action
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
Against the backdrop of their views of the economic
ahead, members judged that the information received
outlook, participants discussed the conditions that could
since the Committee met in June indicated that the labor
warrant taking another step in removing monetary policy
market had strengthened and that economic activity had
accommodation. With inflation continuing to run below
been expanding at a moderate rate. They noted that the
the Committee’s 2 percent objective, many judged that
most recent employment report showed that job gains

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
had been strong in June following weak growth in May, While members judged that near-term risks to the do-
and, on balance, payrolls and other labor market indica- mestic outlook had diminished, some noted that the
tors pointed to some increase in labor utilization in re- U.K. vote, along with other developments abroad, still
cent months. Members agreed that household spending imparted significant uncertainty to the medium- to
had been growing strongly but business fixed investment longer-term outlook for foreign economies, with possi-
had been soft. Inflation continued to run below the ble consequences for the U.S. outlook. As a result,
Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective, partly re- members agreed to indicate that they would continue to
flecting earlier declines in energy prices and in prices of closely monitor global economic and financial develop-
non-energy imports. Market-based measures of infla- ments.
tion compensation remained low over the intermeeting
Members continued to expect inflation to remain low in
period, and most survey-based measures of longer-term
the near term, in part because of earlier declines in en-
inflation expectations were, on balance, little changed.
ergy prices, but most anticipated that inflation would rise
With respect to the economic outlook and its implica- to 2 percent over the medium term as the transitory ef-
tions for monetary policy, members continued to expect fects of past declines in energy and import prices dissi-
that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary pated and the labor market strengthened further. None-
policy, economic activity would expand at a moderate theless, in light of the current shortfall of inflation from
pace and labor market indicators would strengthen. 2 percent, members agreed that they would continue to
Members saw developments during the intermeeting pe- carefully monitor actual and expected progress toward
riod as reducing near-term uncertainty along two dimen- the Committee’s inflation goal.
sions discussed at the June meeting. The first was about
After assessing the outlook for economic activity, the la-
the outlook for the labor market. They agreed that the
bor market, and inflation, as well as the risks around that
strong rebound in job gains in June—together with a rise
outlook, members decided to maintain the target range
in the labor force participation rate and a decline in the
for the federal funds rate at ¼ to ½ percent at this meet-
number of individuals who were working part time for
ing. Members generally agreed that, before taking an-
economic reasons—suggested that, despite the very soft
other step in removing monetary accommodation, it was
employment report for May, labor market conditions re-
prudent to accumulate more data in order to gauge the
mained solid and slack had continued to diminish. Many
underlying momentum in the labor market and eco-
members commented on the somewhat slower average
nomic activity. A couple of members preferred also to
pace of improvement in labor market conditions in re-
wait for more evidence that inflation would rise to 2 per-
cent months. Several of these members observed that
cent on a sustained basis. Some other members antici-
the recent pace of job gains remained well above that
pated that economic conditions would soon warrant tak-
consistent with stable rates of labor utilization. A couple
ing another step in removing policy accommodation.
of members indicated that, in light of their judgment that
One member preferred to raise the target range for the
labor market conditions were at or close to the Commit-
federal funds rate at the current meeting, citing the eas-
tee’s objectives, some moderation in employment gains
ing of financial conditions since the U.K. referendum,
was to be expected. In contrast, several other members
the return to trend economic growth, solid job growth,
expressed concern about the likelihood of a further re-
and inflation moving toward 2 percent.
duction in the pace of job gains, and it was noted that if
that slowing turned out to be persistent, the case for in- Members again agreed that, in determining the timing
creasing the target range for the federal funds rate in the and size of future adjustments to the target range for the
near term would be less compelling. federal funds rate, the Committee would assess realized
and expected economic conditions relative to its objec-
A second source of near-term uncertainty that members
tives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.
had discussed at the June meeting pertained to the po-
They noted that this assessment would take into account
tential economic and financial market consequences of
a wide range of information, including measures of labor
the U.K. referendum on membership in the EU. At the
market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and
current meeting, most members pointed to the quick re-
inflation expectations, and readings on financial and in-
covery of financial market conditions since the “leave”
ternational developments. The Committee expected
vote as an encouraging sign of resilience in global finan-
that economic conditions would evolve in a manner that
cial markets that helped reduce near-term uncertainty
would warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds
about the outlook for the U.S. economy.
rate, and that the federal funds rate was likely to remain,

--- Page 13 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_ g_ _o_f _J_u_ly_ 2_6_–_2_7_,_ 2_0_1_6________________________P__ag_e_ _1_3
for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail backed securities in agency mortgage-backed se-
in the longer run. However, members emphasized that curities. The Committee also directs the Desk
the actual path of the federal funds rate would depend to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap trans-
on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. actions as necessary to facilitate settlement of
In that regard, members judged it appropriate to con- the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed
tinue to leave their policy options open and maintain the securities transactions.”
flexibility to adjust the stance of policy based on incom-
The vote also encompassed approval of the statement
ing information and its implications for the Committee’s
below to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
assessment of the outlook for economic activity, the la-
bor market, and inflation, as well as the risks to the out- “Information received since the Federal Open
look. Most members noted that effective communica- Market Committee met in June indicates that
tions from the Committee would help the public under- the labor market strengthened and that eco-
stand how monetary policy might respond to incoming nomic activity has been expanding at a moder-
data and developments. ate rate. Job gains were strong in June following
weak growth in May. On balance, payrolls and
The Committee also decided to maintain its existing pol-
other labor market indicators point to some in-
icy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings
crease in labor utilization in recent months.
of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in
Household spending has been growing strongly
agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over
but business fixed investment has been soft. In-
maturing Treasury securities at auction, and it antici-
flation has continued to run below the Commit-
pated doing so until normalization of the level of the
tee’s 2 percent longer-run objective, partly re-
federal funds rate is well under way. Members noted
flecting earlier declines in energy prices and in
that this policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of
prices of non-energy imports. Market-based
longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help main-
measures of inflation compensation remain low;
tain accommodative financial conditions.
most survey-based measures of longer-term in-
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee flation expectations are little changed, on bal-
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank ance, in recent months.
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
cute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the
mittee seeks to foster maximum employment
following domestic policy directive, to be released at
and price stability. The Committee currently ex-
2:00 p.m.:
pects that, with gradual adjustments in the
“Effective July 28, 2016, the Federal Open stance of monetary policy, economic activity
Market Committee directs the Desk to will expand at a moderate pace and labor market
undertake open market operations as necessary indicators will strengthen. Inflation is expected
to maintain the federal funds rate in a target to remain low in the near term, in part because
range of ¼ to ½ percent, including overnight of earlier declines in energy prices, but to rise to
reverse repurchase operations (and reverse 2 percent over the medium term as the transi-
repurchase operations with maturities of more tory effects of past declines in energy and im-
than one day when necessary to accommodate port prices dissipate and the labor market
weekend, holiday, or similar trading strengthens further. Near-term risks to the eco-
conventions) at an offering rate of 0.25 percent, nomic outlook have diminished. The Commit-
in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury tee continues to closely monitor inflation indi-
securities held outright in the System Open cators and global economic and financial devel-
Market Account that are available for such opments.
operations and by a per-counterparty limit of
Against this backdrop, the Committee decided
$30 billion per day.
to maintain the target range for the federal
The Committee directs the Desk to continue funds rate at ¼ to ½ percent. The stance of
rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auc- monetary policy remains accommodative,
tion and to continue reinvesting principal pay-
ments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-

--- Page 14 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_4____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
thereby supporting further improvement in la- rate was appropriate at this meeting. Information avail-
bor market conditions and a return to 2 percent able since the June FOMC meeting showed solid em-
inflation. ployment growth, economic growth near its trend, and
inflation outcomes aligning with the Committee’s objec-
In determining the timing and size of future ad-
tive. Domestic financial conditions had eased since the
justments to the target range for the federal
U.K. referendum. She believed that monetary policy
funds rate, the Committee will assess realized
should respond to these developments by gradually re-
and expected economic conditions relative to its
moving accommodation, consistent with the prescrip-
objectives of maximum employment and 2 per-
tions of several frameworks for assessing the appropri-
cent inflation. This assessment will take into ac-
ate stance of monetary policy. She believed that by wait-
count a wide range of information, including
ing longer to adjust the policy stance and deviating from
measures of labor market conditions, indicators
the appropriate path to policy normalization, the Com-
of inflation pressures and inflation expectations,
mittee risked eroding the credibility of its policy commu-
and readings on financial and international de-
nications.
velopments. In light of the current shortfall of
inflation from 2 percent, the Committee will Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the
carefully monitor actual and expected progress target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the
toward its inflation goal. The Committee ex- Board of Governors took no action to change the
pects that economic conditions will evolve in a interest rates on reserves or discount rates.
manner that will warrant only gradual increases
Secretary’s note: The following statement
in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate
regarding the June 14–15, 2016, FOMC meeting
is likely to remain, for some time, below levels
was inadvertently omitted from minutes of that
that are expected to prevail in the longer run.
meeting: “Consistent with the Committee’s
However, the actual path of the federal funds
decision to leave the target range for the federal
rate will depend on the economic outlook as in-
funds rate unchanged, the Board of Governors
formed by incoming data.
took no action to change the interest rates on
The Committee is maintaining its existing policy reserves or discount rates.”
of reinvesting principal payments from its hold-
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
ings of agency debt and agency mortgage-
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, Septem-
backed securities in agency mortgage-backed se-
ber 20–21, 2016. The meeting adjourned at 10:30 a.m.
curities and of rolling over maturing Treasury
on July 27, 2016.
securities at auction, and it anticipates doing so
until normalization of the level of the federal Notation Vote
funds rate is well under way. This policy, by By notation vote completed on July 5, 2016, the
keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer- Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
term securities at sizable levels, should help Committee meeting held on June 14–15, 2016.
maintain accommodative financial conditions.”
Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C.
Dudley, Lael Brainard, James Bullard, Stanley Fischer,
Loretta J. Mester, Jerome H. Powell, Eric Rosengren, _____________________________
and Daniel K. Tarullo. Brian F. Madigan
Secretary
Voting against this action: Esther L. George.
Ms. George dissented because she believed that a 25 ba-
sis point increase in the target range for the federal funds

# Tables

## Page_11_Table_1


| In their discussion of monetary policy for the period    |
|----------------------------------------------------------|
| ahead, members judged that the information received      |
| since the Committee met in June indicated that the labor |
| market had strengthened and that economic activity had   |
| been expanding at a moderate rate. They noted that the   |
| most recent employment report showed that job gains      |


## Page_12_Table_1


| had been strong in June following weak growth in May,       |
|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| and, on balance, payrolls and other labor market indica-    |
| tors pointed to some increase in labor utilization in re-   |
| cent months. Members agreed that household spending         |
| had been growing strongly but business fixed investment     |
| had been soft. Inflation continued to run below the         |
| Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective, partly re-      |
| flecting earlier declines in energy prices and in prices of |
| non-energy imports. Market-based measures of infla-         |
| tion compensation remained low over the intermeeting        |
| period, and most survey-based measures of longer-term       |
| inflation expectations were, on balance, little changed.    |
| With respect to the economic outlook and its implica-       |
| tions for monetary policy, members continued to expect      |
| that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary    |
| policy, economic activity would expand at a moderate        |
| pace and labor market indicators would strengthen.          |
| Members saw developments during the intermeeting pe-        |
| riod as reducing near-term uncertainty along two dimen-     |
| sions discussed at the June meeting. The first was about    |
| the outlook for the labor market. They agreed that the      |
| strong rebound in job gains in June—together with a rise    |
| in the labor force participation rate and a decline in the  |
| number of individuals who were working part time for        |
| economic reasons—suggested that, despite the very soft      |
| employment report for May, labor market conditions re-      |
| mained solid and slack had continued to diminish. Many      |
| members commented on the somewhat slower average            |
| pace of improvement in labor market conditions in re-       |
| cent months. Several of these members observed that         |
| the recent pace of job gains remained well above that       |
| consistent with stable rates of labor utilization. A couple |
| of members indicated that, in light of their judgment that  |
| labor market conditions were at or close to the Commit-     |
| tee’s objectives, some moderation in employment gains       |
| was to be expected. In contrast, several other members      |
| expressed concern about the likelihood of a further re-     |
| duction in the pace of job gains, and it was noted that if  |
| that slowing turned out to be persistent, the case for in-  |
| creasing the target range for the federal funds rate in the |
| near term would be less compelling.                         |
| A second source of near-term uncertainty that members       |
| had discussed at the June meeting pertained to the po-      |
| tential economic and financial market consequences of       |
| the U.K. referendum on membership in the EU. At the         |
| current meeting, most members pointed to the quick re-      |
| covery of financial market conditions since the “leave”     |
| vote as an encouraging sign of resilience in global finan-  |
| cial markets that helped reduce near-term uncertainty       |
| about the outlook for the U.S. economy.                     |


## Page_12_Table_2


| While members judged that near-term risks to the do-         |
|--------------------------------------------------------------|
| mestic outlook had diminished, some noted that the           |
| U.K. vote, along with other developments abroad, still       |
| imparted significant uncertainty to the medium- to           |
| longer-term outlook for foreign economies, with possi-       |
| ble consequences for the U.S. outlook. As a result,          |
| members agreed to indicate that they would continue to       |
| closely monitor global economic and financial develop-       |
| ments.                                                       |
| Members continued to expect inflation to remain low in       |
| the near term, in part because of earlier declines in en-    |
| ergy prices, but most anticipated that inflation would rise  |
| to 2 percent over the medium term as the transitory ef-      |
| fects of past declines in energy and import prices dissi-    |
| pated and the labor market strengthened further. None-       |
| theless, in light of the current shortfall of inflation from |
| 2 percent, members agreed that they would continue to        |
| carefully monitor actual and expected progress toward        |
| the Committee’s inflation goal.                              |
| After assessing the outlook for economic activity, the la-   |
| bor market, and inflation, as well as the risks around that  |
| outlook, members decided to maintain the target range        |
| for the federal funds rate at ¼ to ½ percent at this meet-   |
| ing. Members generally agreed that, before taking an-        |
| other step in removing monetary accommodation, it was        |
| prudent to accumulate more data in order to gauge the        |
| underlying momentum in the labor market and eco-             |
| nomic activity. A couple of members preferred also to        |
| wait for more evidence that inflation would rise to 2 per-   |
| cent on a sustained basis. Some other members antici-        |
| pated that economic conditions would soon warrant tak-       |
| ing another step in removing policy accommodation.           |
| One member preferred to raise the target range for the       |
| federal funds rate at the current meeting, citing the eas-   |
| ing of financial conditions since the U.K. referendum,       |
| the return to trend economic growth, solid job growth,       |
| and inflation moving toward 2 percent.                       |
| Members again agreed that, in determining the timing         |
| and size of future adjustments to the target range for the   |
| federal funds rate, the Committee would assess realized      |
| and expected economic conditions relative to its objec-      |
| tives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.         |
| They noted that this assessment would take into account      |
| a wide range of information, including measures of labor     |
| market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and     |
| inflation expectations, and readings on financial and in-    |
| ternational developments. The Committee expected             |
| that economic conditions would evolve in a manner that       |
| would warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds    |
| rate, and that the federal funds rate was likely to remain,  |


## Page_13_Table_1


| for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail    |
|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| in the longer run. However, members emphasized that         |
| the actual path of the federal funds rate would depend      |
| on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data.       |
| In that regard, members judged it appropriate to con-       |
| tinue to leave their policy options open and maintain the   |
| flexibility to adjust the stance of policy based on incom-  |
| ing information and its implications for the Committee’s    |
| assessment of the outlook for economic activity, the la-    |
| bor market, and inflation, as well as the risks to the out- |
| look. Most members noted that effective communica-          |
| tions from the Committee would help the public under-       |
| stand how monetary policy might respond to incoming         |
| data and developments.                                      |
| The Committee also decided to maintain its existing pol-    |
| icy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings     |
| of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in     |
| agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over       |
| maturing Treasury securities at auction, and it antici-     |
| pated doing so until normalization of the level of the      |
| federal funds rate is well under way. Members noted         |
| that this policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of    |
| longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help main- |
| tain accommodative financial conditions.                    |