# 20160316_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:38:08*
*Pages: 25, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
March 15–16, 2016
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of Market Account
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 15, 2016, at Robert deV. Frierson, Secretary of the Board, Office of
1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, March 16, 2016, the Secretary, Board of Governors
at 9:00 a.m.1
Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking
PRESENT:
Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors
Janet L. Yellen, Chair
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability
Lael Brainard Policy and Research, Board of Governors
James Bullard
Stanley Fischer James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of
Esther L. George Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Loretta J. Mester
Jerome H. Powell William B. English, Senior Special Adviser to the
Eric Rosengren Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
Daniel K. Tarullo Governors
Charles L. Evans, Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Andrew Figura, Ann McKeehan, David Reifschneider,
Neel Kashkari, and Michael Strine, Alternate and Stacey Tevlin,2 Special Advisers to the Board,
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and John C. Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office
Williams, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Board Members, Board of Governors
of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,
respectively Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
Brian F. Madigan, Secretary
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Diana Hancock and Michael G. Palumbo, Senior
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Associate Directors, Division of Research and
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Statistics, Board of Governors; Beth Anne Wilson,
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Senior Associate Director, Division of
Steven B. Kamin, Economist International Finance, Board of Governors
Thomas Laubach, Economist
David W. Wilcox, Economist Ellen E. Meade and Robert J. Tetlow, Senior Advisers,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy, David E.
Lebow, Stephen A. Meyer, Christopher J. Waller, Jane E. Ihrig and David López-Salido, Associate
and William Wascher, Associate Economists Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account
1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the 2 Attended the discussion of the economic and financial situ-
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. ation through the close of the meeting.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Stephanie R. Aaronson and Glenn Follette,3 Assistant monetary policy implementation was effective in main-
Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, taining control over the federal funds rate. Also, the
Board of Governors transitions in early March to the FR 2420 reporting form
(Report of Selected Money Market Rates) as the under-
Penelope A. Beattie,4 Assistant to the Secretary, Office lying source of data for computing the effective federal
of the Secretary, Board of Governors funds rate, and to a volume-weighted median as the cal-
culation method, proceeded smoothly. In addition, the
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of deputy manager reviewed recent and projected trends in
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors foreign portfolio income of the SOMA, including the
implications for portfolio income of foreign nominal in-
Kurt F. Lewis, Principal Economist, Division of terest rates that were very low, even negative.
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
The deputy manager also outlined factors that the Com-
mittee might consider in determining whether to offer
Randall A. Williams, Information Manager, Division of
term reverse repurchase agreements (RRPs) over the end
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
of the first quarter. In the ensuing discussion of this
question among Committee participants, it was noted
Kenneth C. Montgomery, First Vice President, Federal
that, in view of the very elevated capacity of the over-
Reserve Bank of Boston
night (ON) RRP facility that would remain available for
the time being, offering term RRPs in addition to ON
David Altig, Ron Feldman, Alberto G. Musalem,
RRPs would be unlikely to enhance control of the fed-
Glenn D. Rudebusch, and Daniel G. Sullivan,
eral funds rate over quarter-end, and offering term RRPs
Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
at an interest rate spread over ON RRPs could margin-
of Atlanta, Minneapolis, New York, San Francisco,
ally increase the Federal Reserve’s interest costs. For
and Chicago, respectively
these reasons, Committee participants generally pre-
ferred not to offer term RRPs over the end of the first
Michael Dotsey, Evan F. Koenig, Paolo A. Pesenti, and
quarter. Participants noted that it may be appropriate to
John A. Weinberg, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
offer term RRPs at some point in the future after the
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, New York,
Committee reintroduces an aggregate cap on ON RRP
and Richmond, respectively
operations, and the Committee’s decisions regarding
term RRPs over quarter-ends had no implications for
Edward S. Knotek II, Giovanni Olivei, and Jonathan L.
the FOMC’s plan to phase out the ON RRP facility
Willis, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
when it was no longer needed to help control the federal
Cleveland, Boston, and Kansas City, respectively
funds rate.
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.
Developments in Financial Markets and Open There were no intervention operations in foreign curren-
Market Operations cies for the System’s account over the intermeeting pe-
The manager of the System Open Market Account riod.
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and for-
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
eign financial markets, including recent monetary policy
The information reviewed for the March 15–16 meeting
actions of foreign central banks and the expectations of
suggested that labor market conditions were continuing
market participants for the trajectory of U.S. monetary
to improve in the first quarter, and that the pace of ex-
policy. The deputy manager followed with a briefing on
pansion in real gross domestic product (GDP) was pick-
money market developments and System open market
ing up somewhat from the previous quarter. Consumer
operations conducted by the Open Market Desk during
price inflation was still running below the Committee’s
the period since the Committee met on January 26–27,
longer-run objective of 2 percent, restrained in part by
2016. Experience during the intermeeting period con-
decreases in both consumer energy prices and the prices
tinued to suggest that the operational framework for
of non-energy imports. Survey-based measures of
3 Attended Wednesday session only. 4 Attended Tuesday session only.

--- Page 3 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 1_5_–_1_6_,_ 2_0_1_6________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
longer-run inflation expectations were little changed, on PCE over the first half of the year. Gains in real dispos-
balance, in recent months, while market-based measures able income picked up in December and January.
of inflation compensation remained low. Households’ net worth was supported both by a re-
bound in equity prices following declines earlier in the
Total nonfarm payroll employment increased in January
year and by further increases in home values through
and February at a solid average monthly pace. The un-
January. Also, consumer sentiment in the University of
employment rate declined to 4.9 percent in January and
Michigan Surveys of Consumers remained at an elevated
remained at that level in February, while both the labor
level in February.
force participation rate and the employment-to-popula-
tion ratio increased over these months. The share of Recent information on housing activity was consistent
workers employed part time for economic reasons edged with a continued gradual recovery in this sector. Starts
down in January and February. The rates of private-sec- for new single-family homes moved higher, on balance,
tor job openings, hires, and quits rose a little in Decem- in January and February, and building permits were little
ber. The four-week moving average of initial claims for changed. Starts of multifamily units declined on net.
unemployment insurance benefits moved down in Feb- New home sales fell in January, more than reversing an
ruary and early March after increasing a little in January. increase in December. Sales of existing homes increased
Labor compensation continued to rise at a modest pace. further in January following a strong gain in December.
Compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector
Real private expenditures for business equipment and in-
increased 2½ percent over the four quarters of 2015, and
tellectual property products appeared to be increasing
the employment cost index rose nearly 2 percent over
only modestly in the first quarter. Nominal shipments
the 12 months ending in December; both increases were
of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft declined
similar to their averages in recent years. Average hourly
in January, and forward-looking indicators of equipment
earnings for all employees increased 2¼ percent over the
spending, such as new orders for nondefense capital
12 months ending in February, about ¼ percentage
goods along with recent readings from national and re-
point more than over the preceding 12 months.
gional surveys of business conditions, were generally
Industrial production increased in January. Manufactur- soft. Firms’ nominal spending for nonresidential struc-
ing output rose, reversing the declines seen in the two tures excluding drilling and mining increased somewhat
previous months, and the output of utilities moved up in January after having declined for two months. Indi-
sharply as the demand for heating rebounded after hav- cators of spending for structures in the drilling and min-
ing been held down by unseasonably warm weather in ing sector, such as the number of oil and gas rigs in op-
December. Mining output was unchanged following eration, continued to fall through early March. The lim-
four months of sizable declines that resulted from de- ited available data suggested that inventory investment
creases in drilling activity. Automakers’ assembly sched- continued to decline in the early part of the year. None-
ules and broader indicators of manufacturing produc- theless, with the exception of the energy sector, inven-
tion, such as the readings on new orders from national tories generally seemed well aligned with the pace of
and regional manufacturing surveys, mostly pointed to a sales.
modest pace of gains in factory output over the next few
Growth in total real government purchases appeared to
months. Information on drilling activity for crude oil
be modest in the first quarter. Federal government
and natural gas through early March was consistent with
spending for defense was soft in January and February,
further declines in mining output.
while nondefense spending seemed likely to be slightly
Growth in real personal consumption expenditures boosted early in the year by the effect of the 2015 Bipar-
(PCE) appeared to pick up some in the first quarter. The tisan Budget Act. Nominal construction spending by
components of the nominal retail sales data used by the state and local governments increased sharply in January,
Bureau of Economic Analysis to construct its estimate but the payrolls of these governments were little
of PCE were little changed, on net, in January and Feb- changed, on net, over the first two months of the year.
ruary, but spending on energy services appeared likely to
The U.S. international trade deficit widened in both De-
increase somewhat and the rate of sales of new light mo-
cember and January, as exports declined in both months,
tor vehicles stepped up following a decline in December.
continuing a downward trend that began in late 2014,
Recent readings on key factors that influence consumer
with particular weakness in exports of capital goods. Im-
spending generally pointed toward solid growth in real
ports rose slightly in December before falling back in
January. Net exports subtracted from real GDP growth

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
in the fourth quarter, and the January trade data sug- peared to diminish beginning in mid-February, and do-
gested that net exports would continue to weigh on mestic financial conditions generally eased, on balance,
growth in the first quarter. since the January FOMC meeting: Stock prices rose, eq-
uity price volatility declined, and credit spreads on cor-
Total U.S. consumer prices as measured by the PCE
porate bonds narrowed. The dollar depreciated against
price index increased 1¼ percent over the 12 months
most foreign currencies, and long-term sovereign bond
ending in January, partly restrained by declines in con-
yields declined amid easing by central banks in advanced
sumer energy prices. Core PCE price inflation, which
foreign economies.
excludes changes in food and energy prices, was 1¾ per-
cent over the same 12-month period, held down in part Yields on 5- and 10-year nominal Treasury securities de-
by decreases in the prices of non-energy imports and the clined at the outset of the intermeeting period, reflecting
pass-through of declines in energy prices. Over the the continued pullback from risky assets that began early
12 months ending in February, total consumer prices as in the year on concerns about prospects for global eco-
measured by the consumer price index (CPI) rose 1 per- nomic growth. These yields subsequently increased as
cent, while core CPI inflation was around 2¼ percent. market sentiment improved and were little changed, on
Both readings on core inflation were boosted, in part, by balance, over the intermeeting period. Measures of in-
movements in prices for some categories of goods and flation compensation over the next 5 years rose, on net,
services whose prices tend to be volatile. Survey consistent with increases in oil prices, while inflation
measures of longer-run inflation expectations—includ- compensation 5 to 10 years ahead was little changed on
ing those from the Michigan survey, Blue Chip Eco- the period and remained at the lower end of its historical
nomic Indicators, Survey of Professional Forecasters, range.
Survey of Primary Dealers, and Survey of Market Partic-
After becoming considerably flatter early in the inter-
ipants—were generally little changed on balance. In
meeting period, the path of the federal funds rate im-
February, the Michigan survey measure of median infla-
plied by market quotes on interest rate derivatives steep-
tion expectations over the next 5 to 10 years was below
ened subsequently as financial market conditions im-
its typical range of the past 15 years, likely reflecting—at
proved and was little changed, on balance, over the in-
least in part—decreases in energy prices over the past
termeeting period. However, the median respondent to
year and a half.
the Desk’s March Survey of Primary Dealers and to the
Foreign real GDP growth slowed in the fourth quarter, Survey of Market Participants expected only two in-
with Canadian activity restrained by declines in oil- creases in the FOMC’s target range for the federal funds
related investment and the Japanese economy contract- rate this year, one fewer than they had projected in Jan-
ing amid weakness in consumption. Economic growth uary.
continued to be steady but modest in the euro area and
Broad equity market indexes increased, on balance, over
the United Kingdom, while Brazil remained in recession.
the intermeeting period and continued to exhibit a high
In contrast, some economies in emerging Asia recorded
correlation with crude oil prices. Reflecting the im-
robust growth. Indicators pointed to a pickup in growth
provement in investor sentiment that started in mid-
in most foreign economies in the current quarter but to
February, corporate bond spreads narrowed, with
a further softening of growth in China. Inflation in the
spreads on investment-grade issues finishing the period
advanced foreign economies remained low. In contrast,
slightly lower while spreads on speculative-grade is-
inflation rose in China because of a rebound in local
sues—particularly those for the lowest-rated bonds—
food prices, while inflation in much of South America
declined appreciably.
remained elevated, reflecting weaker currencies. Con-
cerns about persistently low inflation spurred further Financing conditions for investment-grade nonfinancial
monetary policy accommodation by the Bank of Japan firms continued to be relatively accommodative. Cor-
(BOJ) and the European Central Bank (ECB). porate bond issuance by these firms was robust in Janu-
ary and February, while speculative-grade bond issuance
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
stayed subdued. Commercial and industrial loan growth
Financial markets were turbulent over the first month
at banks was also strong, mostly driven by the origina-
and a half of the year, apparently reflecting investors’
tion of large loans to investment-grade borrowers. Re-
concerns about global growth prospects and associated
financings of institutional leveraged loans were near zero
risks to the U.S. outlook. However, these concerns ap-
in February, as was equity issuance through initial public
offerings.

--- Page 5 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 1_5_–_1_6_,_ 2_0_1_6________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
The credit quality of speculative-grade nonfinancial cor- market participants had revised down their expected tra-
porations continued to show signs of deterioration. jectory of the federal funds rate somewhat, and yields on
Market analysts’ earnings forecasts for speculative-grade medium- and longer-term Treasury securities declined
companies, including those outside the energy sector, 20 to 30 basis points. Yields on investment- and specu-
were revised down for the first quarter of 2016 amid lative-grade corporate bonds were down slightly less,
concerns about a deterioration in the global economic leaving spreads over Treasury securities little changed
outlook. In the broader corporate bond market, the vol- over the period between mid-December and mid-
ume of downgrades of ratings outpaced that of up- March. Similarly, broad equity price indexes ended this
grades, even for investment-grade securities, in January interval only a bit lower, and one-month-ahead option-
and February, with energy firms accounting for most of implied volatility on the S&P 500 index, the VIX, de-
the downgrades in February. The default rate on nonfi- clined on balance. The broad index of the foreign ex-
nancial bonds remained somewhat elevated compared change value of the dollar was also roughly unchanged,
with typical levels outside recession periods. on net, since the December meeting.
Financing conditions for commercial real estate (CRE) Staff Economic Outlook
tightened somewhat over the intermeeting period but re- In the U.S. economic forecast prepared by the staff for
mained accommodative. Spreads on commercial mort- the March FOMC meeting, real GDP in the first half of
gage-backed securities (CMBS) continued to widen, on the year was projected to increase a little more slowly
net, despite the narrowing of spreads in broader bond than in the forecast prepared for the January meeting,
markets. Reportedly in response, CMBS issuance was although estimated real GDP growth in the fourth quar-
down somewhat over the first two months of the year, ter of last year was revised up. Beyond the near term,
although CRE loans on banks’ balance sheets continued real GDP was expected to increase slightly faster than in
to increase at a robust pace through February. the previous forecast, largely reflecting a somewhat
higher projected path for equity prices and a lower as-
Lending conditions in residential real estate markets
sumed trajectory for the foreign exchange value of the
were little changed, on balance, over the intermeeting
dollar. The staff continued to project that real GDP
period. Financing conditions in consumer credit mar-
would expand at a somewhat faster pace than potential
kets generally remained accommodative, and outstand-
output in 2016 through 2018, supported primarily by in-
ing student and auto debt continued to grow at a robust
creases in consumer spending. The unemployment rate
pace.
was expected to gradually decline further and to run
During the intermeeting period, foreign financial condi- somewhat below the staff’s estimate of its longer-run
tions improved on net. After deteriorating further early natural rate over this period; the staff’s estimate of the
in the period, foreign equity prices bounced back and natural rate was revised down slightly in this forecast.
credit spreads on emerging market bonds narrowed, in
The staff’s forecast for inflation over the first half of the
both cases returning to December levels in most coun-
year was revised up somewhat, reflecting recent in-
tries. Since the January FOMC meeting, the dollar de-
creases in the price of crude oil as well as stronger-than-
preciated, on net, against most foreign currencies. Long-
expected data on core consumer prices early in the year.
term sovereign bond yields declined notably in the ad-
The staff continued to project that inflation would in-
vanced economies, in part as foreign central banks an-
crease gradually over the next several years, as energy
nounced additional monetary policy easing measures.
prices and the prices of non-energy imported goods
The BOJ introduced a negative deposit rate. The ECB
were expected to begin steadily rising later this year. Be-
announced a comprehensive package of easing
yond 2016, the forecast was a bit lower than the previous
measures, including a further cut in benchmark policy
projection, primarily reflecting a flatter expected path for
rates, accelerated and more expansive asset purchases,
crude oil prices. As a result, inflation was projected still
and a new round of targeted long-term refinancing op-
to be slightly below the Committee’s longer-run objec-
erations.
tive of 2 percent in 2018.
Over the period since mid-December, when the Com-
The staff viewed the uncertainty around its March pro-
mittee raised the target range for the federal funds rate
jections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate,
¼ percentage point, U.S. financial market conditions
and inflation as similar to the average of the past
had registered relatively small changes, on balance, amid
20 years. The risks to the forecast for real GDP were
significant volatility. Financial derivatives suggested that

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
seen as tilted to the downside, reflecting the staff’s as- concerns among investors about the global economic
sessment that neither monetary nor fiscal policy was well outlook appeared to trigger a sharp reduction in their
positioned to help the economy withstand substantial risk-taking. Financial conditions deteriorated, with eq-
adverse shocks; in addition, global economic prospects uity prices falling and credit spreads on riskier corporate
were still seen as an important downside risk to the fore- bonds widening. Subsequently, investor sentiment re-
cast. Consistent with the downside risk to aggregate de- bounded, and domestic and global financial conditions
mand, the staff viewed the risks to its outlook for the eased on net over the intermeeting period.
unemployment rate as skewed to the upside. The risks
With respect to the outlook for economic activity and
to the projection for inflation were still seen as weighted
the labor market, participants shared the assessment
to the downside, reflecting the possibility that longer-
that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary
term inflation expectations may have edged down, and
policy, real GDP would continue to increase at a mod-
that the foreign exchange value of the dollar could rise
erate rate over the medium term and labor market indi-
substantially, which would put additional downward
cators would continue to strengthen. Participants ob-
pressure on inflation.
served that strong job gains in recent months had re-
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the duced concerns about a possible slowing of progress in
Economic Outlook the labor market. Many participants, however, antici-
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of pated that relative strength in household spending would
the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank pres- be partially offset by weakness in net exports associated
idents submitted their projections of the most likely out- with lackluster foreign growth and the appreciation of
comes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, in- the dollar since mid-2014. In addition, business fixed
flation, and the federal funds rate for each year from investment seemed likely to remain sluggish. Further-
2016 through 2018 and over the longer run. Each par- more, participants generally saw global economic and fi-
ticipant’s projections were conditioned on his or her nancial developments as continuing to pose risks to the
judgment of appropriate monetary policy. The longer- outlook for economic activity and the labor market in
run projections represent each participant’s assessment the United States. In particular, several participants ex-
of the rate to which each variable would be expected to pressed the view that the underlying factors abroad that
converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy led to a sharp, though temporary, deterioration in global
and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. financial conditions earlier this year had not been fully
These projections and policy assessments are described resolved and thus posed ongoing downside risks. Sev-
in the Summary of Economic Projections, which is an eral participants also noted the possibility that economic
addendum to these minutes. activity or labor market conditions could turn out to be
stronger than anticipated. For example, strong expan-
In their discussion of the economic situation and the
sion of household demand could result in rapid employ-
outlook, meeting participants viewed the information re-
ment growth and overly tight resource utilization, partic-
ceived over the intermeeting period as suggesting that
ularly if productivity gains remained sluggish.
economic activity had been expanding moderately de-
spite the global economic and financial developments of Notwithstanding the downward revisions to recent retail
recent months. Household spending had been increas- sales data, participants were encouraged by the moderate
ing at a moderate rate, and the housing sector had im- average growth of consumer spending over recent quar-
proved further; however, business fixed investment and ters. Continued increases in household spending had
net exports had been soft. A range of labor market in- buoyed growth of overall aggregate demand despite the
dicators, including strong employment growth and rising volatility in financial markets. Among the various cate-
labor force participation, pointed to a further strength- gories of household spending, participants noted that
ening of the labor market. Participants generally saw the motor vehicle sales remained particularly strong, albeit
data on economic activity and labor market conditions with some support from price discounting and other in-
as broadly consistent with their earlier expectations. In- centives. Looking ahead, participants generally expected
flation picked up in recent months, but it continued to consumer spending to continue to rise moderately. Solid
run below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objec- gains in employment and income, the relatively high ra-
tive. Market-based measures of inflation compensation tio of household wealth to income, low gasoline prices,
remained low, while survey-based measures of longer- and a high level of consumer confidence were seen as
term inflation expectations were little changed, on bal- factors that should contribute to moderate growth in
ance, in recent months. Early in the intermeeting period, consumer spending.

--- Page 7 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 1_5_–_1_6_,_ 2_0_1_6________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
Reports on the housing sector were mixed, with some also shown progress, including an increase in labor force
participants noting a weakening of housing activity in re- participation. The quits rate had returned to its pre-
gions adversely affected by the decline in energy prices. recession level, as had households’ perceptions of job
Nonetheless, fundamentals for housing activity were availability and firms’ assessments of the difficulty of fill-
seen as strong except for a reported shortage of builda- ing jobs, providing further evidence of improved labor
ble lots in some areas. Some participants reported that market conditions. Some participants judged that cur-
contacts were generally upbeat about the outlook for rent labor market conditions were at or near those con-
housing construction in their Districts, and participants sistent with maximum sustainable employment, noting
anticipated that activity in the housing sector would con- that the unemployment rate was at or below their esti-
tinue to expand this year. mates of its longer-run normal level and citing anecdotal
reports of labor shortages or increased wage pressures.
In contrast, several participants noted recent softness in
In contrast, some other participants judged that the
business fixed investment and signs that the sluggish
economy had not yet reached maximum employment.
growth would continue. Orders and shipments for non-
They noted several indicators other than the unemploy-
defense capital goods had been about flat. Capital ex-
ment rate that pointed to remaining underutilization of
penditures continued to be depressed by the contraction
labor resources; these indicators included the still-high
in the energy sector. Capital spending plans appeared to
rate of involuntary part-time employment and the low
remain soft. The possible adverse effects on investment
level of the employment-to-population ratio for prime-
spending of concerns about global growth and the asso-
age workers. The surprisingly limited extent to which
ciated volatility in financial markets were also noted.
aggregate data indicated upward pressure on wage
District reports on commercial construction activity,
growth also suggested some remaining slack in labor
however, were generally positive.
markets.
With regard to the external sector, a number of partici-
Participants commented on the recent increase in infla-
pants said that they expected declines in net exports to
tion. Some participants saw the increase as consistent
continue to subtract from real GDP growth, reflecting
with a firming trend in inflation. Some others, however,
weak foreign activity as well as the earlier appreciation
expressed the view that the increase was unlikely to be
of the dollar. The outlook for growth abroad had
sustained, in part because it appeared to reflect, to an
dimmed in recent months, suggesting a more persistent
appreciable degree, increases in prices that had been rel-
drag on growth of U.S. exports. A couple of participants
atively volatile in the past. Participants continued to an-
commented that emerging market economies faced an
ticipate that inflation would run below the Committee’s
extended period of less rapid export growth, reflecting
2 percent objective in the near term but that, as the tran-
slower economic growth in many advanced foreign
sitory effects of earlier declines in energy and import
economies and in China. It also was noted that weak
prices dissipated and the labor market strengthened fur-
growth abroad could lead to further appreciation of the
ther, inflation would rise to 2 percent over the medium
dollar.
term. Several participants indicated that the persistence
In discussing domestic business conditions, several par- of global disinflationary pressures or the possibility that
ticipants noted that their contacts saw rising sales in the inflation expectations were moving lower continued to
retail sector and that reports from firms in the services pose downside risks to the inflation outlook. A few oth-
sector were mostly strong. In some Districts, surveys ers expressed the view that there were also risks that
suggested that manufacturing activity had bottomed out. could lead to inflation running higher than anticipated;
However, a number of participants commented that pre- for example, overly tight resource utilization could push
vious declines in commodity and energy prices, along inflation above the Committee’s 2 percent goal, particu-
with the earlier appreciation of the dollar and weak for- larly if productivity gains remained sluggish.
eign activity, continued to weigh on manufacturing ac-
Participants discussed readings from various market-
tivity. A few participants also noted that such factors
and survey-based measures of longer-run inflation ex-
were reducing farm incomes in their Districts.
pectations. Some survey-based measures had edged
During the intermeeting period, the labor market down, while others had remained stable and one had
strengthened further. In their comments on labor mar- edged up; such measures were little changed, on balance,
ket conditions, participants cited strong payroll gains and in recent months. The market-based measures of infla-
a further tick down in the civilian unemployment rate. tion compensation that had declined earlier were still at
Broader measures of labor force underutilization had low levels. Several participants noted that some of the

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
softness in the market-based measures likely reflected also cited wider credit spreads as a factor that was likely
changes in risk and liquidity premiums, and that some of to restrain growth in demand. Accordingly, many par-
the survey-based measures appeared to be excessively ticipants expressed the view that a somewhat lower path
sensitive to movements in gasoline prices. Some partic- for the federal funds rate than they had projected in De-
ipants concluded that longer-run inflation expectations cember now seemed most likely to be appropriate for
remained reasonably stable, but some others expressed achieving the Committee’s dual mandate. Many partici-
concern that longer-run inflation expectations may have pants also noted that a somewhat lower projected inter-
already moved lower, or that they might do so if inflation est rate path was one reason for the relatively small revi-
was to persist for much longer at a rate below the Com- sions in their medium-term projections for economic ac-
mittee’s objective. tivity, unemployment, and inflation.
Participants discussed the implications of the global eco- Several participants also argued for proceeding cau-
nomic and financial developments of the past few tiously in reducing policy accommodation because they
months for the medium-term outlook, and they offered saw the risks to the U.S. economy stemming from devel-
different characterizations of the risks to the U.S. econ- opments abroad as tilted to the downside or because
omy stemming from these developments. Many partic- they were concerned that longer-term inflation expecta-
ipants expressed a view that the global economic and fi- tions might be slipping lower, skewing the risks to the
nancial situation still posed appreciable downside risks outlook for inflation to the downside. Many participants
to the domestic economic outlook. Some noted that re- noted that, with the target range for the federal funds
cent financial market turbulence provided an important rate only slightly above zero, the FOMC continued to
reminder that the ability of central banks to offset the have little room to ease monetary policy through con-
effects of adverse economic shocks might be limited, ventional means if economic activity or inflation turned
particularly by the low level of policy interest rates in out to be materially weaker than anticipated, but could
most advanced economies. In contrast, a few noted that raise rates quickly if the economy appeared to be over-
the actions taken by several foreign central banks in re- heating or if inflation was to increase significantly more
cent weeks to increase monetary accommodation likely rapidly than anticipated. In their view, this asymmetry
had helped mitigate downside risks to the global out- made it prudent to wait for additional information re-
look. Nonetheless, many participants indicated that the garding the underlying strength of economic activity and
heightened global risks and the asymmetric ability of prospects for inflation before taking another step to re-
monetary policy to respond to them warranted caution duce policy accommodation.
in making adjustments to the stance of U.S. monetary
For all of these reasons, most participants judged it ap-
policy.
propriate to maintain the target range for the federal
Participants generally agreed that the incoming infor- funds rate at ¼ to ½ percent at this meeting while noting
mation indicated that the U.S. economy had been resili- that global economic and financial developments con-
ent to recent global economic and financial develop- tinued to pose risks. These participants saw their judg-
ments, and that the domestic economic indicators that ment as consistent with the Committee’s data-depend-
had become available in recent weeks had been mostly ent approach to setting monetary policy; it was noted
consistent with their expectations. Moreover, the sharp that, in this context, the relevant data include not only
asset price movements that occurred earlier in the year domestic economic releases, but also information about
had been reversed to a large extent, but longer-term in- developments abroad and changes in financial condi-
terest rates and market participants’ expectations for the tions that bear on the economic outlook. A couple of
future path of the federal funds rate remained lower. participants, however, saw an increase in the target range
Taking these developments into account, participants to ½ to ¾ percent as appropriate at this meeting, citing
generally judged that the medium-term outlook for do- evidence that the economy was continuing to expand at
mestic demand was not appreciably different than it had a moderate rate despite developments abroad and earlier
been when the Committee met in December. However, volatility in financial conditions, continued improve-
most participants, while recognizing the likely positive ment in labor market conditions, the firming of inflation
effects of recent policy actions abroad, saw foreign eco- over recent months, and the apparent leveling-off of oil
nomic growth as likely to run at a somewhat slower pace prices. In their judgment, increasing the target range for
than previously expected, a development that probably the federal funds rate too gradually in the near term
would further restrain growth in U.S. exports and tend risked having to raise it quickly later, which could cause
to damp overall aggregate demand. Several participants economic and financial strains at that time.

--- Page 9 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 1_5_–_1_6_,_ 2_0_1_6________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
Participants agreed that their ongoing assessments of the the near term, in part because of earlier declines in en-
data and the implications for the outlook, rather than ergy prices, but to rise to 2 percent over the medium
calendar dates, would determine the timing and pace of term as the transitory effects of declines in energy and
future adjustments to the stance of monetary policy. import prices dissipated and the labor market strength-
They expressed a range of views about the likelihood ened further. Members noted the increase in inflation
that incoming information would make an adjustment reported in recent months but expressed a range of
appropriate at the time of their next meeting. A number views about the extent to which the increase would
of participants judged that the headwinds restraining prove persistent. Several members expressed concern
growth and holding down the neutral rate of interest that longer-run inflation expectations may have de-
were likely to subside only slowly. In light of this expec- clined. Members agreed they would continue to monitor
tation and their assessment of the risks to the economic inflation developments closely.
outlook, several expressed the view that a cautious ap-
Against the backdrop of its discussion of current condi-
proach to raising rates would be prudent or noted their
tions, the economic outlook, and the risks and uncer-
concern that raising the target range as soon as April
tainties surrounding the outlook, the Committee decided
would signal a sense of urgency they did not think ap-
to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at
propriate. In contrast, some other participants indicated
¼ to ½ percent at this meeting. This accommodative
that an increase in the target range at the Committee’s
stance of monetary policy was expected to support fur-
next meeting might well be warranted if the incoming
ther improvement in labor market conditions and a re-
economic data remained consistent with their expecta-
turn to 2 percent inflation. One member, however, pre-
tions for moderate growth in output, further strengthen-
ferred to raise the target range for the federal funds rate,
ing of the labor market, and inflation rising to 2 percent
indicating that the current low level of real interest rates
over the medium term.
was not appropriate in the context of current economic
Committee Policy Action conditions and the progress that had been achieved to-
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period ward the Committee’s objectives.
ahead, members judged that information received since
Members again agreed that, in determining the timing
the Committee met in January suggested that economic
and size of future adjustments to the target range for the
activity had been expanding at a moderate pace despite
federal funds rate, the Committee would assess realized
the global economic and financial developments of re-
and expected economic conditions relative to its objec-
cent months. They also agreed that household spending
tives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.
had been increasing at a moderate rate, and that the
This assessment would take into account a wide range of
housing sector had improved further; however, business
information, including measures of labor market condi-
fixed investment and net exports had been soft. Mem-
tions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation ex-
bers saw a range of recent indicators, including strong
pectations, and readings on financial and international
job gains, as pointing to additional strengthening of the
developments. In light of the current shortfall of infla-
labor market. Members noted that inflation had picked
tion from 2 percent, the Committee agreed that it would
up in recent months; however, they also noted that in-
carefully monitor actual and expected progress toward
flation had continued to run below the Committee’s
its inflation goal. The Committee expected that eco-
2 percent longer-run objective, partly reflecting declines
nomic conditions would evolve in a manner that would
in energy prices and in prices of non-energy imports.
warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate,
Market-based measures of inflation compensation re-
and that the federal funds rate was likely to remain, for
mained low. Survey-based measures of longer-term in-
some time, below levels that were expected to prevail in
flation expectations were little changed, on balance, in
the longer run. Indeed, several members noted that their
recent months.
current projections of the path for the federal funds rate
With respect to the economic outlook and its implica- that would likely be appropriate this year and next were
tions for monetary policy, members continued to expect lower than they had projected in December. However,
that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary members agreed that future data and developments
policy, economic activity would expand at a moderate could lead to changes in the economic outlook and in
pace and labor market indicators would continue to their projections of appropriate monetary policy, and
strengthen. However, they saw global economic and fi- that the actual path of the federal funds rate would de-
nancial developments as continuing to pose risks. Mem- pend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming
bers also continued to expect inflation to remain low in data.

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
The Committee also decided to maintain its existing pol- however, business fixed investment and net ex-
icy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings ports have been soft. A range of recent indica-
of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in tors, including strong job gains, points to addi-
agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over tional strengthening of the labor market. Infla-
maturing Treasury securities at auction, and it antici- tion picked up in recent months; however, it con-
pated doing so until normalization of the level of the tinued to run below the Committee’s 2 percent
federal funds rate is well under way. This policy, by longer-run objective, partly reflecting declines in
keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term secu- energy prices and in prices of non-energy im-
rities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommoda- ports. Market-based measures of inflation com-
tive financial conditions. pensation remain low; survey-based measures of
longer-term inflation expectations are little
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
changed, on balance, in recent months.
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe- Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
cute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the mittee seeks to foster maximum employment and
following domestic policy directive, to be released at price stability. The Committee currently expects
2:00 p.m.: that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of
monetary policy, economic activity will expand at
“Effective March 17, 2016, the Federal Open
a moderate pace and labor market indicators will
Market Committee directs the Desk to undertake
continue to strengthen. However, global eco-
open market operations as necessary to maintain
nomic and financial developments continue to
the federal funds rate in a target range of ¼ to
pose risks. Inflation is expected to remain low in
½ percent, including overnight reverse repur-
the near term, in part because of earlier declines
chase operations (and reverse repurchase opera-
in energy prices, but to rise to 2 percent over the
tions with maturities of more than one day when
medium term as the transitory effects of declines
necessary to accommodate weekend, holiday, or
in energy and import prices dissipate and the la-
similar trading conventions) at an offering rate of
bor market strengthens further. The Committee
0.25 percent, in amounts limited only by the value
continues to monitor inflation developments
of Treasury securities held outright in the System
closely.
Open Market Account that are available for such
operations and by a per-counterparty limit of Against this backdrop, the Committee decided to
$30 billion per day. maintain the target range for the federal funds
rate at ¼ to ½ percent. The stance of monetary
The Committee directs the Desk to continue roll-
policy remains accommodative, thereby support-
ing over maturing Treasury securities at auction
ing further improvement in labor market condi-
and to continue reinvesting principal payments
tions and a return to 2 percent inflation.
on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed
securities in agency mortgage-backed securities. In determining the timing and size of future ad-
The Committee also directs the Desk to engage justments to the target range for the federal funds
in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as rate, the Committee will assess realized and ex-
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal pected economic conditions relative to its objec-
Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities tives of maximum employment and 2 percent in-
transactions.” flation. This assessment will take into account a
wide range of information, including measures of
The vote also encompassed approval of the statement
labor market conditions, indicators of inflation
below to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
pressures and inflation expectations, and readings
“Information received since the Federal Open on financial and international developments. In
Market Committee met in January suggests that light of the current shortfall of inflation from
economic activity has been expanding at a mod- 2 percent, the Committee will carefully monitor
erate pace despite the global economic and finan- actual and expected progress toward its inflation
cial developments of recent months. Household goal. The Committee expects that economic con-
spending has been increasing at a moderate rate, ditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant
and the housing sector has improved further; only gradual increases in the federal funds rate;

--- Page 11 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 1_5_–_1_6_,_ 2_0_1_6_______________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some Recently, labor market conditions had continued to
time, below levels that are expected to prevail in strengthen, with the economy apparently near full em-
the longer run. However, the actual path of the ployment, and some data had suggested a firming of un-
federal funds rate will depend on the economic derlying inflation trends. She believed that monetary
outlook as informed by incoming data. policy should respond to these developments by gradu-
ally removing accommodation. She noted that, in such
The Committee is maintaining its existing policy
circumstances, postponing the removal of accommoda-
of reinvesting principal payments from its hold-
tion could increase financial distortions and risks to the
ings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed
economy and undermine the achievement of the Com-
securities in agency mortgage-backed securities
mittee’s longer-run objectives.
and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction, and it anticipates doing so until normali- Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the
zation of the level of the federal funds rate is well target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the
under way. This policy, by keeping the Commit- Board of Governors took no action to change the
tee’s holdings of longer-term securities at sizable interest rates on reserves or discount rates.
levels, should help maintain accommodative fi-
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
nancial conditions.”
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, April 26–27,
Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C. 2016. The meeting adjourned at 10:40 a.m. on
Dudley, Lael Brainard, James Bullard, Stanley Fischer, March 16, 2016.
Loretta J. Mester, Jerome H. Powell, Eric Rosengren,
Notation Vote
and Daniel K. Tarullo.
By notation vote completed on February 16, 2016, the
Voting against this action: Esther L. George. Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
Committee meeting held on January 26–27, 2016.
Ms. George dissented because she believed that a 25 ba-
sis point increase in the target range for the federal funds
rate was warranted at this meeting. Although risks to the
global economy had increased in recent months and fi-
nancial markets were unusually volatile at times, she be- _____________________________
lieved that monetary policy should focus primarily on Brian F. Madigan
progress toward the Committee’s longer-run objectives. Secretary

--- Page 12 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- ticipants projected that the appropriate level of the fed-
tee (FOMC) meeting held on March 15–16, 2016, meet- eral funds rate would be below their individual estimates
ing participants submitted their projections of the most of its longer-run level through 2018.
likely outcomes for real output growth, the unemploy-
Almost all participants regarded the levels of uncertainty
ment rate, inflation, and the federal funds rate for each
associated with their forecasts for economic growth and
year from 2016 to 2018 and over the longer run. Each
the unemployment rate as broadly similar to the norms
participant’s projection was based on information avail-
of the previous 20 years and shared a similar view re-
able at the time of the meeting, together with his or her
garding the uncertainty surrounding their inflation pro-
assessment of appropriate monetary policy and assump-
jections. Participants were about evenly divided as to
tions about the factors likely to affect economic out-
whether they judged the risks to their forecasts for real
comes. The longer-run projections represent each par-
GDP growth to be weighted to the downside or broadly
ticipant’s assessment of the value to which each variable
balanced; no participant saw risks to real GDP growth
would be expected to converge, over time, under appro-
as weighted to the upside. Participants who thought that
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further
risks to their outlook for real GDP growth were skewed
shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy”
to the downside tended to cite developments in foreign
is defined as the future path of policy that each partici-
economies, recent volatility in financial markets, or the
pant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic
limited capacity of policy to respond to adverse develop-
activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual
ments as contributing to that view. Risk perceptions re-
interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objectives of
garding the unemployment rate were more dispersed.
maximum employment and stable prices.
Most participants regarded risks to their unemployment
FOMC participants generally expected that, under ap- rate forecasts as broadly balanced, but four participants
propriate monetary policy, growth in real gross domestic considered risks as skewed toward a higher unemploy-
product (GDP) would be at or somewhat above their ment rate, and two viewed risks as weighted toward a
individual estimates of the longer-run growth rate in lower unemployment rate. A majority of participants
2016 and 2017 and would converge toward the longer- thought that the risks attending their projections for
run rate in 2018 (table 1 and figure 1). All participants PCE price inflation were weighted to the downside; al-
projected that by the end of the current year, the unem- most all of these participants also saw risks to core PCE
ployment rate would decline to, or fall below, their indi- inflation as tilted in the same direction. Among the rea-
vidual estimates of the longer-run normal unemploy- sons cited by participants for perceptions of downside
ment rate—that is, their projected unemployment gaps risk to their inflation projections were ongoing develop-
would be zero or negative—and that these zero or neg- ments in overseas economies and their possible implica-
ative gaps would persist through 2018, even though tions for U.S. import prices, declines in energy prices
many participants reduced their estimates of the longer- since December, and low readings for some indicators
run normal rate. All participants projected that inflation, of long-term inflation expectations.
as measured by the four-quarter change in the price in-
The Outlook for Economic Activity
dex for personal consumption expenditures (PCE),
A substantial majority of participants expected that, con-
would pick up in 2016 and 2017 from the very low rate
ditional on their individual assumptions about appropri-
seen in 2015. Participants generally projected inflation
ate monetary policy, real GDP in 2016 and 2017 would
to be either at or just slightly below the Committee’s
increase at a rate above their individual estimates of the
2 percent objective by the end of 2018.
longer-run normal growth rate before decelerating to a
As shown in figure 2, participants expected that it would pace at or near their individual estimates of the longer-
be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal run normal rate. A number of participants indicated that
funds rate gradually over the projection period as head- they expected domestic factors—including improving
winds to economic growth dissipate slowly over time labor market conditions, stronger household and busi-
and as inflation rises toward the Committee’s goal of ness balance sheets, lower consumer energy prices, and
2 percent. Consistent with this outlook, nearly all par- a still-accommodative stance of monetary policy—to
contribute to strength in aggregate expenditures, while

--- Page 13 ---

,stnediserp
knaB
evreseR
laredeF
dna
srebmem
draoB
evreseR
laredeF
fo
snoitcejorp
cimonocE
.1
elbaT
6102
hcraM
,ycilop
yratenom
etairporppa
detcejorp
fo
stnemssessa
laudividni
rieht
rednu
tnecreP
3egnaR
2ycnednetlartneC
1naideM
regnoL
8102
7102
6102
regnoL
8102
7102
6102
regnoL
8102
7102
6102
elbairaV
nur
nur
nur
4.2–8.1
3.2–8.1
3.2–7.1
5.2–9.1
1.2–8.1
1.2–8.1
3.2–0.2
3.2–1.2
0.2
0.2
1.2
2.2
PDGlaerniegnahC
3.2–8.1
4.2–7.1
5.2–8.1
7.2–0.2
2.2–8.1
2.2–8.1
3.2–0.2
5.2–3.2
0.2
0.2
2.2
4.2
noitcejorprebmeceD
8.5–7.4
0.5–3.4
9.4–3.4
9.4–5.4
0.5–7.4
0.5–5.4
7.4–5.4
8.4–6.4
8.4
5.4
6.4
7.4
etartnemyolpmenU
8.5–7.4
3.5–5.4
0.5–5.4
9.4–3.4
0.5–8.4
0.5–6.4
8.4–6.4
8.4–6.4
9.4
7.4
7.4
7.4
noitcejorprebmeceD
0.2
0.2–8.1
0.2–6.1
6.1–0.1
0.2
0.2–9.1
0.2–7.1
6.1–0.1
0.2
0.2
9.1
2.1
noitaflniECP
0.2
1.2–7.1
0.2–7.1
1.2–2.1
0.2
0.2–9.1
0.2–8.1
7.1–2.1
0.2
0.2
9.1
6.1
noitcejorprebmeceD
0.2–8.1
0.2–6.1
1.2–4.1
0.2–9.1
0.2–7.1
7.1–4.1
0.2
8.1
6.1
4noitaflniECPeroC
1.2–7.1
0.2–6.1
1.2–4.1
0.2–9.1
0.2–7.1
7.1–5.1
0.2
9.1
6.1
noitcejorprebmeceD
detcejorP:omeM
htapycilopetairporppa
0.4–0.3
9.3–1.2
8.2–6.1
4.1–6.0
5.3–0.3
3.3–5.2
4.2–6.1
4.1–9.0
3.3
0.3
9.1
9.0
etarsdnuflaredeF
0.4–0.3
9.3–1.2
4.3–9.1
1.2–9.0
5.3–3.3
5.3–9.2
0.3–9.1
4.1–9.0
5.3
3.3
4.2
4.1
noitcejorprebmeceD
eht
morf
segnahc
tnecrep
era
noitaflni
fo
serusaem
htob
rof
snoitcejorp
dna
)PDG(
tcudorp
citsemod
ssorg
laer
ni
egnahc
fo
snoitcejorP
:etoN
egnahcfosetaregatnecrepehteranoitaflniECPerocdnanoitaflniECP
.detacidniraeyehtforetrauqhtruofehtotraeysuoiverpehtforetrauqhtruof
rofsnoitcejorP
.ygrenednadoofgnidulcxeECProfxedniecirpehtdna)ECP(serutidnepxenoitpmusnoclanosreprofxedniecirpeht,ylevitcepser,ni
era
snoitcejorp
s’tnapicitrap
hcaE
.detacidni
raey
eht
fo
retrauq
htruof
eht
ni
etar
tnemyolpmenu
nailivic
egareva
eht
rof
era
etar
tnemyolpmenu
eht
hcaehcihwotetarehtfotnemssessas’tnapicitraphcaetneserpersnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.ycilopyratenometairporppafotnemssessarehrosihnodesab
ehtrofsnoitcejorpehT
.ymonoceehtotskcohsrehtruffoecnesbaehtnidnaycilopyratenometairporpparednuegrevnocotdetcepxeebdluowelbairav
tegratetairporppadetcejorpehtroetarsdnuflaredefehtrofegnartegratetairporppadetcejorpehtfotniopdimehtfoeulavehteraetarsdnuflaredef htiwnoitcnujnocniedamerewsnoitcejorprebmeceDehT
.nurregnolehtrevororaeyradnelacdefiicepsehtfodneehttaetarsdnuflaredefehtroflevel
.5102,61–51rebmeceDnoeettimmoCtekraMnepOlaredeFehtfogniteemeht
snoitcejorpforebmunehtnehW
.tsehgihottsewolmorfdegnarraerasnoitcejorpehtnehwnoitcejorpelddimehtsinaidemeht,doirephcaeroF
.1
.snoitcejorpelddimowtehtfoegarevaehtsinaidemeht,nevesi
.raeyhcaenielbairavhcaerofsnoitcejorptsewoleerhtdnatsehgiheerhtehtsedulcxeycnednetlartnecehT
.2
.raeytahtnielbairavtahtrof,tsehgihottsewolmorf,snoitcejorp’stnapicitrapllasedulcniraeyneviganielbairavarofegnarehT
.3
.detcelloctoneranoitaflniECPerocrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.4
_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________

--- Page 14 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_5_–_1_6_, _2_0_16______________P_a_g_e_ _3
Figure1. Medians,centraltendencies,andrangesofeconomicprojections,2016–18andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections 4
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections
3
2
Actual 1
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
9
8
7
6
5
4
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesofthevariablesare
annual.

--- Page 15 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure2. FOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy: Midpointoftargetrangeortargetlevelfor
thefederalfundsrate
Percent
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
2016 2017 2018 Longer run
Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual par-
ticipant’sjudgmentofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfundsrateortheappropriatetarget
levelforthefederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun.

--- Page 16 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_5_–_1_6_, _2_0_16______________P_a_g_e_ _5
foreign conditions were projected to be a source of their projections for inflation in 2017, although the me-
weakness for some time. dian value for that year was unchanged. Inflation pro-
jections in 2018 were little changed from December. Re-
Compared with their forecasts prepared for the Sum-
garding core PCE price inflation, some participants
mary of Economic Projections (SEP) in December,
marked down their projections for 2016, although al-
most participants marked down their projections of real
most all still expected core inflation to rise gradually over
GDP growth in 2016, and several did so for 2017. Over-
the projection period and to be at or very close to 2 per-
all, the median value of participants’ projections for real
cent by the end of 2018. Factors cited by participants as
GDP growth in 2016 was revised down a little to 2.2 per-
contributing to their expectation that inflation will rise
cent, and that for 2017 was revised down slightly to
over the medium term included recent readings for core
2.1 percent.
inflation, an anticipation that improvements in labor
The median forecast for the unemployment rate was a markets will continue, the fading effects of recent dollar
bit lower in 2017 and 2018 than in December and appreciation and declines in oil prices, and an assessment
showed a modest downward tilt over the three years of that long-term inflation expectations will remain at levels
the forecast. Participants cited stronger-than-expected consistent with the FOMC’s 2 percent objective, all sup-
labor market data in recent months as a factor explaining ported by a stance of monetary policy that participants
these revisions. Moreover, many participants also re- generally described as accommodative.
duced their estimates of the longer-run normal rate of
Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri-
unemployment, resulting in a modest reduction in the
bution of participants’ views about the outlook for infla-
median of the longer-run rate. Thus, while a majority
tion. The distribution for PCE price inflation in 2016
expected the unemployment rate gap to turn negative by
shifted notably to the left compared with the December
the end of this year, fewer participants projected a nega-
SEP, while changes in the distributions of projections
tive gap at that time than was the case in December. For
for 2017 and 2018 were small. The distributions of par-
2017, all participants projected a negative unemploy-
ticipants’ projections for core PCE price inflation shifted
ment rate gap, and a substantial majority did so for 2018
only a touch toward lower values for 2017 and 2018 as
as well. All told, however, the medians of the unemploy-
compared with December.
ment rate gaps for the three years of the projection were
essentially unchanged from the December SEP. Appropriate Monetary Policy
Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’
Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distribution of partici-
judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target
pants’ views regarding the likely outcomes for real GDP
federal funds rate at the end of each calendar year from
growth and the unemployment rate through 2018 and in
2016 to 2018 and over the longer run. Relative to De-
the longer run. The distribution of the projections of
cember, the projections of the appropriate levels of the
GDP growth shifted toward lower values for 2016; dif-
federal funds rate over the next three years shifted nota-
ferences from December for 2017 and 2018 were less
bly toward lower values. The median projections for the
noteworthy, but there was a modest narrowing of the
federal funds rate at the end of 2016 and 2017 both de-
distribution for 2018. The distributions of projections
clined 0.50 percentage point, to levels of 0.88 percent
for the unemployment rate in 2017 and beyond shifted
and 1.88 percent, respectively, while the median for the
modestly toward lower values, relative to the December
end of 2018 fell 0.25 percentage point, to 3.0 percent.
SEP, on the basis of strong labor market indicators in
The median for the federal funds rate in the longer run
recent months.
was also reduced 0.25 percentage point, to 3.25 percent.
The Outlook for Inflation The view that a lower path of the federal funds rate rel-
All participants projected PCE price inflation to pick up ative to December would be appropriate for achieving
in 2016 and to rise further in 2017. For 2018, nearly all the Committee’s objectives was broadly shared across
expected PCE price inflation to be at or very close to the participants, especially for the first two years of their
Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective. However, forecasts. Given their expectations that certain factors
relative to the December SEP, almost all participants would continue to restrain economic growth for a time,
marked down their projections for PCE price inflation that inflation will increase only gradually to 2 percent,
in 2016, observing that declines in energy prices since and that the economic and policy outlook entails asym-
the end of last year and continued strength in the dollar metric risks over the next few years, participants gener-
were expected to impart additional downward pressure ally projected that a gradual rise in the federal funds rate
on inflation this year. Many participants also lowered

--- Page 17 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2016–18andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2016
March projections 18
December projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 18 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_5_–_1_6_, _2_0_16______________P_a_g_e_ _7
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2016–18andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2016
March projections 18
December projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8
4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8
4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8
4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8
4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 19 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2016–18andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2016
March projections 18
December projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_5_–_1_6_, _2_0_16______________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2016–18
Number of participants
2016
March projections
18
December projections
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’judgmentsofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfunds
rateortheappropriatetargetlevelforthefederalfundsrate,2016–18andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2016
March projections 18
December projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8
0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8
0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8
0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8
0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Note: Themidpointsofthetargetrangesforthefederalfundsrateandthetargetlevelsforthefederalfundsrate
aremeasuredattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun.

--- Page 22 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_5_–_1_6_, _2_0_16_____________P__ag_e_ _1_1
over that period would be appropriate; almost all partic-
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
ipants judged it advisable for the federal funds rate to Percentage points
remain below their individual estimates of its longer-run Variable 2016 2017 2018
normal level through the end of 2018. Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . . . ±1.6 ±2.1 ±2.1
Although the median of participants’ projections of the Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . . . . ±0.5 ±1.2 ±1.7
federal funds rate in the longer run moved lower, the Total consumer prices2 . . . . . . . . ±0.9 ±1.1 ±1.1
range of estimates for the longer-run rate was unchanged
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean
from December. Hence, with all participants anticipat- squared error of projections for 1996 through 2015 that were released in the
ing that inflation would eventually reach the Commit- spring by various private and government forecasters. As described in the
box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a
tee’s objective of 2 percent, the range of participants’
70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment,
judgments of the longer-run level of the real federal and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of projec-
tion errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider
funds rate was also unchanged from December, at 1 to
and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook
2 percent; the median value for the longer-run real rate from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Se-
was 1.25 percent, down 0.25 percentage point from De- ries 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys-
tem, November), available at www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2007/
cember.
200760/200760abs.html; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, Division of Research and Statistics (2014), “Updated Historical
Participants’ views of the appropriate path for monetary
Forecast Errors,” memorandum, April 9, www.federalreserve.gov/
policy were informed by their judgments about the out- foia/files/20140409-historical-forecast-errors.pdf.
look for economic activity, labor markets, and inflation 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that
as well as the risks and uncertainties associated with that has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts.
outlook. One important consideration for many partic- Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the
fourth quarter of the year indicated.
ipants was their assessment that several factors—includ-
ing weak foreign economic conditions, a persistently
Uncertainty and Risks
high exchange value of the dollar, and tighter financial
As in the December SEP, nearly all participants judged
conditions—will continue to restrain economic growth
the levels of uncertainty around their projections for real
for a time and thus collectively imply a temporarily low
GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and both headline
level for the neutral rate of interest. These forces, com-
and core PCE price inflation as broadly similar to the
bined with the current proximity of short-term interest
average levels of the past 20 years (as shown in the left-
rates to their effective lower bound and the related asym-
hand column of figure 4).1 In contrast, participants re-
metry of risks around the outlook for real GDP growth
vised appreciably their assessments of the risks to real
and inflation, were noted as reasons why a gradual ap-
GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and both headline
proach to raising the federal funds rate would be appro-
and core inflation since December (as shown in the
priate, provided that the outlook for the economy un-
right-hand column). Eight participants saw the risks to
folded about as expected. Another consideration under-
real GDP growth as weighted to the downside—up
lying the anticipated gradual removal of policy accom-
from three in December. Four participants saw risks to
modation involved the prospects for inflation to return
the unemployment rate as skewed toward higher unem-
to the Committee’s objective of 2 percent. In assessing
ployment—two more than in December—while two
those prospects, participants weighed the implications of
continued to see risks weighted toward lower unemploy-
a range of factors, including indicators of longer-run in-
ment. Explanations for the less marked shift in risks to
flation expectations and the magnitude and persistence
the outlook for the unemployment rate versus the out-
of the effects of both low energy prices and the earlier
look for real GDP growth included favorable labor mar-
appreciation of the dollar. Judgments regarding the
ket news over the past three months. More generally,
likely future strength of the labor market and future
participants cited financial market and global economic
wage gains also figured into participants’ forecasts for
conditions, either on their own or coupled with the lim-
inflation.
ited capacity of policymakers to respond to possible ad-
verse economic conditions, as reasons for the downward
tilt to their perceptions of the risks to growth. Turning
1 Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for the discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con- economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess
sumer price inflation over the period from 1996 through 2015. the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projec-
At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” tions.

--- Page 23 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4. Uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth Risks to GDP growth
March projections March projections
18 18
December projections December projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation Risks to PCE inflation
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation Risks to core PCE inflation
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”Defini-
tionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 24 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_5_–_1_6_, _2_0_16_____________P__ag_e_ _1_3
to inflation, 11 participants indicated that the risks to of a deterioration, or an absence of improvement, in in-
their headline inflation forecasts were skewed to the dicators of long-term inflation expectations as contrib-
downside, up from 7 in December, and nearly all of uting to increased downside risks for inflation, while
these participants saw the same tilt to the risks for core some pointed to the further declines in energy prices.
inflation. Many participants noted some recent evidence

--- Page 25 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_4____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the pand within a range of 1.4 to 4.6 percent in the
members of the Board of Governors and the current year and 0.9 to 5.1 percent in the second
presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform and third years. The corresponding 70 percent
discussions of monetary policy among policy- confidence intervals for overall inflation would
makers and can aid public understanding of the be 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the current year and 0.9
basis for policy actions. Considerable uncer- to 3.1 percent in the second and third years.
tainty attends these projections, however. The Because current conditions may differ from
economic and statistical models and relation- those that prevailed, on average, over history,
ships used to help produce economic forecasts participants provide judgments as to whether
are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the the uncertainty attached to their projections of
real world, and the future path of the economy each variable is greater than, smaller than, or
can be affected by myriad unforeseen develop- broadly similar to typical levels of forecast un-
ments and events. Thus, in setting the stance certainty in the past, as shown in table 2. Partic-
of monetary policy, participants consider not ipants also provide judgments as to whether the
only what appears to be the most likely eco- risks to their projections are weighted to the up-
nomic outcome as embodied in their projec- side, are weighted to the downside, or are
tions, but also the range of alternative possibil- broadly balanced. That is, participants judge
ities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the whether each variable is more likely to be above
potential costs to the economy should they oc- or below their projections of the most likely out-
cur. come. These judgments about the uncertainty
Table 2 summarizes the average historical and the risks attending each participant’s projec-
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including tions are distinct from the diversity of partici-
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports pants’ views about the most likely outcomes.
and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Forecast uncertainty is concerned with the risks
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the associated with a particular projection rather
Federal Open Market Committee. The projec- than with divergences across a number of differ-
tion error ranges shown in the table illustrate ent projections.
the considerable uncertainty associated with As with real activity and inflation, the out-
economic forecasts. For example, suppose a look for the future path of the federal funds rate
participant projects that real gross domestic is subject to considerable uncertainty. This un-
product (GDP) and total consumer prices will certainty arises primarily because each partici-
rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, pant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of
3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- monetary policy depends importantly on the
tending those projections is similar to that ex- evolution of real activity and inflation over time.
perienced in the past and the risks around the If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected
projections are broadly balanced, the numbers manner, then assessments of the appropriate
reported in table 2 would imply a probability of setting of the federal funds rate would change
about 70 percent that actual GDP would ex- from that point forward.

# Tables

## Page_13_Table_1


|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|------------------|------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 6102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
| 2ycnednetlartneC | regnoL
nur | 1.2–8.1 2.2–8.1 0.5–7.4 0.5–8.4
0.2 0.2
1.2–8.1 2.2–8.1 0.5–5.4 0.5–6.4 0.2–9.1 0.2–9.1 0.2–9.1 0.2–9.1
3.2–0.2 3.2–0.2 7.4–5.4 8.4–6.4 0.2–7.1 0.2–8.1 0.2–7.1 0.2–7.1
3.2–1.2 5.2–3.2 8.4–6.4 8.4–6.4 6.1–0.1 7.1–2.1 7.1–4.1 7.1–5.1 | 5.3–0.3 5.3–3.3
3.3–5.2 5.3–9.2
4.2–6.1 0.3–9.1
4.1–9.0 4.1–9.0 |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 6102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
| 1naideM          | regnoL
nur | 0.2 0.2 8.4 9.4 0.2 0.2
0.2 0.2 5.4 7.4 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
1.2 2.2 6.4 7.4 9.1 9.1 8.1 9.1
2.2 4.2 7.4 7.4 2.1 6.1 6.1 6.1                                                                                                                 | 3.3 5.3
0.3 3.3
9.1 4.2
9.0 4.1                                 |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 6102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |