# 20160427_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:37:56*
*Pages: 13, Tables: 0*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
April 26–27, 2016
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of Market Account
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 26, 2016, at Robert deV. Frierson, Secretary of the Board, Office of
10:30 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, April 27, 2016, the Secretary, Board of Governors
at 9:00 a.m.1
Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking
PRESENT: Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors
Janet L. Yellen, Chair
Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman
Policy and Research, Board of Governors
Lael Brainard
James Bullard
James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of
Stanley Fischer
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Esther L. George
Loretta J. Mester
William B. English, Senior Special Adviser to the
Jerome H. Powell
Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
Eric Rosengren
Governors
Daniel K. Tarullo
Andrew Figura, Ann McKeehan, David Reifschneider,
Charles L. Evans, Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan,
and Stacey Tevlin, Special Advisers to the Board,
Neel Kashkari, and Michael Strine, Alternate
Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office
Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and John C.
of Board Members, Board of Governors
Williams, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
respectively
Board Members, Board of Governors
Brian F. Madigan, Secretary
Eric M. Engen, Senior Associate Director, Division of
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Fabio
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
M. Natalucci, Senior Associate Director, Division
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary
of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Antulio N. Bomfim, Egon Zakrajšek,2 and Joyce K.
Steven B. Kamin, Economist
Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary
Thomas Laubach, Economist
Affairs, Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd,
David W. Wilcox, Economist
Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Thomas A. Connors, Troy Davig, Michael P. Leahy,
David E. Lebow, Stephen A. Meyer, Geoffrey
Mark Carey,2 Associate Director, Division of
Tootell, and William Wascher, Associate
International Finance, Board of Governors; Joshua
Economists
Gallin, Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account
1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the 2 Attended the discussion of the relationship between mone-
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. tary policy and financial stability.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Shaghil Ahmed, Deputy Associate Director, Division Richard K. Crump2 and Marco Del Negro, Assistant
of International Finance, Board of Governors Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of New
York
Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Associate Director, Office
of Financial Stability Policy and Research, Board of Jim Dolmas, Senior Research Economist, Federal
Governors Reserve Bank of Dallas
Glenn Follette and John M. Roberts, Assistant Nina Boyarchenko,2 Financial Economist, Federal
Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Reserve Bank of New York
Board of Governors; Christopher J. Gust,
Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, The Relationship between Monetary Policy and
Board of Governors Financial Stability
The staff presented several briefings on a special topic,
Burcu Duygan-Bump, Adviser, Division of Monetary the relationship between monetary policy and financial
Affairs, Board of Governors stability. The presentations began with an overview of
the possible linkages among monetary policy, macropru-
Penelope A. Beattie,3 Assistant to the Secretary, Office dential tools, and financial stability, drawing on both ac-
of the Secretary, Board of Governors ademic research and experience with such tools in vari-
ous countries. The staff then reviewed empirical litera-
Dana L. Burnett, Section Chief, Division of Monetary ture on the linkages between the stance of monetary pol-
Affairs, Board of Governors icy and financial stability. Lastly, the staff presented il-
lustrative simulation results from a specific macroeco-
Bora Durdu,2 Section Chief, Office of Financial nomic model to explore whether and how monetary pol-
Stability Policy and Research, Board of Governors icy should react to financial imbalances as well as the ex-
tent to which monetary and macroprudential policies
Jae Sim,2 Principal Economist, Division of Research should be coordinated to best achieve macroeconomic
and Statistics, Board of Governors goals and financial stability goals.
In their comments on the briefings and in their discus-
Andrea Ajello, Senior Economist, Division of
sion of the relationship between monetary policy and fi-
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
nancial stability, FOMC participants noted that more
stringent regulatory and supervisory policies imple-
Kelly J. Dubbert, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
mented since the financial crisis, including enhanced
Bank of Kansas City
capital and liquidity requirements for some types of fi-
nancial institutions, had significantly increased the resil-
David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Jeff Fuhrer,2 and Glenn
ience of the financial system to shocks. Participants em-
D. Rudebusch, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal
phasized the importance of macroprudential tools in
Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, Boston, and
promoting financial stability, and they generally ex-
San Francisco, respectively
pressed the view that such tools should be the primary
means to address financial stability risks. However, it
Tobias Adrian,2 Michael Dotsey, and Samuel
was noted that relatively few macroprudential tools are
Schulhofer-Wohl, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
available to financial regulators in the United States and
Reserve Banks of New York, Philadelphia, and
that, for the most part, such tools are untested. More-
Minneapolis, respectively
over, a number of institutional factors, including the dis-
persion of responsibilities across regulatory agencies,
Joseph G. Haubrich, Anna Paulson, and David C.
differences in mandates among those agencies, and re-
Wheelock, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
sulting coordination challenges, may make it difficult to
of Cleveland, Chicago, and St. Louis, respectively
deploy macroprudential tools expeditiously in the
United States and may lessen their effectiveness. Some
participants noted that these considerations would be
3 Attended Tuesday session only.

--- Page 3 ---

______________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ _M_e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ A__p_r_il _2_6_–_2_7_, _2_01_6_________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
less significant for tools that were likely to be adjusted By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
only infrequently. Most participants judged that the ben- domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.
efits of using monetary policy to address threats to fi- There were no intervention operations in foreign curren-
nancial stability would typically be outweighed by the cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe-
costs associated with deviations from the Committee’s riod.
employment and price-stability objectives induced by
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
such actions; some also noted that the benefits are highly
The information reviewed for the April 26–27 FOMC
uncertain. Nonetheless, participants generally agreed
meeting indicated that labor market conditions im-
that the Committee should not completely rule out the
proved further in the first quarter even though growth
possibility of using monetary policy to address financial
in real gross domestic product (GDP) appeared to have
stability risks, particularly in circumstances in which such
slowed. Consumer price inflation continued to run be-
risks significantly threatened the achievement of its dual
low the Committee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent,
mandate and when macroprudential tools had been or
restrained in part by earlier decreases in energy prices
were likely to be ineffective at mitigating those risks. Fi-
and declining prices of non-energy imports. Survey-
nally, participants stressed the need for further research
based measures of longer-run inflation expectations
and analysis to advance understanding of the relation-
were little changed, on balance, in recent months, while
ship between monetary policy and financial stability and
market-based measures of inflation compensation were
to help identify situations in which it might be desirable
still low.
to incorporate financial stability considerations in the de-
sign of monetary policy. Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded at a solid
pace in March, and labor market conditions generally
Developments in Financial Markets and Open
continued to strengthen. Although the unemployment
Market Operations
rate edged up to 5.0 percent, both the labor force partic-
The manager of the System Open Market Account
ipation rate and the employment-to-population ratio
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and for-
continued to increase. The share of workers employed
eign financial markets, including changes in market par-
part time for economic reasons rose slightly but had
ticipants’ expectations for the course of U.S. monetary
been about flat, on balance, over recent months. The
policy. The deputy manager provided a briefing on
rates of private-sector hires and quits moved up in Feb-
money market developments and System open market
ruary, while the rate of job openings declined a little but
operations conducted by the Open Market Desk during
was still at an elevated level. In late March and early
the period since the Committee met on March 15–16,
April, the four-week moving average of initial claims for
2016. Except for the March quarter-end, the daily effec-
unemployment insurance benefits was essentially un-
tive federal funds rate had again remained very close to
changed, on net, at a low level. Labor productivity
the center of the Committee’s ¼ to ½ percent target
growth appeared to have remained slow over the four
range over the intermeeting period. The manager then
quarters ending in the first quarter of this year. Measures
briefed the Committee on a routine review by the staff
of labor compensation continued to rise at a modest
of the process for managing foreign currency reserves
pace, as average hourly earnings for all employees in-
and a resulting proposal for an enhanced analytical
creased 2¼ percent over the 12 months ending in
framework for the management of those reserves.
March.
The Committee voted unanimously to renew the recip-
Total industrial production declined in February and
rocal currency arrangements with the Bank of Canada
March. Manufacturing output decreased, partly reflec-
and the Bank of Mexico; these arrangements are associ-
ting the effects on export demand of earlier appreciation
ated with the Federal Reserve’s participation in the
of the foreign exchange value of the dollar. Meanwhile,
North American Framework Agreement of 1994. In ad-
mining output continued to contract as a result of fur-
dition, the Committee voted unanimously to renew the
ther declines in drilling activity associated with low crude
dollar and foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements
oil prices. Moreover, unseasonably warm weather in
with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank
February and March held down the output of utilities.
of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss Na-
Automakers’ assembly schedules and broader indicators
tional Bank. The votes to renew the Federal Reserve’s
of manufacturing production, such as the readings on
participation in these standing arrangements are taken
new orders from national and regional manufacturing
annually at the April FOMC meeting.
surveys, mostly pointed to only modest gains in factory

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
output over the next few months. Information on ex- spending for defense appeared to have declined. How-
traction and drilling activity for crude oil and natural gas ever, the payrolls of state and local governments in-
in early April was consistent with further declines in min- creased in the first quarter, and nominal construction
ing output. spending by these governments rose, on net, in the first
two months of the quarter.
Growth in real personal consumption expenditures
(PCE) appeared to have slowed in the first quarter. Real The U.S. international trade deficit widened in February,
PCE rose moderately in February after being flat in Jan- as imports rose more than exports; however, preliminary
uary. The components of the nominal retail sales data data on trade in goods suggested that the deficit nar-
used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis to construct rowed substantially in March, with imports falling back
its estimate of PCE moved sideways in March, and the sharply even as exports declined. Large increases in both
rate of sales of new light motor vehicles decreased mark- exports and imports of consumer goods in February
edly. Nevertheless, recent readings on key factors that were more than reversed in March. Also, imports of
influence consumer spending were consistent with a capital goods dropped sharply in March after increasing
pickup in real PCE growth in the coming months. Gains in February. In all, the recent data indicated that net ex-
in real disposable income continued to be solid in Feb- ports probably continued to be a moderate drag on real
ruary. Households’ net worth was boosted by the rise in GDP growth in the first quarter.
equity prices over the intermeeting period and by further
Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE
strong increases in home values through February. Also,
price index, increased 1 percent over the 12 months end-
consumer sentiment as measured by the University of
ing in February, partly restrained by declines in con-
Michigan Surveys of Consumers remained upbeat in
sumer energy prices. Core PCE price inflation, which
early April.
excludes changes in food and energy prices, was 1¾ per-
Recent information on housing activity was broadly con- cent over the same 12-month period, held down in part
sistent with a continued slow recovery in this sector. by falling prices of non-energy imports and the pass-
Starts and building permits for new single-family homes through of declines in energy prices to prices of other
declined in March, but both measures were higher in the goods and services. Over the 12 months ending in
first quarter as a whole than in the fourth quarter of March, total consumer prices as measured by the con-
2015. However, starts of multifamily units continued to sumer price index (CPI) rose 1 percent, while core CPI
decrease in March. Sales of existing homes rose in inflation was 2¼ percent. In light of the CPI data, both
March after decreasing in February, while new home total and core PCE price inflation on a 12-month basis
sales moved lower in both months; nonetheless, sales of appeared to slow a bit in March. Survey measures of
both new and existing homes in the first quarter as a longer-run inflation expectations—including those from
whole were above those in the fourth quarter. the Michigan survey along with the Desk’s Survey of Pri-
mary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants—were
Real private expenditures for business equipment and in-
generally little changed, on balance, in recent months,
tellectual property appeared to decline further in the first
although the reading from the Michigan survey in early
quarter. Nominal shipments of nondefense capital
April was at the low end of its historical range.
goods excluding aircraft decreased, on net, in February
and March. Forward-looking indicators of equipment Recent indicators suggested that foreign real GDP
spending, such as new orders for nondefense capital growth had picked up in the first quarter after a lacklus-
goods along with recent readings from national and re- ter performance last year. Economic growth in Canada
gional surveys of business conditions, continued to be appeared to have rebounded from a very weak fourth
soft. Firms’ nominal spending for nonresidential struc- quarter. Recent data on industrial production and retail
tures excluding drilling and mining decreased in Febru- sales pointed to a pickup in economic growth in the euro
ary. Indicators of spending for structures in the drilling area. Although weak economic performance persisted
and mining sector, such as the number of oil and gas rigs in Japan and South America, the weakness appeared to
in operation, continued to fall through early April. The have abated somewhat. In contrast, economic growth
available data suggested that inventory investment in China moderated in the first quarter, although eco-
moved down in the first quarter. nomic indicators in March were more upbeat than in the
earlier months of the year. In the advanced foreign
Total real government purchases seemed to have risen
economies (AFEs), headline inflation remained low,
modestly in the first quarter. Federal government

--- Page 5 ---

______________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ _M_e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ A__p_r_il _2_6_–_2_7_, _2_01_6_________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
held down by earlier declines in energy prices. With in- Over the intermeeting period, broad U.S. equity price in-
flation generally running below the target rates in these dexes moved up, on net, likely because of investors’
economies, monetary policies remained very accommo- views that monetary policy would be more accommoda-
dative. By contrast, overall inflation in emerging market tive than previously expected along with an improve-
economies (EMEs) rose in the first quarter, largely re- ment in risk sentiment. Stock prices increased broadly
flecting increases in inflation in much of Latin America across industries, including the energy sector. One-
along with an increase in inflation in China that was month-ahead implied volatility on the S&P 500 index—
driven by higher food prices. the VIX—moved down and ended the period below its
historical median. Spreads on 10-year corporate bond
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
yields over yields on comparable-maturity Treasury se-
Financial market conditions improved further, on bal-
curities for both triple-B-rated and speculative-grade is-
ance, over the intermeeting period, with investors ap-
suers declined, on balance, but remained at levels near
pearing to respond to Federal Reserve communications
the high end of their ranges since 2012, as the outlook
that were viewed as more accommodative than antici-
for corporate earnings deteriorated somewhat over the
pated and to somewhat better-than-expected incoming
period. In light of available earnings reports of some
data on foreign economic activity. Risk sentiment also
companies in the S&P 500 index along with equity ana-
appeared to improve further, on net, accompanied by a
lysts’ forecasts for companies that had not yet issued re-
decline in financial market volatility and higher oil prices.
ports, corporate earnings in the first quarter appeared to
Domestic economic data releases over the period had,
have decreased markedly relative to the previous quarter.
on balance, a limited effect on asset prices.
Financing conditions for U.S. nonfinancial businesses
Federal Reserve communications following the March
remained generally accommodative for investment-
FOMC meeting were interpreted by market participants
grade issuers, and those for speculative-grade firms im-
as more accommodative than expected. In particular,
proved somewhat after showing strains earlier in the
investors were attentive to the larger-than-expected
year. Corporate bond issuance by speculative-grade
downward revisions to the projections of the federal
firms rebounded in March from the sluggish pace in Jan-
funds rate in the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Pro-
uary and February. Growth of commercial and indus-
jections as well as to references in the March FOMC
trial (C&I) loans on banks’ books remained strong and
statement and the Chair’s prepared remarks at the press
continued to be driven by lending to investment-grade
conference to risks to the U.S. economic outlook stem-
borrowers by large banks. Nonetheless, according to the
ming from global economic and financial developments.
most recent Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on
Meanwhile, domestic data releases were mixed and elic-
Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), on balance, banks
ited only modest market reactions. On net, financial
further tightened their lending standards on C&I loans
market quotes implied that the federal funds rate path
to large and middle-market firms in the first quarter,
expected by investors flattened notably, and that their
while demand for such loans weakened. The SLOOS
estimated probability of a rate hike by the June FOMC
indicated that banks expected an increase this year in de-
meeting declined significantly. In the Survey of Market
linquencies and charge-offs on existing loans to firms in
Participants, the median investor’s modal path for the
the energy sector; banks also noted some deterioration
federal funds rate also moved down substantially, while
in credit quality of loans to non-energy businesses lo-
in the Survey of Primary Dealers, the median dealer’s
cated in U.S. regions that were dependent on the energy
modal path was little changed.
sector.
Consistent with the flatter path for the federal funds rate
A significant number of SLOOS respondents reported
implied by market quotes, yields on nominal Treasury
tightening their lending standards on all major categories
securities with maturities up to 10 years declined slightly
of commercial real estate (CRE) loans during the first
over the period since the March FOMC meeting.
quarter. However, demand for CRE loans reportedly
Measures of inflation compensation based on Treasury
strengthened, and CRE loans on banks’ books contin-
Inflation-Protected Securities increased somewhat but
ued to grow at a robust pace over the first quarter. In
remained at low levels. Credit conditions in municipal
response to wider and more volatile spreads on commer-
bond markets continued to be stable even as the situa-
cial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) since the sum-
tion facing Puerto Rico and its creditors deteriorated fur-
mer of 2015, CMBS issuance was subdued in the first
ther.
quarter, consistent with reports from banks in the

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
SLOOS. Over the intermeeting period, CMBS spreads In its latest report on potential risks to the stability of the
narrowed markedly but remained elevated. U.S. financial system, the staff continued to judge that
vulnerabilities were moderate overall. In particular, lev-
Growth of residential real estate (RRE) loans on banks’
erage and maturity transformation in the financial sector
books continued to be low through the first quarter, and
were subdued relative to historical levels, and growth of
credit conditions stayed tight for mortgage borrowers
aggregate private nonfinancial-sector credit was modest.
with low credit scores, hard-to-document income, or rel-
These indicators suggested that the financial system was
atively high debt-to-income ratios. A significant number
fairly resilient, as did the absence of a significant increase
of SLOOS respondents reportedly eased lending stan-
in funding stresses or margin calls earlier this year when
dards on residential mortgages eligible for purchase by
prices of risky assets fell and volatility rose sharply. Since
the government-sponsored enterprises, and a significant
then, prices of risky assets rebounded notably, and valu-
number also experienced stronger demand overall for
ation pressures rose somewhat. Term premiums re-
RRE loans in the first quarter. Over the intermeeting
mained very low, and CRE valuations were elevated. In
period, rates on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages for well-
addition, corporate debt positions were high, although
qualified borrowers edged down in line with yields on
the issuance of low-rated debt had slowed.
mortgage-backed securities and comparable-duration
Treasury securities and were near their all-time lows at Staff Economic Outlook
the end of the period. In the U.S. economic forecast prepared by the staff for
the April FOMC meeting, real GDP growth in the first
Financing conditions in consumer credit markets were
quarter of this year was estimated to have been much
little changed and remained largely accommodative in
slower than in the forecast prepared for the March meet-
the first quarter, with student and auto loans continuing
ing, although projected real GDP growth in the second
to be broadly available. Credit card lending conditions
quarter was revised up a little. Beyond the near term,
were still relatively tight, particularly for borrowers with
real GDP was expected to increase slightly faster than in
subprime credit scores. Responses to the SLOOS indi-
the previous forecast, largely reflecting a somewhat
cated that during the first quarter, while credit card lend-
higher projected trajectory for equity prices and lower
ing standards were little changed, a modest number of
assumed paths for both longer-term interest rates and
banks eased standards on auto and other consumer
the foreign exchange value of the dollar. The staff con-
loans. Over the same period, demand for auto loans re-
tinued to project that real GDP would expand at a mod-
portedly strengthened further at many banks. Consumer
estly faster pace than potential output in 2016 through
loan balances continued to increase at a robust pace
2018, supported primarily by increases in consumer
through February, and data on bank lending activities
spending. The unemployment rate was expected to
suggested further growth through March. Issuance of
gradually decline further and to run somewhat below the
asset-backed securities continued to be strong in the first
staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate over this pe-
quarter. Spreads on such securities remained at levels
riod.
that were a bit higher than usual.
The staff’s forecast for inflation was little changed from
Since the March FOMC meeting, foreign financial mar-
the previous projection. The staff continued to project
ket conditions eased, on net, and overall risk sentiment
that inflation would increase over the next several years,
appeared to have improved. A number of factors likely
as energy prices and the prices of non-energy imports
contributed to the improvement, including expectations
were expected to begin steadily rising this year, but infla-
of more accommodative monetary policy in the United
tion was still projected to be slightly below the Commit-
States. Sentiment was also likely boosted by the release
tee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent in 2018.
of generally favorable foreign economic data. Against
this backdrop, stock prices rose in most countries, with The staff viewed the uncertainty around its April projec-
the equity indexes of the EMEs outperforming those of tions for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and
the AFEs. Changes in longer-term yields in the AFEs inflation as similar to the average of the past 20 years.
were mixed: Ten-year sovereign yields decreased slightly The risks to the forecast for real GDP were seen as tilted
in Germany and Japan but increased in Canada and in to the downside, reflecting the staff’s assessment that
the United Kingdom. The foreign exchange value of the neither monetary nor fiscal policy was well positioned to
dollar depreciated against most currencies, in part be- help the economy withstand substantial adverse shocks.
cause higher oil prices supported the currencies of oil In addition, while there had been recent improvements
exporters. in global financial and economic conditions, downside

--- Page 7 ---

______________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ _M_e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ A__p_r_il _2_6_–_2_7_, _2_01_6_________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
risks to the forecast from developments abroad, though ally since March and discussed a number of factors sug-
smaller, remained. Consistent with the downside risk to gesting that the apparent softness in spending in the first
aggregate demand, the staff viewed the risks to its out- quarter was unlikely to persist. Most pointed to the
look for the unemployment rate as skewed to the upside. steady improvement in the labor market as an indicator
The risks to the projection for inflation were still judged that the underlying pace of economic activity had likely
as weighted to the downside, reflecting the possibility not deteriorated as much as was suggested by the recent
that longer-term inflation expectations may have edged data on spending and production. Notably, solid job
down. gains and real income growth, along with a high level of
household wealth and relatively upbeat consumer senti-
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
ment, were expected to support a pickup in consumer
Economic Outlook
spending after its slowdown in the first quarter. In ad-
In their discussion of the economic situation and the
dition, the easing of financial conditions in recent
outlook, meeting participants agreed that the infor-
months was anticipated to provide some support for
mation received over the intermeeting period indicated
consumer spending and business investment going for-
that labor market conditions improved further even as
ward. Many also thought that, as had apparently been
growth in economic activity appeared to have slowed.
the case in recent years, a low reading on seasonally ad-
Growth in household spending had moderated, al-
justed first-quarter GDP growth could partly reflect
though households’ real income had risen at a solid rate
measurement problems and, if so, would likely be fol-
and consumer sentiment remained high. Since the be-
lowed by stronger GDP growth in subsequent quarters.
ginning of the year, the housing sector had improved
However, some participants were concerned that transi-
further, but business fixed investment and net exports
tory factors may not fully explain the softness in con-
had been soft. A range of indicators, including strong
sumer spending or the broad-based declines in business
job gains, pointed to additional strengthening of the la-
investment in recent months. They saw a risk that a
bor market. Inflation had continued to run below the
more persistent slowdown in economic growth might be
Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective, partly re-
under way, which could hinder further improvement in
flecting earlier declines in energy prices and falling prices
labor market conditions.
of non-energy imports. Market-based measures of infla-
tion compensation remained low; survey-based Participants generally agreed that the risks to the eco-
measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little nomic outlook posed by global economic and financial
changed, on balance, in recent months. Domestic and developments had receded over the intermeeting period.
global financial conditions eased over the intermeeting The public appeared to have interpreted Federal Reserve
period, the incoming news on the foreign economic out- communications following the March FOMC meeting as
look was generally positive, and investor sentiment im- indicating that achieving the Committee’s economic ob-
proved. jectives would likely require a somewhat more gradual
pace of increases in the federal funds rate than antici-
Although the incoming data suggested that aggregate
pated earlier. The shift in policy expectations, along with
spending in the first quarter had been weaker than ex-
incoming data showing that economic growth abroad
pected, participants continued to anticipate that eco-
picked up during the first quarter of the year, seemed to
nomic activity would expand at a moderate pace over the
contribute to the improved tone in global financial mar-
medium term and that labor market indicators would
kets. Several FOMC participants judged that the risks to
continue to strengthen. Inflation was expected to re-
the economic outlook were now roughly balanced.
main low in the near term, in part because of earlier de-
However, many others indicated that they continued to
clines in energy prices, but to rise to 2 percent over the
see downside risks to the outlook either because of con-
medium term as the transitory effects of the declines in
cerns that the recent slowdown in domestic spending
energy and import prices dissipated and the labor market
might persist or because of remaining concerns about
strengthened further. Participants generally saw the
the global economic and financial outlook. Some partic-
risks stemming from global economic and financial de-
ipants noted that global financial markets could be sen-
velopments as having diminished over the intermeeting
sitive to the upcoming British referendum on member-
period but as continuing to warrant close monitoring.
ship in the European Union or to unanticipated devel-
Participants indicated that their assessments of the me- opments associated with China’s management of its ex-
dium-term economic outlook had not changed materi- change rate.

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
While the recent data suggested markedly slower growth Business fixed investment declined in the fourth quarter
in consumer spending in the first quarter than seen in of 2015 and appeared to have dropped further in early
2015, most participants expected to see a pickup in the 2016. As noted by a number of participants, the weak-
growth rate of consumer spending in coming months in ness in capital spending in recent quarters was in part
light of the still-solid fundamental determinants of due to the ongoing contraction in drilling activity and
household spending. Ongoing strong gains in employ- weak demand from abroad for goods manufactured in
ment and low energy prices were boosting aggregate the United States. More broadly, several participants
household real income, and the level of household commented that their business contacts had expressed
wealth was relatively high. It was noted that the slow- considerable caution about the economic outlook or had
down in consumer spending early this year was primarily indicated that their firms were focused on cost-cutting
due to weaker expenditures for goods while outlays for measures that included delaying major expenditures, de-
services continued to increase in line with recent trends. spite relatively favorable financial conditions. However,
Although a couple of participants noted that consumers’ some other participants were more positive about the
caution in recent months might have been the result of outlook for business spending, pointing to the optimism
financial market turmoil in the first two months of this reported in a number of business surveys or to rising
year, they and others observed that financial conditions business investment in both equipment and commercial
had since improved and that consumer confidence re- structures in their Districts.
mained at a relatively high level. Reports from District
Labor market conditions strengthened further in recent
contacts on consumer spending were generally positive.
months. Increases in nonfarm payroll employment av-
In the housing sector, indicators of sales and starts of eraged almost 210,000 per month over the first three
new single-family homes were up, on balance, from their months of 2016. Although the unemployment rate
fourth-quarter levels. Activity in the multifamily sector changed little over that period, the labor force participa-
appeared to have slowed during the first quarter, al- tion rate moved up and the pool of potential workers,
though demographic trends should continue to support which includes the unemployed as well as those who
this sector going forward. Business contacts in a num- would like a job but are not actively looking, continued
ber of Districts noted an improvement in housing activ- to shrink. Many participants judged that labor market
ity and a continued rise in house prices, although their conditions had reached or were quite close to those con-
reports showed that the pace of sales and construction sistent with their interpretation of the Committee’s ob-
varied across regions. jective of maximum employment. Several of them re-
ported that businesses in their Districts had seen a
Participants summarized survey readings and anecdotal
pickup in wages, shortages of workers in selected occu-
reports on business conditions that were, on balance,
pations, or pressures to retain or train workers for hard-
mixed. According to several District surveys, activity in
to-fill jobs. Many other participants continued to see
services industries continued to expand, and in some
scope for reducing labor market slack as labor demand
Districts, surveys and reports from business contacts in-
continued to expand. In that regard, a number of par-
dicated that manufacturing activity had strengthened or
ticipants indicated that the recent rise in the participation
stabilized. Motor vehicle production remained at a high
rate was a positive development, suggesting that a tighter
level. Nonetheless, manufacturing industries dependent
labor market could potentially draw more individuals
on exports or the energy sector were still experiencing
back into the workforce on a sustained basis without
weak demand. The low level of oil prices continued to
adding to inflationary pressures and thus increase the
depress activity in the domestic energy sector, and a cou-
productive capacity of the economy. It was also noted
ple of participants suggested that, even with the ongoing
that businesses might satisfy increases in labor demand
cutbacks in production and potential increases in global
in part by converting involuntary part-time jobs to full-
demand, the imbalance of supply of crude oil relative to
time positions.
demand could last into 2017 and lead to further reduc-
tions in capital investment by energy firms. One partic- Over the past five years, employment and hours worked
ipant noted that bankruptcies were rising among natural rose relatively strongly while the pace of the expansion
gas and coal producers as well as among firms engaged in output was moderate, resulting in measured produc-
in oil exploration and extraction. A few participants also tivity growth of slightly less than ½ percent per year on
reported that low prices for agricultural commodities average. It was noted that participants’ projections of
continued to strain the profitability of farming opera- the longer-run growth rate of real GDP, shown in the
tions in their Districts. Summary of Economic Projections, appeared to assume

--- Page 9 ---

______________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ _M_e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ A__p_r_il _2_6_–_2_7_, _2_01_6_________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
that productivity growth would strengthen. While ac- several noting recent increases in alternative measures of
knowledging uncertainty about the reasons for the slow- the trend in inflation, such as the trimmed mean PCE
down in productivity growth in recent years and whether and the median CPI, or citing evidence that wage growth
it would persist, many participants commented on a was picking up. In addition to the ongoing tightening of
range of possible outcomes that could result from resource utilization, the recent depreciation of the dollar
slower-than-expected productivity growth. Some saw and the firming in oil prices suggested that the down-
the possibility that, even with real GDP growth remain- ward pressures on both core and headline inflation from
ing relatively slow, the unemployment rate might decline declining prices of non-oil imports and energy should
more quickly and inflation might rise a bit more rapidly begin to subside.
than expected if productivity growth continued to disap-
U.S. and global financial conditions improved signifi-
point in coming quarters while hiring remained strong.
cantly over the intermeeting period, marked by a rise in
In that case, monetary policy accommodation might
equity indexes, more positive risk sentiment, and a de-
need to be removed more quickly than currently antici-
cline in financial market volatility. During their discus-
pated. Alternatively, continued low productivity growth
sion of these developments, participants cited several
for a time might instead lead to slower-than-anticipated
factors that likely contributed to the easing in financial
growth in household income and business sales, thereby
conditions. In the view of many FOMC participants,
resulting in paths for the unemployment rate and the
Federal Reserve communications after the March
federal funds rate little different than currently expected.
FOMC meeting led financial market participants to shift
Moreover, several participants noted that if trend
down their expectations concerning the likely path of the
productivity growth remained permanently lower—a de-
Committee’s target for the federal funds rate. In addi-
velopment that could be quite difficult to identify in only
tion, the recent depreciation of the dollar and indications
a few quarters—the likely implication for monetary pol-
of a rebound of economic growth in China appeared to
icy would be a reduction in the longer-run equilibrium
reduce pressures on the renminbi. More broadly, signs
federal funds rate.
of a pickup in growth in economic activity in some AFEs
The incoming information on inflation over the inter- and emerging Asian economies other than China also
meeting period showed that the earlier declines in energy appeared to contribute to the improvement in sentiment
prices and falling prices of non-energy imports were still in financial markets. Participants generally agreed that
contributing importantly to low headline inflation. The the easing in financial conditions in the United States
12-month change in core PCE prices also continued to would provide some support for consumer spending
run below 2 percent, but it moved up to 1.7 percent in and business investment going forward and had reduced
January and February from 1.4 percent at the end of the downside risks to the outlook. Moreover, a number
2015. Despite the recent rise in core inflation, some par- of participants cited reports from business contacts in
ticipants continued to see progress toward the Commit- their Districts of favorable credit conditions for house-
tee’s 2 percent inflation objective as likely to be gradual. hold and business borrowers.
They noted that, as they had expected, the March CPI
Several participants pointed out that U.S. firms and fi-
data showed that the high monthly readings on some
nancial markets had come through the period of elevated
components of core prices in January and February were
financial market volatility earlier in the year looking rel-
transitory, and that the March CPI data suggested that
atively resilient. However, several noted the ongoing
the 12-month change in core PCE prices likely moved
need to remain alert to vulnerabilities in the financial sys-
down in March. Several commented that the stronger
tem. In that regard, a few cited concerns about rapidly
labor market still appeared to be exerting little upward
rising prices of CRE, including multifamily properties,
pressure on wage or price inflation. Moreover, several
or about illiquidity of the assets of some mutual funds.
continued to see important downside risks to inflation
It was also noted that the debt situation in Puerto Rico
in light of the still-low readings on market-based
had deteriorated further over the intermeeting period
measures of inflation compensation and the slippage in
and remained unresolved. To date, the situation had not
the past couple of years in some survey measures of ex-
led to strains in broader financial markets and was not
pected longer-run inflation. However, for many other
expected to do so.
participants, the recent developments provided greater
confidence that inflation would rise to 2 percent over the Participants discussed whether their current assessments
medium term. Some viewed the recent firming in core of economic conditions and the medium-term outlook
inflation as broadly based and unlikely to unwind, with warranted increasing the target range for the federal

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
funds rate at this meeting. Participants agreed that in- Some participants saw limited costs to maintaining a pa-
coming indicators regarding labor market developments tient posture at this meeting but noted the risks—includ-
continued to be encouraging. They generally concurred ing potential risks to financial stability—of waiting too
that data releases during the intermeeting period on long to resume the process of removing policy accom-
components of private domestic demand had been dis- modation, especially given the lags with which monetary
appointing, but most participants judged that the slow- policy affects the economy. A couple of participants
down in growth of domestic spending would be tempo- were concerned that further postponement of action to
rary, citing possible measurement problems and other raise the federal funds rate might confuse the public
transitory factors. Financial market conditions contin- about the economic considerations that influence the
ued to improve, providing support to aggregate demand Committee’s policy decisions and potentially erode the
and suggesting that market participants saw some reduc- Committee’s credibility.
tion in downside risks to the outlook: Equity prices rose
A few participants judged it appropriate to increase the
further, credit spreads declined somewhat, and the dollar
target range for the federal funds rate at this meeting,
depreciated over the intermeeting period. Taking these
citing their assessments that downside risks associated
developments into account, participants generally
with global economic and financial developments had
judged that the medium-term outlook for economic ac-
diminished substantially since early this year, that labor
tivity and the labor market had not changed appreciably
market conditions were consistent with the Committee’s
since the previous meeting. Furthermore, most partici-
maximum-employment objective, and that inflation was
pants continued to expect that, with labor markets con-
likely to rise this year toward the Committee’s 2 percent
tinuing to strengthen, the dollar no longer appreciating,
objective. Two participants noted that several standard
and energy prices apparently having bottomed out, infla-
policy benchmarks, such as a number of interest rate
tion would move up to the Committee’s 2 percent ob-
rules and some measures of the equilibrium real interest
jective in the medium run.
rate, continued to imply values for the federal funds rate
Still, with 12-month PCE inflation continuing to run be- well above the current target range. Such large and per-
low the Committee’s 2 percent objective, a number of sistent deviations of the federal funds rate from these
participants judged that it would be appropriate to pro- benchmarks, in their view, posed a risk that the removal
ceed cautiously in removing policy accommodation. of policy accommodation was proceeding too slowly and
Some participants pointed to the risk that the recent that the Committee might, in the future, find it necessary
weak data on domestic spending could reflect a loss of to raise the federal funds rate quickly to combat inflation
momentum in the economy that might hinder further pressures, potentially unduly disrupting economic or fi-
gains in the labor market and raise the likelihood that nancial activity. Overly accommodative policy could
inflation could fail to increase as expected. Accordingly, also induce imprudent risk-taking in financial markets,
these participants believed that it would be important to posing additional risks to achieving the Committee’s
evaluate whether incoming information was consistent goals in the future.
with their expectation that economic growth would pick
Participants agreed that their ongoing assessments of the
up and thus support continued improvement in the la-
data and other incoming information, as well as the im-
bor market. In addition, a number of participants judged
plications for the outlook, would determine the timing
that the risks to the outlook for inflation remained tilted
and pace of future adjustments to the stance of monetary
to the downside in light of low readings on measures of
policy. Most participants judged that if incoming data
inflation compensation and the fall over the past year in
were consistent with economic growth picking up in the
some survey measures of longer-term inflation expecta-
second quarter, labor market conditions continuing to
tions. Also, many participants noted that downside risks
strengthen, and inflation making progress toward the
emanating from developments abroad, while reduced,
Committee’s 2 percent objective, then it likely would be
still warranted close monitoring. For these reasons, par-
appropriate for the Committee to increase the target
ticipants generally saw maintaining the target range for
range for the federal funds rate in June. Participants ex-
the federal funds rate at ¼ to ½ percent at this meeting
pressed a range of views about the likelihood that in-
and continuing to assess developments carefully as con-
coming information would make it appropriate to adjust
sistent with setting policy in a data-dependent manner
the stance of policy at the time of the next meeting. Sev-
and as leaving open the possibility of an increase in the
eral participants were concerned that the incoming in-
federal funds rate at the June FOMC meeting.
formation might not provide sufficiently clear signals to
determine by mid-June whether an increase in the target

--- Page 11 ---

______________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ _M_e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ A__p_r_il _2_6_–_2_7_, _2_01_6________________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
range for the federal funds rate would be warranted. cided to indicate that it would continue to closely moni-
Some participants expressed more confidence that in- tor inflation indicators and global economic and finan-
coming data would prove broadly consistent with eco- cial developments. This change in language was in-
nomic conditions that would make an increase in the tar- tended to convey the Committee’s sense that the risks
get range in June appropriate. Some participants were associated with global developments had diminished
concerned that market participants may not have somewhat since the March FOMC meeting without
properly assessed the likelihood of an increase in the tar- characterizing the overall balance of risks.
get range at the June meeting, and they emphasized the
Against the backdrop of its discussion of current condi-
importance of communicating clearly over the inter-
tions, the economic outlook, and the risks and uncer-
meeting period how the Committee intends to respond
tainties surrounding the outlook, the Committee decided
to economic and financial developments.
to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at
Committee Policy Action ¼ to ½ percent at this meeting. Members generally
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period agreed that, in light of the recent weak readings on
ahead, members judged that information received since spending and production, and with inflation below the
the FOMC met in March indicated that labor market Committee’s objective, it would be prudent to wait for
conditions had improved further even as growth in eco- additional information bearing on the medium-term out-
nomic activity had appeared to slow. They noted that look before deciding whether to raise the target range for
growth in household spending had moderated, although the federal funds rate. One member, however, preferred
households’ real income had risen at a solid rate and con- to raise the target range for the federal funds rate at this
sumer sentiment had remained high. They also agreed meeting, noting that downside risks to the outlook had
that since the beginning of the year, the housing sector diminished and that the outlook was for outcomes con-
had improved further, but business fixed investment and sistent with the Committee’s objectives.
net exports had been soft. Members saw a range of re-
Members again agreed that, in determining the timing
cent indicators, including strong job gains, as pointing to
and size of future adjustments to the target range for the
additional strengthening of the labor market. Members
federal funds rate, the Committee would assess realized
noted that inflation had continued to run below the
and expected economic conditions relative to its objec-
Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective, partly re-
tives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.
flecting earlier declines in energy prices and falling prices
This assessment would take into account a wide range of
of non-energy imports. Market-based measures of infla-
information, including measures of labor market condi-
tion compensation remained low. Survey-based
tions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation ex-
measures of longer-term inflation expectations were lit-
pectations, and readings on financial and international
tle changed, on balance, in recent months.
developments. In light of the current shortfall of infla-
With respect to the economic outlook and its implica- tion from 2 percent, the Committee agreed that it would
tions for monetary policy, members continued to expect carefully monitor actual and expected progress toward
that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary its inflation goal. The Committee expected that eco-
policy, economic activity would expand at a moderate nomic conditions would evolve in a manner that would
pace and labor market indicators would continue to warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate,
strengthen. Although the recent spending and produc- and that the federal funds rate was likely to remain, for
tion data had been disappointing, members generally some time, below levels that were expected to prevail in
judged this weakness to be temporary, though some the longer run. Regarding the possibility of adjustments
members noted the risk that it might persist, potentially in the stance of policy at the next meeting, members gen-
undermining further improvement in the labor market. erally judged it appropriate to leave their policy options
Members also continued to expect inflation to remain open and maintain the flexibility to make this decision
low in the near term, in part because of earlier declines based on how the incoming data and developments
in energy prices, but to rise to 2 percent over the me- shaped their outlook for the labor market and inflation
dium term as the transitory effects of declines in energy as well as their evolving assessments of the balance of
and import prices dissipated and the labor market risks around that outlook. It was noted that communi-
strengthened further. In its postmeeting statement, ra- cations could help the public understand how the Com-
ther than stating that global economic and financial de- mittee might respond to incoming data and develop-
velopments continued to pose risks, the Committee de- ments over the upcoming intermeeting period. Some
members expressed concern that the likelihood implied

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
by market pricing that the Committee would increase the have slowed. Growth in household spending has
target range for the federal funds rate at the June meeting moderated, although households’ real income has
might be unduly low. risen at a solid rate and consumer sentiment re-
mains high. Since the beginning of the year, the
The Committee also decided to maintain its existing pol-
housing sector has improved further but business
icy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings
fixed investment and net exports have been soft.
of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in
A range of recent indicators, including strong job
agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over
gains, points to additional strengthening of the la-
maturing Treasury securities at auction, and it antici-
bor market. Inflation has continued to run below
pated doing so until normalization of the level of the
the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective,
federal funds rate is well under way. This policy, by
partly reflecting earlier declines in energy prices
keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term secu-
and falling prices of non-energy imports. Market-
rities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommoda-
based measures of inflation compensation remain
tive financial conditions.
low; survey-based measures of longer-term infla-
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee tion expectations are little changed, on balance, in
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank recent months.
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
cute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the
mittee seeks to foster maximum employment and
following domestic policy directive, to be released at
price stability. The Committee currently expects
2:00 p.m.:
that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of
“Effective April 28, 2016, the Federal Open Mar- monetary policy, economic activity will expand at
ket Committee directs the Desk to undertake a moderate pace and labor market indicators will
open market operations as necessary to maintain continue to strengthen. Inflation is expected to
the federal funds rate in a target range of ¼ to remain low in the near term, in part because of
½ percent, including overnight reverse repur- earlier declines in energy prices, but to rise to
chase operations (and reverse repurchase opera- 2 percent over the medium term as the transitory
tions with maturities of more than one day when effects of declines in energy and import prices
necessary to accommodate weekend, holiday, or dissipate and the labor market strengthens fur-
similar trading conventions) at an offering rate of ther. The Committee continues to closely moni-
0.25 percent, in amounts limited only by the value tor inflation indicators and global economic and
of Treasury securities held outright in the System financial developments.
Open Market Account that are available for such
Against this backdrop, the Committee decided to
operations and by a per-counterparty limit of
maintain the target range for the federal funds
$30 billion per day.
rate at ¼ to ½ percent. The stance of monetary
The Committee directs the Desk to continue roll- policy remains accommodative, thereby support-
ing over maturing Treasury securities at auction ing further improvement in labor market condi-
and to continue reinvesting principal payments tions and a return to 2 percent inflation.
on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed
In determining the timing and size of future ad-
securities in agency mortgage-backed securities.
justments to the target range for the federal funds
The Committee also directs the Desk to engage
rate, the Committee will assess realized and ex-
in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
pected economic conditions relative to its objec-
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal
tives of maximum employment and 2 percent in-
Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities
flation. This assessment will take into account a
transactions.”
wide range of information, including measures of
The vote also encompassed approval of the statement labor market conditions, indicators of inflation
below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: pressures and inflation expectations, and readings
on financial and international developments. In
“Information received since the Federal Open
light of the current shortfall of inflation from
Market Committee met in March indicates that la-
2 percent, the Committee will carefully monitor
bor market conditions have improved further
actual and expected progress toward its inflation
even as growth in economic activity appears to

--- Page 13 ---

______________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ _M_e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ A__p_r_il _2_6_–_2_7_, _2_01_6________________________P__ag_e_ _1_3
goal. The Committee expects that economic con- was for economic growth, employment, and inflation
ditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant outcomes consistent with the Committee’s statutory
only gradual increases in the federal funds rate; objectives. She believed that monetary policy should
the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some respond to these developments by gradually removing
time, below levels that are expected to prevail in accommodation and noted that several frameworks for
the longer run. However, the actual path of the assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy,
federal funds rate will depend on the economic such as prescriptions from various policy rules and some
outlook as informed by incoming data. estimates of equilibrium interest rates, also suggested
that a reduction in monetary policy accommodation
The Committee is maintaining its existing policy
would be appropriate.
of reinvesting principal payments from its hold-
ings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the
securities in agency mortgage-backed securities target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the
and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at Board of Governors took no action to change the
auction, and it anticipates doing so until normali- interest rates on reserves or discount rates.
zation of the level of the federal funds rate is well
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
under way. This policy, by keeping the Commit-
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, June 14–15,
tee’s holdings of longer-term securities at sizable
2016. The meeting adjourned at 10:05 a.m. on April 27,
levels, should help maintain accommodative fi-
2016.
nancial conditions.”
Notation Vote
Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C.
By notation vote completed on April 5, 2016, the
Dudley, Lael Brainard, James Bullard, Stanley Fischer,
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
Loretta J. Mester, Jerome H. Powell, Eric Rosengren,
Committee meeting held on March 15–16, 2016.
and Daniel K. Tarullo.
Voting against this action: Esther L. George.
Ms. George dissented because she believed that a
25 basis point increase in the target range for the federal _____________________________
funds rate was appropriate at this meeting. Potential Brian F. Madigan
downside risks to the economic outlook had diminished Secretary
since the March FOMC meeting, and the modal outlook