# 20160615_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:38:15*
*Pages: 25, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
June 14–15, 2016
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of Market Account
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, June 14, 2016, at Robert deV. Frierson, Secretary of the Board, Office of
1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, June 15, 2016, the Secretary, Board of Governors
at 9:00 a.m.1
Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking
PRESENT: Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors
Janet L. Yellen, Chair
James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Andreas
Lael Brainard
Lehnert, Deputy Director, Division of Financial
James Bullard
Stability, Board of Governors
Stanley Fischer
Esther L. George
David Bowman, Andrew Figura, Ann McKeehan,
Loretta J. Mester
David Reifschneider, and Stacey Tevlin, Special
Jerome H. Powell
Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members,
Eric Rosengren
Board of Governors
Daniel K. Tarullo
Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office
Charles L. Evans, Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan,
of Board Members, Board of Governors
and Neel Kashkari, Alternate Members of the
Federal Open Market Committee
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and John C.
Williams, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
Fabio M. Natalucci, Senior Associate Director,
of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors;
respectively
Beth Anne Wilson, Senior Associate Director,
Division of International Finance, Board of
Brian F. Madigan, Secretary
Governors
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Michael T. Kiley, Senior Adviser, Division of Research
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary
and Statistics, and Senior Associate Director,
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel
Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors
Steven B. Kamin, Economist
Thomas Laubach, Economist
Antulio N. Bomfim, Ellen E. Meade, and Joyce K.
David W. Wilcox, Economist
Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd,
Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy, David E.
Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics,
Lebow, Jonathan P. McCarthy, Stephen A. Meyer,
Board of Governors
Ellis W. Tallman, Christopher J. Waller, and
William Wascher, Associate Economists
Shaghil Ahmed, Deputy Associate Director, Division
of International Finance, Board of Governors
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account
1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Christopher J. Gust2 and Jason Wu, Assistant Cristina Arellano, Senior Research Economist, Federal
Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Governors; Paul A. Smith, Assistant Director,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors Developments in Financial Markets and Open
Market Operations
Eric C. Engstrom and Patrick E. McCabe, Advisers, The manager of the System Open Market Account
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of (SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and for-
Governors eign financial markets during the period since the Com-
mittee met on April 26–27, 2016. Market participants’
Penelope A. Beattie,3 Assistant to the Secretary, Office expectations for a firming of monetary policy at the June
of the Secretary, Board of Governors FOMC meeting rose considerably in the middle of the
period, largely in response to monetary policy commu-
Brett Berger, Senior Economic Project Manager, nications, but those expectations subsequently fell
Division of International Finance, Board of sharply following the release of labor market data for
Governors May. Nominal yields on Treasury securities declined
over the period. Forward measures of inflation compen-
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of sation derived from yields on nominal and inflation-
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors indexed Treasury securities fell despite an appreciable in-
crease in crude oil prices, a development that contrasted
Wendy E. Dunn, Principal Economist, Division of with the positive correlation between these variables that
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; had been evident for some time. The manager also
Marcelo Rezende, Principal Economist, Division noted that bond yields globally had declined to very low
of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors levels and discussed some of the possible reasons for the
drop. Actions by investors to shift their portfolios away
Edward Herbst and Hiroatsu Tanaka, Senior from very low-yielding foreign sovereign debt were cited
Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board as adding to the downward pressure on U.S. yields. The
of Governors manager also reviewed the apparent effects on financial
markets of changes in the perceived odds that the United
Randall A. Williams, Information Manager, Division of Kingdom would vote in a referendum on June 23 to
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors leave the European Union.
In domestic money markets, the effective federal funds
David Sapenaro, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
rate once again stayed close to the middle of the
Bank of St. Louis
FOMC’s ¼ to ½ percent target range over the inter-
meeting period except on month-ends. Usage of the
David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, and Jeff Fuhrer,
System’s overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility
Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
remained low. Market participants anticipated that
of Atlanta, Richmond, and Boston, respectively
changes to the regulation of money market mutual funds
that will take effect later in the year could lead to some
Stephanie Heller, Evan F. Koenig, and Spencer Krane,
increase in usage of the facility. Finally, the manager
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
briefed the Committee on various efforts, including
New York, Dallas, and Chicago, respectively
small-value tests of System facilities, to enhance opera-
tional readiness.
Roc Armenter, Sarah K. Bell, Òscar Jordà, and
George A. Kahn, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
Banks of Philadelphia, New York, San Francisco, domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.
and Kansas City, respectively
2Attended Wednesday session only.
3 Attended Tuesday session only.

--- Page 3 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_4_–_1_5,_ 2_0_1_6_________________________P__ag_e_ _3
There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- Total industrial production (IP) rose in April, principally
cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- reflecting a rebound in the output of utilities following a
riod. couple of unseasonably warm winter months as well as
a moderate increase in manufacturing production.
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
Meanwhile, mining output continued to contract as a re-
The information reviewed for the June 14–15 meeting
sult of further declines in drilling activity, a slower pace
indicated that the pace of improvement in labor market
of crude oil extraction, and a continued pullback in coal
conditions slowed in April and May but that real gross
production. A variety of indicators—including manu-
domestic product (GDP) appeared to be rising faster
facturing production worker hours, motor vehicle as-
than in the first quarter. Consumer price inflation con-
semblies, and oil and gas extraction and drilling activ-
tinued to run below the Committee’s longer-run objec-
ity—suggested that IP likely declined in May. Automak-
tive of 2 percent, restrained in part by earlier decreases
ers’ assembly schedules and mixed readings on other in-
in energy prices and in prices of non-energy imports.
dicators of manufacturing production, such as new or-
Survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expecta-
ders from national and regional manufacturing surveys,
tions were mixed in recent months, while market-based
pointed to only subdued gains in factory output over the
measures of inflation compensation declined from levels
next few months.
that were already low.
Growth in real personal consumption expenditures
Total nonfarm payroll employment gains slowed in April
(PCE) appeared to be picking up in the second quarter.
and May, even after adjusting for the effects of a strike
The components of the nominal retail sales data used by
at a large telecommunications company. The unemploy-
the Bureau of Economic Analysis to construct its esti-
ment rate dropped to 4.7 percent in May, partly reflect-
mate of PCE rose at a solid pace in April and May, and
ing an unusually large number of unemployed persons
sales of light motor vehicles rebounded after dipping in
exiting the labor force. Over the first two months of the
March. The apparent pickup in real PCE growth was
second quarter, both the labor force participation rate
consistent with recent readings on key factors that influ-
and the employment-to-population ratio moved down
ence consumer spending. Gains in real disposable per-
on net. The share of workers employed part time for
sonal income continued to be solid in March and April,
economic reasons rose noticeably in May. Although the
and households’ net worth was boosted by further
rate of private-sector job openings remained elevated,
strong increases in home values through April. Also,
the rate of hires declined in both March and April and
consumer sentiment as measured by the University of
the rate of quits was unchanged. The four-week moving
Michigan Surveys of Consumers remained upbeat in
average of initial claims for unemployment insurance
early June.
benefits moved up a little, on net, from late April to early
June but was still at a low level. Labor productivity Recent information on housing activity was broadly con-
growth remained slow over the four quarters ending in sistent with a continued gradual recovery in this sector.
the first quarter of 2016. Measures of labor compensa- Starts for new single-family homes increased in April but
tion continued to rise at a moderate pace on balance: were below the average pace in the first quarter, and
Compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector building permit issuance remained essentially flat at the
increased 3¾ percent over the four quarters ending in level that prevailed since late last year. The pace of starts
the first quarter, the employment cost index for private for multifamily units moved up in April and was faster
workers rose 1¾ percent over the 12 months ending in than in the first quarter. Sales of both new and existing
March, and average hourly earnings for all employees in- homes rose in April.
creased 2½ percent over the 12 months ending in May.
Real private expenditures for business equipment and in-
The unemployment rates for African Americans and for tellectual property appeared to be relatively flat early in
Hispanics stayed above the rate for whites, although the the second quarter after declining sharply in the previous
differentials in jobless rates across the different groups quarter. Nominal shipments of nondefense capital
were similar to those before the most recent recession. goods excluding aircraft edged up in April, and forward-
The share of African American and Hispanic workers looking indicators, such as new orders for these capital
employed part time for economic reasons remained goods and recent readings from national and regional
higher than for whites, and the gap in these rates was surveys of business conditions, suggested little change in
wider than in the years just before the most recent reces- business equipment spending in the near term. Firms’
sion.

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
nominal spending for nonresidential structures exclud- what were likely to be temporary disruptions, including
ing drilling and mining was little changed, on net, in wildfires in Canada and an earthquake in Japan. In the
March and April. The number of oil and gas rigs in op- United Kingdom, uncertainty about the outcome of the
eration, an indicator of spending for structures in the referendum on exit from the European Union seemed
drilling and mining sector, fell through late May but to be holding down investment. In contrast, indicators
edged up in early June. for emerging Asia, including China, suggested that eco-
nomic growth picked up in the second quarter. Inflation
Total real government purchases rose modestly in the
remained low in the advanced foreign economies
first quarter and appeared to be increasing at about the
(AFEs), in part reflecting previous declines in energy
same pace in the second quarter. Nominal outlays for
prices. Inflation also continued to be subdued in most
defense in April and May pointed to an increase in real
emerging market economies (EMEs).
federal purchases in the second quarter, after such pur-
chases had declined in the first quarter. In contrast, real Staff Review of the Financial Situation
state and local government purchases seemed to be edg- Domestic financial market conditions remained accom-
ing down in the second quarter; the payrolls of these modative over the intermeeting period. Equity price in-
governments were little changed, on net, in April and dexes and corporate bond spreads were little changed,
May, and their nominal spending for construction de- on net, and, in aggregate, corporations continued to tap
clined in April. credit markets at a solid pace. Credit also remained
broadly available to households, except for higher-risk
The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed substan-
borrowers in some markets. The expected near-term
tially in March, with a sharp decline in imports more than
path of the federal funds rate implied by market quotes
offsetting a fall in exports. The March data, together
varied notably over the intermeeting period. On bal-
with revised estimates for earlier months, suggested that
ance, it flattened, largely in response to the disappointing
real exports were about flat in the first quarter while im-
May employment report and growing concerns among
ports fell slightly. In April, the deficit widened as im-
investors about the British referendum on membership
ports recovered somewhat, but it remained narrower
in the European Union. The flatter expected path of the
than its first-quarter average.
federal funds rate, along with an apparent decline in
Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE global risk sentiment early in the period, contributed to
price index, increased about 1 percent over the an appreciable reduction in longer-term Treasury yields.
12 months ending in April, partly restrained by earlier
Market-based estimates of the probability of a hike in the
declines in consumer energy prices. Core PCE price in-
federal funds rate at the June FOMC meeting were vari-
flation, which excludes changes in food and energy
able during the intermeeting period. The probability of
prices, was a little above 1½ percent over the same
an increase in June fell to near zero in early May in re-
12-month period, held down in part by decreases in the
sponse to incoming economic data, jumped to about
prices of non-energy imports over much of this period
30 percent after the release of the April FOMC minutes
and the pass-through of the declines in energy prices to
and other Federal Reserve communications, and
prices of other goods and services. Over the 12 months
dropped again to near zero after the May employment
ending in April, total consumer prices as measured by
report. The expected path of the federal funds rate for
the consumer price index (CPI) also rose about 1 per-
the medium term implied by market quotes declined
cent, while core CPI inflation was a little above 2 per-
somewhat on net. The average probability assigned by
cent. The Michigan survey measure of longer-run infla-
respondents to the Desk’s June Survey of Primary Deal-
tion expectations fell to its lowest level on record in early
ers and Survey of Market Participants was near zero for
June, but other measures of such expectations—includ-
a rate hike in June and around 20 percent for a rate in-
ing those from the Survey of Professional Forecasters
crease in July. The median respondent in each survey
and from the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Sur-
indicated that the most likely outcome was only one hike
vey of Market Participants—were generally little
in 2016, down from two in the April surveys.
changed, on balance, in recent months.
The nominal Treasury yield curve flattened, on net, over
Foreign real GDP growth picked up in the first quarter,
the intermeeting period, mainly reflecting declines in
supported by relatively robust increases in Canada, the
longer-term rates; the flattening left the spread between
euro area, Japan, and Mexico. However, the pace of
yields on 2- and 10-year Treasury securities near its low-
growth appeared to slow in many foreign economies in
est level since 2007. Although a significant portion of
the second quarter, although in some cases as a result of

--- Page 5 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_4_–_1_5,_ 2_0_1_6_________________________P__ag_e_ _5
the declines in yields occurred following the release of nonfinancial bonds significantly outpaced upgrades in
the May employment report, yields at longer maturities May. Expected year-ahead default rates for nonfinancial
had begun drifting down earlier in the period, consistent firms remained moderately elevated relative to previous
with an apparent deterioration in global risk sentiment. expansions, while those for oil companies continued to
Yields moved lower late in the period amid growing con- be high.
cerns about the upcoming British referendum. Some
Financing conditions for commercial real estate re-
market participants attributed the decline in Treasury
mained fairly accommodative. All major categories of
yields in part to heavy demand from foreign investors
commercial real estate loans on banks’ books increased
faced with extraordinarily low yields on foreign sover-
briskly during April and May. However, spreads on
eign securities. Inflation compensation based on Treas-
commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) stayed
ury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) decreased, par-
elevated, continuing to depress CMBS issuance.
ticularly at longer tenors. Measures of inflation compen-
sation based on inflation swaps also declined, but less On balance, credit conditions in municipal bond markets
than TIPS-based measures, consistent with anecdotal re- continued to be stable. Yield spreads on general obliga-
ports suggesting that a portion of the declines in TIPS- tion municipal bonds were little changed, and gross issu-
based measures might have been driven by elevated de- ance remained solid. The default by Puerto Rico’s Gov-
mand for longer-term nominal Treasury securities. ernment Development Bank on debt payments due in
early May was widely expected and elicited limited reac-
Broad stock price indexes moved within narrow ranges
tion in broader municipal bond markets.
but were modestly lower, on net, over the intermeeting
period. However, one-month-ahead option-implied Conditions in consumer credit markets were little
volatility on the S&P 500 index—the VIX—rose notably changed and generally remained accommodative. Con-
from fairly low levels and ended the period close to its sumer loan balances continued to increase at a robust
historical median level. Spreads of 10-year triple-B-rated pace in recent months, with year-over-year growth in
corporate bond yields over those on comparable-ma- credit card balances outstanding continuing to trend up-
turity Treasury securities were little changed on balance. ward. Credit in mortgage markets stayed tight for bor-
High-yield spreads widened, mainly for firms outside of rowers with low credit scores, hard-to-document in-
the energy sector; spreads on bonds for firms in the en- come, or high debt-to-income ratios. Interest rates on
ergy sector narrowed, likely in response to rising oil 30-year fixed-rate mortgages declined and continued to
prices. be low by historical standards.
Overall financing conditions for nonfinancial firms im- Over the intermeeting period, developments in global fi-
proved a bit over the intermeeting period, remaining ac- nancial markets were driven in large part by shifting
commodative. Amid still-low yields, bond issuance by views on the expected path of U.S. monetary policy and
investment-grade corporations rose to a robust pace in by fluctuating expectations about the outcome of the
May, and speculative-grade issuance also picked up. U.K. vote on membership in the European Union. The
Growth of commercial and industrial (C&I) loans on exchange value of the U.S. dollar rose in the middle of
banks’ books remained strong in April and May, partic- the intermeeting period along with expectations for less
ularly at large banks. Following significant declines in accommodative Federal Reserve monetary policy. How-
the first quarter of 2016, gross issuance of leveraged ever, the dollar partially retraced these increases follow-
loans increased slightly in April and May, as refinancing ing the much weaker-than-expected U.S. employment
was reportedly boosted by lower loan spreads. Equity report for May, finishing the period a bit stronger against
issuance by nonfinancial firms through initial public of- the currencies of the AFEs and about 3 percent higher
ferings remained subdued over the intermeeting period. against EME currencies. In contrast to its changes
Meanwhile, nonfinancial firms continued to repurchase against most currencies, the dollar depreciated against
their shares at a brisk pace in the first quarter, and divi- the Japanese yen, in large part because of the unexpected
dends stayed near record levels. decision by the Bank of Japan not to ease policy further
at its April meeting. AFE sovereign yields declined, with
Recent developments pointed to some decline in the
U.K. yields in particular being weighed down following
credit quality of nonfinancial firms. The percentage of
polls showing an increase in support for the “leave” vote
C&I loans entering delinquency or being charged off in-
in the upcoming referendum. Decreases in equity in-
creased further in the first quarter, the default rate of
dexes in the AFEs, particularly in Europe, also report-
corporate bonds moved up in April, and downgrades of

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
edly reflected concerns about the possibility of a success- longer-term inflation expectations may have edged
ful “leave” vote. Most EME equity markets also edged down.
lower.
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
Staff Economic Outlook Economic Outlook
In the U.S. economic forecast prepared by the staff for In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of
the June FOMC meeting, real GDP growth was esti- the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank pres-
mated to have been faster in the first quarter than in the idents submitted their projections of the most likely out-
April forecast, and the incoming information was con- comes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, in-
sistent with a moderate pickup in GDP growth in the flation, and the federal funds rate for each year from
second quarter. Real GDP was projected to rise a little 2016 through 2018 and over the longer run.4 Each par-
slower in the second half of this year than in the previous ticipant’s projections were conditioned on his or her
forecast and to increase at about the same pace thereaf- judgment of appropriate monetary policy. The longer-
ter; the small boosts to real GDP growth implied by a run projections represented each participant’s assess-
lower assumed path for interest rates and by a slightly ment of the rate to which each variable would be ex-
stronger trajectory for home values were essentially off- pected to converge, over time, under appropriate mone-
set by restraint from higher projected paths for the for- tary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the
eign exchange value of the dollar and for oil prices. The economy. These projections and policy assessments are
staff continued to forecast that real GDP would expand described in the Summary of Economic Projections,
at a modestly faster pace than potential output in 2016 which is an addendum to these minutes.
through 2018, supported primarily by increases in con-
In their discussion of the economic situation and the
sumer spending. The unemployment rate was expected
outlook, meeting participants agreed that information
to remain relatively flat over the second half of the year
received over the intermeeting period indicated that the
and then to gradually decline further; over this period,
pace of improvement in the labor market had slowed
the unemployment rate was projected to run somewhat
while growth in economic activity appeared to have
below the staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate.
picked up. Although the unemployment rate had de-
The staff’s forecast for inflation was little changed from clined, job gains had diminished. Growth in household
the previous projection. The staff continued to project spending had strengthened. Since the beginning of the
that inflation would increase over the next several years, year, the housing sector had continued to improve and
as energy prices and the prices of non-energy imports the drag from net exports appeared to have lessened, but
were expected to begin steadily rising this year. How- business fixed investment had been soft. Inflation had
ever, inflation was still projected to be slightly below the continued to run below the Committee’s 2 percent
Committee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent in 2018. longer-run objective, partly reflecting earlier declines in
energy prices and in prices of non-energy imports. Mar-
The staff viewed the uncertainty around its April projec-
ket-based measures of inflation compensation declined;
tions for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and
most survey-based measures of longer-term inflation ex-
inflation as similar to the average of the past 20 years.
pectations were little changed, on balance, in recent
The risks to the forecast for real GDP were seen as tilted
months.
to the downside, reflecting the staff’s assessment that
neither monetary nor fiscal policy was well positioned to Participants generally expected that, with gradual adjust-
help the economy withstand substantial adverse shocks. ments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activ-
In addition, the staff continued to see the risks to the ity would expand at a moderate pace and labor market
forecast from developments abroad as skewed to the indicators would strengthen. Inflation was expected to
downside. Consistent with the downside risks to aggre- remain low in the near term, in part because of earlier
gate demand, the staff viewed the risks to its outlook for declines in energy prices, but to rise to 2 percent over
the unemployment rate as tilted to the upside. The risks the medium term as the transitory effects of past de-
to the projection for inflation were still judged as clines in energy and import prices dissipated and the la-
weighted to the downside, reflecting the possibility that bor market strengthened further. Participants generally
agreed that the Committee should continue to closely
4 One participant did not submit longer-run projections in
conjunction with the June 2016 FOMC meeting.

--- Page 7 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_4_–_1_5,_ 2_0_1_6_________________________P__ag_e_ _7
monitor inflation indicators and global economic and fi- Available indicators suggested that the softness in busi-
nancial developments. ness fixed investment since late last year persisted early
in the second quarter. While weakness in the drilling and
Growth of consumer spending appeared to have picked
mining sector was attributable to the earlier declines in
up from its slow pace in the first quarter. Retail sales
oil prices, participants identified a variety of potential
posted strong gains in April and May, and sales of light
causes of the broader weakness in investment spending,
motor vehicles moved back up. At the time of the April
including a slowdown in corporate profits, concern
meeting, most participants had anticipated a rebound in
about prospects for economic growth, heightened un-
consumer spending in light of the still-solid fundamental
certainty regarding the future course of domestic regula-
determinants of household spending. Some participants
tory and fiscal policies, and a persistent reluctance on the
indicated that consumption was likely to continue being
part of firms to undertake new projects in the wake of
supported by these factors, which included ongoing
the financial crisis. Some participants mentioned that
gains in income, robust household balance sheets, and
the sluggishness in business investment could portend a
the positive assessment of current economic conditions
broader economic slowdown. A couple of participants
that was evident in recent surveys of consumers. How-
also noted that elevated inventory levels could be a drag
ever, a few participants expressed caution about the out-
on economic growth in the near term. However, partic-
look for consumer expenditures, noting that slower in-
ipants also cited factors that could lead to a pickup in
creases in employment and higher energy prices could
business spending, including the recent turnaround in
restrain spending.
energy prices and the greater optimism on the part of
The housing sector continued to improve since the be- firms indicated by surveys of businesses and anecdotal
ginning of the year. Reports from a number of partici- reports in some Districts.
pants indicated that single-family construction was
The employment report for May showed considerably
strengthening and house prices were rising in most parts
weaker growth in payrolls than had been expected, and
of their Districts. However, some areas that were af-
gains in previous months were revised down. Although
fected by the slowdown in the energy sector experienced
the unemployment rate fell in May, a drop in labor force
house price declines or increases in mortgage delin-
participation accounted for the decline. Participants dis-
quency rates.
cussed a range of interpretations of these data. Many
Participants summarized survey readings and anecdotal participants observed that, because of transitory factors,
reports on business conditions in their Districts. Those such as statistical noise and the effects of a strike in the
indicators were mixed regarding the pace of economic telecommunications industry, the reported rate of pay-
activity within the manufacturing sector. Some of the roll job growth likely understated its underlying pace;
weakness in manufacturing activity was linked to the ef- however, many participants thought that the underlying
fects of earlier declines in oil prices on firms in the en- pace had slowed some from that of previous months.
ergy sector and to previous increases in the exchange Some noted that other indicators did not corroborate a
value of the dollar, which had adversely affected export- material weakening of labor market conditions. These
ers. But manufacturing activity was judged to have sta- indicators included a number of regional surveys of la-
bilized in a couple of Districts, and contacts there were bor market conditions, relatively low levels of initial
optimistic about further improvement in the months claims for unemployment insurance, surveys of business
ahead. It was noted that the recent increase in crude oil hiring plans, and positive views of labor market condi-
prices had improved the outlook for the energy sector. tions in recent consumer surveys. In addition, a few par-
However, a couple of participants observed that finan- ticipants commented that the movements in labor force
cial strains caused by previous declines in energy prices participation in recent months were, on balance, con-
had continued for firms or financial institutions in their sistent with its secular downtrend. In contrast, some
Districts, and such difficulties were seen as likely to per- noted that the lower rate of payroll gains could instead
sist absent further increases in energy prices. Regarding be indicative of a broader slowdown in growth of eco-
the service sector, a few participants commented that ac- nomic activity that was also evidenced by other down-
tivity and hiring continued to expand in their Districts. beat labor market indicators, such as a decline in the dif-
The near-term outlook for farm income remained weak fusion indexes of industry payrolls, an increase in the
despite recent increases in the futures prices of some ag- number of workers reporting that they were working
ricultural commodities. part time for economic reasons, or the recent sharp drop
in labor force participation. Finally, a few participants

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
suggested that the weak employment growth may in- nal sector had abated somewhat. Still, participants gen-
stead reflect supply constraints associated with a general erally agreed that global economic and financial devel-
tightening of labor market conditions. These partici- opments should continue to be monitored closely.
pants saw the rising trend in wages, business reports of Some participants indicated that prospects for economic
reduced worker availability, and high rate of job open- activity in many foreign economies appeared to be sub-
ings as supporting this interpretation. Others thought it dued, that global inflation and interest rates remained
unlikely that such constraints would have become evi- very low by historical standards, and that recurring bouts
dent so abruptly. of global financial market instability remained a risk.
Most participants noted that the upcoming British refer-
Almost all participants judged that the surprisingly weak
endum on membership in the European Union could
May employment report increased their uncertainty
generate financial market turbulence that could ad-
about the outlook for the labor market. Even so, many
versely affect domestic economic performance. Some
remarked that they were reluctant to change their out-
also noted that continued uncertainty regarding the out-
look materially based on one economic data release. Par-
look for China’s foreign exchange policy and the rela-
ticipants generally expected to see a resumption of
tively high levels of debt in China and some other EMEs
monthly gains in payroll employment that would be suf-
represented appreciable risks to global financial stability
ficient to promote continued strengthening of the labor
and economic performance.
market. However, some noted that with labor market
conditions at or near those consistent with maximum In light of participants’ updates to their economic pro-
employment, it would be reasonable to anticipate that jections, they discussed their current assessments of the
gains in payroll employment would soon moderate from appropriate trajectory of monetary policy over the me-
the pace seen over the past few years. dium term. Most still expected that the appropriate tar-
get range for the federal funds rate associated with their
Inflation continued to run below the Committee’s 2 per-
projections of further progress toward the Committee’s
cent longer-run objective, partly reflecting earlier de-
statutory objectives would rise gradually in coming years.
clines in energy prices and in prices of non-energy im-
However, some noted that their forecasts were now con-
ports. Core PCE price inflation registered an increase of
sistent with a shallower path than they had expected at
1.6 percent for the 12 months ending in April, while re-
the time of the March meeting. Many participants com-
cent readings on retail energy prices moved up notably.
mented that the level of the federal funds rate consistent
Most participants expected to see continued progress to-
with maintaining trend economic growth—the so-called
ward the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective.
neutral rate—appeared to be lower currently or was
They viewed the firming in some measures of core infla-
likely to be lower in the longer run than they had esti-
tion, the evidence that wage growth was picking up, the
mated earlier. While recognizing that the longer-run
ongoing tightening of resource utilization, the recent
neutral rate was highly uncertain, many judged that it
firming in oil prices, and the stabilization of the foreign
would likely remain low relative to historical standards,
exchange value of the dollar this year as factors likely to
held down by factors such as slow productivity growth
boost inflation over time. However, other participants
and demographic trends. Several noted that in the pre-
were less confident that inflation would return to its tar-
vailing circumstances of considerable uncertainty about
get level over the medium term. They thought that pro-
the neutral federal funds rate, the Committee could bet-
gress could be very slow, particularly in light of the like-
ter gauge the effects of increases in the federal funds rate
lihood that tighter resource utilization may impart only
on the economy if it proceeded gradually in adjusting
modest upward pressure on prices. They also saw im-
policy.
portant downside risks, including persistent disinflation-
ary pressures from very low inflation and weak eco- Participants weighed a number of considerations in as-
nomic growth abroad as well as the softening in some sessing the conditions under which it would be appro-
survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expecta- priate to increase the target range for the federal funds
tions and market-based measures of inflation compen- rate. Most participants indicated that they made only
sation. small changes to their forecasts for achieving and main-
taining the Committee’s objectives of maximum em-
Global financial conditions had improved since earlier in
ployment and 2 percent inflation over the medium term.
the year, and recent data on net exports suggested that
Several noted that the fundamentals underlying their
the drag on domestic economic activity from the exter-
forecasts remained solid, with several mentioning, in
particular, that financial conditions were accommodative

--- Page 9 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_4_–_1_5,_ 2_0_1_6_________________________P__ag_e_ _9
and household balance sheets had improved. In evalu- that monetary policy may need to remain accommoda-
ating recent economic information, participants gener- tive for some time in order to move inflation closer to
ally agreed that it was advisable to avoid overreacting to 2 percent on a sustained basis. A few pointed out that
one or two labor market reports; however, the implica- with inflation likely to remain low for some time and to
tions of the recent data on labor market conditions for rise only gradually, maintaining an accommodative
the economic outlook were uncertain. Most judged that stance of policy could extend the strengthening of the
they would need to accumulate additional information labor market. In addition, several participants observed
on the labor market, production, and spending to help that because short-term interest rates were still near zero,
clarify how the economy was evolving in order to evalu- monetary policy could, if necessary, respond more effec-
ate whether the stance of monetary policy should be ad- tively to surprisingly strong inflationary pressures in the
justed. In addition, participants generally thought that it future than to a weakening in the labor market and fall-
would be prudent to wait for the outcome of the upcom- ing inflation.
ing referendum in the United Kingdom on membership
A number of participants emphasized that the Commit-
in the European Union in order to assess the conse-
tee’s approach to policy-setting was necessarily data de-
quences of the vote for global financial market condi-
pendent given the uncertainties associated with medium-
tions and the U.S. economic outlook.
term forecasts of economic activity and, accordingly,
Most participants judged that, in the absence of signifi- with the appropriate policy path over the medium term.
cant economic or financial shocks, raising the target It was noted that their expectations for the federal funds
range for the federal funds rate would be appropriate if rate did not represent a preset plan and could change as
incoming information confirmed that economic growth incoming information influenced their views of the eco-
had picked up, that job gains were continuing at a pace nomic outlook and the risks associated with it. Several
sufficient to sustain progress toward the Committee’s participants expressed concern that the Committee’s
maximum-employment objective, and that inflation was communications had not been fully effective in inform-
likely to rise to 2 percent over the medium term. Some ing the public how incoming information affected the
participants viewed a broad range of labor market indi- Committee’s view of the economic outlook, its degree
cators as well as the recent firming in wages as consistent of confidence in the outlook, or the implications for the
with a high level of labor utilization. They also pointed trajectory of monetary policy.
out that core inflation had begun to move up and that
Committee Policy Action
the transitory factors that had been holding down head-
In their consideration of monetary policy for the period
line inflation were receding. Several of these participants
ahead, members judged that the information received
expressed concern that a delay in resuming further grad-
since the Committee met in April indicated that the pace
ual increases in the federal funds rate would increase the
of improvement in labor market conditions had slowed
risks to financial stability or would raise the potential for
in recent months while growth in economic activity ap-
overshooting the Committee’s objectives; such an over-
peared to have picked up from the low rates recorded in
shooting might require a rapid removal of policy accom-
the fourth quarter of 2015 and the first quarter of 2016.
modation at some point in the future, which could entail
Although the unemployment rate had declined over the
significant risks for U.S. financial markets and the econ-
intermeeting period, job gains had diminished. After
omy.
only a modest increase early in the year, growth in house-
However, some other participants were uncertain hold spending had strengthened in recent months. Since
whether economic conditions would soon warrant an in- the beginning of the year, the housing sector had contin-
crease in the target range for the federal funds rate. Sev- ued to improve and the drag from net exports had less-
eral of them noted downside risks to the outlook for ened, but business fixed investment had been soft. In-
growth in economic activity and for further improve- flation continued to run below the Committee’s 2 per-
ment in labor market conditions, including the possibil- cent objective, partly reflecting declines in energy prices
ity that the sharp slowdown in employment gains and and in prices of non-energy imports. Market-based
the continued weakness in business fixed investment sig- measures of inflation compensation declined over the
naled a downshift in economic growth, as well as the po- intermeeting period; most survey-based measures of in-
tential for global economic or financial shocks. Moreo- flation expectations were little changed.
ver, several of them worried about the declines in
With respect to the economic outlook and its implica-
measures of inflation compensation and in some survey-
tions for monetary policy, members continued to expect
based measures of inflation expectations and suggested

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary the Committee agreed to continue carefully monitoring
policy, economic activity would expand at a moderate actual and expected progress toward its inflation goal.
pace and labor market indicators would strengthen.
After assessing the outlook for economic activity, the la-
Most members made only small changes to their fore-
bor market, and inflation, and after weighing the uncer-
casts for economic activity and the labor market. Most
tainties associated with the outlook, members agreed to
judged it appropriate to avoid overweighting one or two
leave the target range for the federal funds rate un-
labor market reports in their consideration of the eco-
changed at ¼ to ½ percent at this meeting. Members
nomic outlook, but they indicated that the recent slow-
generally agreed that, before assessing whether another
ing in payroll employment gains had increased their un-
step in removing monetary accommodation was war-
certainty about the likely pace of improvements in the
ranted, it was prudent to wait for additional data regard-
labor market going forward. Many noted that the slow-
ing labor market conditions as well as information that
down could be a temporary aberration and that other la-
would allow them to assess the consequences of the
bor market indicators—such as new claims for unem-
U.K. vote for global financial conditions and the U.S.
ployment insurance, the rate of job openings, and read-
economic outlook. They judged that their decisions
ings on consumers’ perceptions of the labor market—
about the appropriate level of the federal funds rate in
remained positive. Some of them judged that labor mar-
coming months would depend importantly on whether
ket conditions were now at or close to the Committee’s
incoming information corroborated the Committee’s ex-
objectives and pointed out that some moderation in em-
pectations for economic activity, the labor market, and
ployment gains was to be expected when such condi-
inflation. Some of them emphasized that, with labor
tions were near those consistent with maximum employ-
market conditions and inflation at or close to the Com-
ment. However, other members observed that the re-
mittee’s objectives, taking another step in removing
cent soft readings on payroll jobs as well as the decline
monetary accommodation should not be delayed too
in the labor force participation rate and the absence of
long. However, a couple of members underscored that
further reductions in the number of individuals who
they would need to accumulate sufficient evidence to in-
were working part time for economic reasons in recent
crease their confidence that economic growth was
months suggested a possible downshift in the pace of
strong enough to withstand a possible downward shock
improvement in the labor market.
to demand and that inflation was moving closer to 2 per-
An additional factor in the Committee’s policy delibera- cent on a sustained basis.
tions was the upcoming U.K. referendum on member-
Members reiterated that, in determining the timing and
ship in the European Union. Members noted the con-
size of future adjustments to the target range for the fed-
siderable uncertainty about the outcome of the vote and
eral funds rate, the Committee would assess realized and
its potential economic and financial market conse-
expected economic conditions relative to its objectives
quences. They indicated that they would closely monitor
of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This
developments associated with the referendum as well as
assessment would take into account a wide range of in-
other global economic and financial developments that
formation, including measures of labor market condi-
could affect the U.S. outlook.
tions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation ex-
Members expected inflation to remain low in the near pectations, and readings on financial and international
term, in part because of earlier declines in energy prices, developments. The Committee expected that economic
but most anticipated that inflation would rise to 2 per- conditions would evolve in a manner that would warrant
cent over the medium term as the transitory effects of only gradual increases in the federal funds rate, and the
past declines in energy and import prices dissipated and federal funds rate was likely to remain, for some time,
the labor market strengthened further. Although head- below levels that were expected to prevail in the longer
line inflation continued to run below the Committee’s run. Members emphasized that the actual path of the
objective, some members observed that core inflation federal funds rate would depend on the economic out-
had risen, and one member noted that the annual rate of look as informed by incoming data. In that regard, they
increase in core PCE inflation in the first quarter had judged it appropriate to continue to leave their policy
exceeded 2 percent. However, several others continued options open and maintain the flexibility to adjust the
to see downside risks to inflation, citing the decline in stance of policy based on how incoming information af-
inflation expectations and the risk of adverse shocks to fected the Committee’s assessment of the outlook for
U.S. economic activity from developments abroad. In economic activity, the labor market, and inflation as well
light of the current shortfall of inflation from 2 percent, as the risks to the outlook.

--- Page 11 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_4_–_1_5,_ 2_0_1_6________________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
The Committee also decided to maintain its existing pol- diminished. Growth in household spending has
icy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings strengthened. Since the beginning of the year,
of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in the housing sector has continued to improve
agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over and the drag from net exports appears to have
maturing Treasury securities at auction, and it antici- lessened, but business fixed investment has
pated doing so until normalization of the federal funds been soft. Inflation has continued to run below
rate is well under way. This policy, by keeping the Com- the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective,
mittee’s holdings of longer-term securities at sizable lev- partly reflecting earlier declines in energy prices
els, should help maintain accommodative financial con- and in prices of non-energy imports. Market-
ditions. based measures of inflation compensation
declined; most survey-based measures of
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
longer-term inflation expectations are little
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
changed, on balance, in recent months.
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
cute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
following domestic policy directive, to be released at Committee seeks to foster maximum
2:00 p.m.: employment and price stability. The
Committee currently expects that, with gradual
“Effective June 16, 2016, the Federal Open
adjustments in the stance of monetary policy,
Market Committee directs the Desk to
economic activity will expand at a moderate
undertake open market operations as necessary
pace and labor market indicators will
to maintain the federal funds rate in a target
strengthen. Inflation is expected to remain low
range of ¼ to ½ percent, including overnight
in the near term, in part because of earlier
reverse repurchase operations (and reverse
declines in energy prices, but to rise to 2 percent
repurchase operations with maturities of more
over the medium term as the transitory effects
than one day when necessary to accommodate
of past declines in energy and import prices
weekend, holiday, or similar trading
dissipate and the labor market strengthens
conventions) at an offering rate of 0.25 percent,
further. The Committee continues to closely
in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury
monitor inflation indicators and global
securities held outright in the System Open
economic and financial developments.
Market Account that are available for such
operations and by a per-counterparty limit of Against this backdrop, the Committee decided
$30 billion per day. to maintain the target range for the federal
funds rate at ¼ to ½ percent. The stance of
The Committee directs the Desk to continue
monetary policy remains accommodative,
rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auc-
thereby supporting further improvement in
tion and to continue reinvesting principal pay-
labor market conditions and a return to
ments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-
2 percent inflation.
backed securities in agency mortgage-backed se-
curities. The Committee also directs the Desk In determining the timing and size of future
to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap trans- adjustments to the target range for the federal
actions as necessary to facilitate settlement of funds rate, the Committee will assess realized
the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed and expected economic conditions relative to its
securities transactions.” objectives of maximum employment and
2 percent inflation. This assessment will take
The vote also encompassed approval of the statement
into account a wide range of information,
below to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
including measures of labor market conditions,
“Information received since the Federal Open indicators of inflation pressures and inflation
Market Committee met in April indicates that expectations, and readings on financial and
the pace of improvement in the labor market international developments. In light of the
has slowed while growth in economic activity current shortfall of inflation from 2 percent, the
appears to have picked up. Although the Committee will carefully monitor actual and
unemployment rate has declined, job gains have expected progress toward its inflation goal. The

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Committee expects that economic conditions Esther L. George, Loretta J. Mester, Jerome H. Powell,
will evolve in a manner that will warrant only Eric Rosengren, and Daniel K. Tarullo.
gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the
Voting against this action: None.
federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some
time, below levels that are expected to prevail in It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
the longer run. However, the actual path of the would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, July 26–27,
federal funds rate will depend on the economic 2016. The meeting adjourned at 10:30 a.m. on June 15,
outlook as informed by incoming data. 2016.
The Committee is maintaining its existing policy Notation Vote
of reinvesting principal payments from its hold- By notation vote completed on May 17, 2016, the
ings of agency debt and agency mortgage- Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
backed securities in agency mortgage-backed se- Committee meeting held on April 26–27, 2016.
curities and of rolling over maturing Treasury
securities at auction, and it anticipates doing so
until normalization of the level of the federal
funds rate is well under way. This policy, by
_____________________________
keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-
Brian F. Madigan
term securities at sizable levels, should help
Secretary
maintain accommodative financial conditions.”
Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C.
Dudley, Lael Brainard, James Bullard, Stanley Fischer,

--- Page 13 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- longer-run rate. However, because the economic out-
tee (FOMC) meeting held on June 14–15, 2016, meeting look is inherently uncertain, participants’ assessments of
participants submitted their projections of the most appropriate policy were also uncertain and likely would
likely outcomes for real output growth, the unemploy- change in response to revisions to their economic out-
ment rate, inflation, and the federal funds rate for each looks and associated risks.
year from 2016 to 2018 and over the longer run.1 Each
Participants generally viewed the level of uncertainty as-
participant’s projection was based on information avail-
sociated with their individual forecasts for economic
able at the time of the meeting, together with his or her
growth, unemployment, and inflation as broadly similar
assessment of appropriate monetary policy and assump-
to the norms of the previous 20 years. Most participants
tions about the factors likely to affect economic out-
also judged the risks around their projections for eco-
comes. The longer-run projections represent each par-
nomic activity and inflation as broadly balanced, al-
ticipant’s assessment of the value to which each variable
though many participants saw the risks to their GDP
would be expected to converge, over time, under appro-
growth and inflation forecasts as weighted to the down-
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further
side. In addition, some participants viewed the risks to
shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy”
their forecasts of the unemployment rate as tilted to the
is defined as the future path of policy that each partici-
upside.
pant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic
activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual The Outlook for Economic Activity
interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objectives of The median of participants’ projections for the growth
maximum employment and stable prices. rate of real GDP, conditional on their individual as-
sumptions about appropriate monetary policy, was
FOMC participants generally expected that, under ap-
2 percent for each year from 2016 through 2018, the
propriate monetary policy, growth in real gross domestic
same as the median of their projections of the longer-
product (GDP) this year, next year, and in 2018 would
run GDP growth rate. However, a majority of partici-
be at or quite close to their individual estimates of GDP
pants expected that real GDP growth would pick up a
growth over the longer run. All but a few participants
bit in 2017 from this year’s pace, and most expected it to
projected that the unemployment rate at the end of this
remain at or above their estimates of its longer-run pace
year will be at or below its longer-run normal rate and
in 2018. Participants pointed to a number of factors that
expected it to edge lower next year. For 2018, nearly all
they expected would contribute to moderate output
participants expected the unemployment rate to be at or
growth over the next few years, including a diminution
a bit below its longer-run level. Almost all participants
of the drag on net exports from a strong dollar, the con-
projected that inflation, as measured by the four-quarter
tinued improvements in household and business balance
percentage change in the price index for personal con-
sheets, accommodative financial conditions, and some-
sumption expenditures (PCE), would increase this year
what more supportive fiscal policy.
and over the next two years, and most expected inflation
to have converged to the Committee’s objective of Participants’ median projections for real GDP growth in
2 percent by 2018. Table 1 and figure 1 provide sum- 2016 and 2017 were slightly lower than the medians
mary statistics for the projections. shown in the March 2016 Summary of Economic Pro-
jections (SEP). Participants who lowered their projec-
As shown in figure 2, almost all participants expected
tions for near-term GDP growth generally attributed
that it would be appropriate for the target range for the
their revisions to weaker-than-expected growth in the
federal funds rate to rise gradually as the economy stead-
first quarter and soft readings on economic activity in
ily progresses toward the Committee’s longer-run goals
recent months, particularly those on business spending.
of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. In-
Although several participants also reduced their fore-
deed, participants generally judged that the federal funds
casts for real GDP growth in 2018 and in the longer run,
rate in 2018 would still be below their estimates of its
1 One participant did not submit longer-run projections in
conjunction with the June 2016 FOMC meeting.

--- Page 14 ---

,stnediserp
knaB
evreseR
laredeF
dna
srebmem
draoB
evreseR
laredeF
fo
snoitcejorp
cimonocE
.1
elbaT
6102
enuJ
,ycilop
yratenom
etairporppa
detcejorp
fo
stnemssessa
laudividni
rieht
rednu
tnecreP
3egnaR
2ycnednetlartneC
1naideM
regnoL
8102
7102
6102
regnoL
8102
7102
6102
regnoL
8102
7102
6102
elbairaV
nur
nur
nur
4.2–6.1
2.2–5.1
4.2–6.1
2.2–8.1
0.2–8.1
1.2–8.1
2.2–9.1
0.2–9.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
PDGlaerniegnahC
4.2–8.1
3.2–8.1
3.2–7.1
5.2–9.1
1.2–8.1
1.2–8.1
3.2–0.2
3.2–1.2
0.2
0.2
1.2
2.2
noitcejorphcraM
0.5–6.4
0.5–3.4
8.4–3.4
9.4–5.4
0.5–7.4
8.4–4.4
7.4–5.4
8.4–6.4
8.4
6.4
6.4
7.4
etartnemyolpmenU
8.5–7.4
0.5–3.4
9.4–3.4
9.4–5.4
0.5–7.4
0.5–5.4
7.4–5.4
8.4–6.4
8.4
5.4
6.4
7.4
noitcejorphcraM
0.2
1.2–8.1
0.2–6.1
0.2–3.1
0.2
0.2–9.1
0.2–7.1
7.1–3.1
0.2
0.2
9.1
4.1
noitaflniECP
0.2
0.2–8.1
0.2–6.1
6.1–0.1
0.2
0.2–9.1
0.2–7.1
6.1–0.1
0.2
0.2
9.1
2.1
noitcejorphcraM
1.2–8.1
0.2–6.1
0.2–3.1
0.2–9.1
0.2–7.1
8.1–6.1
0.2
9.1
7.1
4noitaflniECPeroC
0.2–8.1
0.2–6.1
1.2–4.1
0.2–9.1
0.2–7.1
7.1–4.1
0.2
8.1
6.1
noitcejorphcraM
detcejorP:omeM
htapycilopetairporppa
8.3–8.2
4.3–6.0
4.2–6.0
4.1–6.0
3.3–0.3
9.2–1.2
9.1–4.1
9.0–6.0
0.3
4.2
6.1
9.0
etarsdnuflaredeF
0.4–0.3
9.3–1.2
8.2–6.1
4.1–6.0
5.3–0.3
3.3–5.2
4.2–6.1
4.1–9.0
3.3
0.3
9.1
9.0
noitcejorphcraM
eht
morf
segnahc
tnecrep
era
noitaflni
fo
serusaem
htob
rof
snoitcejorp
dna
)PDG(
tcudorp
citsemod
ssorg
laer
ni
egnahc
fo
snoitcejorP
:etoN
egnahcfosetaregatnecrepehteranoitaflniECPerocdnanoitaflniECP
.detacidniraeyehtforetrauqhtruofehtotraeysuoiverpehtforetrauqhtruof
rofsnoitcejorP
.ygrenednadoofgnidulcxeECProfxedniecirpehtdna)ECP(serutidnepxenoitpmusnoclanosreprofxedniecirpeht,ylevitcepser,ni
era
snoitcejorp
s’tnapicitrap
hcaE
.detacidni
raey
eht
fo
retrauq
htruof
eht
ni
etar
tnemyolpmenu
nailivic
egareva
eht
rof
era
etar
tnemyolpmenu
eht
hcaehcihwotetarehtfotnemssessas’tnapicitraphcaetneserpersnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.ycilopyratenometairporppafotnemssessarehrosihnodesab
ehtrofsnoitcejorpehT
.ymonoceehtotskcohsrehtruffoecnesbaehtnidnaycilopyratenometairporpparednuegrevnocotdetcepxeebdluowelbairav
tegratetairporppadetcejorpehtroetarsdnuflaredefehtrofegnartegratetairporppadetcejorpehtfotniopdimehtfoeulavehteraetarsdnuflaredef htiwnoitcnujnocniedamerewsnoitcejorphcraMehT
.nurregnolehtrevororaeyradnelacdefiicepsehtfodneehttaetarsdnuflaredefehtroflevel
htiwnoitcnujnocnisnoitcejorpnur-regnoltimbustondidtnapicitrapenO
.6102,61–51hcraMnoeettimmoCtekraMnepOlaredeFehtfogniteemeht
.gniteem6102,51–41enuJeht
snoitcejorpforebmunehtnehW
.tsehgihottsewolmorfdegnarraerasnoitcejorpehtnehwnoitcejorpelddimehtsinaidemeht,doirephcaeroF
.1
.snoitcejorpelddimowtehtfoegarevaehtsinaidemeht,nevesi
.raeyhcaenielbairavhcaerofsnoitcejorptsewoleerhtdnatsehgiheerhtehtsedulcxeycnednetlartnecehT
.2
.raeytahtnielbairavtahtrof,tsehgihottsewolmorf,snoitcejorp’stnapicitrapllasedulcniraeyneviganielbairavarofegnarehT
.3
.detcelloctoneranoitaflniECPerocrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.4
_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________

--- Page 15 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_4_–_1_5_, _2_0_1_6______________P__ag_e_ _3
Figure1. Medians,centraltendencies,andrangesofeconomicprojections,2016–18andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections 3
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections
2
Actual 1
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
9
8
7
6
5
4
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesof
thevariablesareannual.

--- Page 16 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure2. FOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy: Midpointoftargetrangeortargetlevelfor
thefederalfundsrate
Percent
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
2016 2017 2018 Longer run
Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual par-
ticipant’sjudgmentofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfundsrateortheappropriatetarget
levelforthefederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun. Oneparticipantdidnot
submitlonger-runprojections.

--- Page 17 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_4_–_1_5_, _2_0_1_6______________P__ag_e_ _5
those downward revisions did not alter the median fore- to the right on balance. For 2017 and 2018, the distri-
casts. butions of projections for both total and core PCE price
inflation were nearly unchanged.
The median of projections for the unemployment rate
edged down from 4.7 percent at the end of 2016 to Appropriate Monetary Policy
4.6 percent in 2017 and remained at that level in 2018, Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’
modestly below the median assessment of the longer- judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target
run normal unemployment rate of 4.8 percent. The me- federal funds rate at the end of each year from 2016 to
dians and ranges of the unemployment rate projections 2018 and over the longer run.2 The distributions for
for 2016 to 2018 were nearly unchanged from March. 2016 to 2018 and for the longer run shifted to the left.
The median projection for the federal funds rate rises
Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of partici-
gradually from 0.88 percent at the end of 2016 to
pants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unem-
1.63 percent at the end of 2017 and 2.38 percent at the
ployment rate from 2016 through 2018 and in the longer
end of 2018; the median for the longer-run projections
run. The distribution of individual projections of GDP
of the federal funds rate is 3 percent. Although the me-
growth for 2016 shifted lower relative to the distribution
dian federal funds rate at the end of 2016 was unchanged
of the March projections. The distributions of projec-
from the March projection, a majority of participants re-
tions for GDP growth over the next two years and in the
vised down their projections for that year, most by
longer run also shifted down. For this year and next, the
0.25 percentage point. For 2017 and 2018, the median
distributions of projections for the unemployment rate
projections were 0.25 percentage point and 0.62 percent-
were little changed, while the distribution for 2018 be-
age point lower, respectively, than in March.
came less dispersed.
Compared with the March SEP, the median of partici-
The Outlook for Inflation
pants’ projections for the federal funds rate in the longer
In the June SEP, the median of projections for headline
run moved down 0.25 percentage point. This change
PCE price inflation in 2016 was 1.4 percent, a bit higher
reflected downward revisions by about half of the par-
than in March. Many participants pointed to stronger-
ticipants.
than-expected readings on inflation early this year, as
well as to the recent stabilization of oil prices, as factors Participants’ projections for the path of the federal funds
contributing to the upward revision to their inflation rate represented their individual assessments of appro-
projections. The projections for headline PCE price in- priate monetary policy consistent with their projections
flation over the next two years and in the longer run were of economic growth, employment, inflation, and other
little changed since March, with the median inflation factors. In discussing their June forecasts, many partici-
projection still rising to 1.9 percent in 2017 and to the pants expressed a view that increases in the federal funds
Committee’s objective of 2 percent in 2018. Almost all rate over the next several years would need to be gradual
participants projected that inflation will be within in light of a short-term neutral interest rate that was cur-
0.1 percentage point of the Committee’s objective by rently low—a phenomenon that several participants at-
2018. The median of individual projections for core tributed to the persistence of factors that restrained
PCE price inflation also increases gradually over the next spending over recent years—and that was likely to rise
two years. only slowly as the effects of those factors faded over
time. Some participants noted the proximity of short-
Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri-
term nominal interest rates to the effective lower bound
bution of participants’ views about the outlook for infla-
as limiting the Committee’s ability to increase monetary
tion. The distribution of projections for headline PCE
accommodation to counter adverse shocks to the econ-
price inflation for this year shifted up relative to projec-
omy should they occur. They judged that, as a result, the
tions for the March meeting. The distribution of projec-
Committee should take a cautious approach to monetary
tions for core PCE price inflation this year also moved
2 One participant’s projections for the federal funds rate, GDP cannot be forecast. Under this view, the economy currently is
growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation were informed in a regime characterized by expansion of economic activity
by the view that there are multiple possible medium-term re- with low productivity growth and a low short-term real inter-
gimes for the U.S. economy, that these regimes are persistent, est rate, but longer-term outcomes cannot be usefully pro-
and that the economy shifts between regimes in a way that jected.

--- Page 18 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2016–18andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2016
June projections 18
March projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4 - 1.6 - 1.8 - 2.0 - 2.2 - 2.4 -
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4 - 1.6 - 1.8 - 2.0 - 2.2 - 2.4 -
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4 - 1.6 - 1.8 - 2.0 - 2.2 - 2.4 -
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4 - 1.6 - 1.8 - 2.0 - 2.2 - 2.4 -
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 19 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_4_–_1_5_, _2_0_1_6______________P__ag_e_ _7
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2016–18andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2016
June projections 18
March projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.2 - 4. 4 - 4.6 - 4. 8 - 5.0 - 5.2 - 5.4 - 5.6 - 5.8 -
4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.2 - 4. 4 - 4.6 - 4. 8 - 5.0 - 5.2 - 5.4 - 5.6 - 5.8 -
4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.2 - 4. 4 - 4.6 - 4. 8 - 5.0 - 5.2 - 5.4 - 5.6 - 5.8 -
4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.2 - 4. 4 - 4.6 - 4. 8 - 5.0 - 5.2 - 5.4 - 5.6 - 5.8 -
4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2016–18andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2016
June projections 18
March projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.9 - 1.1 - 1.3 - 1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 -
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.9 - 1.1 - 1.3 - 1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 -
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.9 - 1.1 - 1.3 - 1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 -
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.9 - 1.1 - 1.3 - 1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 -
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_4_–_1_5_, _2_0_1_6______________P__ag_e_ _9
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2016–18
Number of participants
2016
June projections
18
March projections
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 3 - 1. 5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 -
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 3 - 1. 5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 -
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 3 - 1. 5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 -
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 22 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’judgmentsofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfunds
rateortheappropriatetargetlevelforthefederalfundsrate,2016–18andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2016
June projections 18
March projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.6 3 - 0.8 8 - 1.1 3 - 1.3 8 - 1.6 3 - 1.8 8 - 2.1 3 - 2.3 8 - 2.6 3 - 2.8 8 - 3.1 3 - 3.3 8 - 3.6 3 - 3.8 8 -
0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.6 3 - 0.8 8 - 1.1 3 - 1.3 8 - 1.6 3 - 1.8 8 - 2.1 3 - 2.3 8 - 2.6 3 - 2.8 8 - 3.1 3 - 3.3 8 - 3.6 3 - 3.8 8 -
0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.6 3 - 0.8 8 - 1.1 3 - 1.3 8 - 1.6 3 - 1.8 8 - 2.1 3 - 2.3 8 - 2.6 3 - 2.8 8 - 3.1 3 - 3.3 8 - 3.6 3 - 3.8 8 -
0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.6 3 - 0.8 8 - 1.1 3 - 1.3 8 - 1.6 3 - 1.8 8 - 2.1 3 - 2.3 8 - 2.6 3 - 2.8 8 - 3.1 3 - 3.3 8 - 3.6 3 - 3.8 8 -
0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Note: Themidpointsofthetargetrangesforthefederalfundsrateandthetargetlevelsforthefederalfundsrate
aremeasuredattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun. Oneparticipantdidnotsubmitlonger-run
projections.

--- Page 23 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_4_–_1_5_, _2_0_1_6_____________P__ag_e_ _1_1
policy normalization. Participants cited a number of fac-
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
tors that pushed down their projections of the longer- Percentage points
run rate, including domestic and global demographic Variable 2016 2017 2018
trends and weak productivity growth, which together Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . ±1.4 ±2.0 ±2.2
imply a slower pace of trend output growth.
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . ±0.4 ±1.2 ±1.8
Uncertainty and Risks Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.8 ±1.0 ±1.0
The left-hand column of figure 4 shows that all but a few
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean
participants judged the levels of uncertainty around their squared error of projections for 1996 through 2015 that were released in the
June projections for real GDP growth, the unemploy- summer by various private and government forecasters. As described in the
box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a
ment rate, and headline and core PCE price inflation to
70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment,
be broadly similar to the average levels of the past and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of projec-
tion errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider
20 years.3 A few participants saw the uncertainty about
and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook
GDP growth as higher than its historical average, up from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Se-
from only one in March. These participants cited the ries 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys-
tem, November), available at www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/
surprisingly weak productivity growth of recent years or
2007/200760/200760abs.html; and Board of Governors of the Federal Re-
the continuing fragile nature of the global economic en- serve System, Division of Research and Statistics (2014), “Updated Histori-
vironment as supporting such a view. Most participants’ cal Forecast Errors,” memorandum, April 9, http://www.federalre-
serve.gov/foia/files/20140409-historical-forecast-errors.pdf.
assessments of the level of uncertainty surrounding their
1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
economic projections did not change materially from 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that
has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts.
March.
Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the
fourth quarter of the year indicated.
As in March, most participants judged the risks to their
projections of GDP growth and the unemployment rate
effective lower bound. A majority of participants judged
to be broadly balanced, although many still assessed the
the risks to their inflation projections to be broadly bal-
risks to GDP growth as weighted to the downside and
anced. However, many viewed the risks to inflation as
some saw the risks to the unemployment rate as tilted to
skewed to the downside, although fewer than in March.
the upside (top two panels in the right-hand column of
A couple of participants pointed to the firming of some
figure 4). Participants who saw the risks to growth as
measures of inflation in recent months as contributing
tilted to the downside attributed this assessment to the
to the change in their risk assessment. Among those
weaker-than-expected May employment report; recent
who continued to judge that the risks to inflation were
softness in business fixed investment; concerns about
weighted to the downside, almost all cited recent de-
the global economic environment, including possible
clines in measures of inflation compensation and some
economic and financial consequences of the upcoming
survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expecta-
British referendum on European Union membership; or
tions as reasons for that assessment.
the proximity of short-term nominal interest rates to the
3 Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for the discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con- economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess
sumer price inflation over the period from 1996 through 2015. the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projec-
At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” tions.

--- Page 24 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4. Uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth Risks to GDP growth
June projections June projections
18 18
March projections March projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation Risks to PCE inflation
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation Risks to core PCE inflation
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”Defini-
tionsofvariablesareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 25 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_4_–_1_5_, _2_0_1_6_____________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the 5.0 percent in the second year, and 0.8 to 5.2 per-
members of the Board of Governors and the pres- cent in the third year. The corresponding 70 per-
idents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform dis- cent confidence intervals for overall inflation would
cussions of monetary policy among policymakers be 1.2 to 2.8 percent in the current year and 1.0 to
and can aid public understanding of the basis for 3.0 percent in the second and third years.
policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends Because current conditions may differ from
these projections, however. The economic and those that prevailed, on average, over history, par-
statistical models and relationships used to help ticipants provide judgments as to whether the un-
produce economic forecasts are necessarily imper- certainty attached to their projections of each vari-
fect descriptions of the real world, and the future able is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar
path of the economy can be affected by myriad to typical levels of forecast uncertainty in the past,
unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in as shown in table 2. Participants also provide judg-
setting the stance of monetary policy, participants ments as to whether the risks to their projections
consider not only what appears to be the most are weighted to the upside, are weighted to the
likely economic outcome as embodied in their downside, or are broadly balanced. That is, partic-
projections, but also the range of alternative pos- ipants judge whether each variable is more likely to
sibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the be above or below their projections of the most
potential costs to the economy should they occur. likely outcome. These judgments about the uncer-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical ac- tainty and the risks attending each participant’s
curacy of a range of forecasts, including those re- projections are distinct from the diversity of partic-
ported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those ipants’ views about the most likely outcomes.
prepared by the Federal Reserve Board’s staff in Forecast uncertainty is concerned with the risks as-
advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market sociated with a particular projection rather than
Committee. The projection error ranges shown in with divergences across a number of different pro-
the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty as- jections.
sociated with economic forecasts. For example, As with real activity and inflation, the outlook
suppose a participant projects that real gross do- for the future path of the federal funds rate is sub-
mestic product (GDP) and total consumer prices ject to considerable uncertainty. This uncertainty
will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, arises primarily because each participant’s assess-
3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty attend- ment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy
ing those projections is similar to that experienced depends importantly on the evolution of real activ-
in the past and the risks around the projections are ity and inflation over time. If economic conditions
broadly balanced, the numbers reported in table 2 evolve in an unexpected manner, then assessments
would imply a probability of about 70 percent that of the appropriate setting of the federal funds rate
actual GDP would expand within a range of would change from that point forward.
1.6 to 4.4 percent in the current year, 1.0 to

# Tables

## Page_14_Table_1


|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|------------------|------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 6102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
| 2ycnednetlartneC | regnoL
nur | 0.2–8.1 1.2–8.1 0.5–7.4 0.5–7.4
0.2 0.2
1.2–8.1 1.2–8.1 8.4–4.4 0.5–5.4 0.2–9.1 0.2–9.1 0.2–9.1 0.2–9.1
2.2–9.1 3.2–0.2 7.4–5.4 7.4–5.4 0.2–7.1 0.2–7.1 0.2–7.1 0.2–7.1
0.2–9.1 3.2–1.2 8.4–6.4 8.4–6.4 7.1–3.1 6.1–0.1 8.1–6.1 7.1–4.1 | 3.3–0.3 5.3–0.3
9.2–1.2 3.3–5.2
9.1–4.1 4.2–6.1
9.0–6.0 4.1–9.0 |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 6102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
| 1naideM          | regnoL
nur | 0.2 0.2 8.4 8.4 0.2 0.2
0.2 0.2 6.4 5.4 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
0.2 1.2 6.4 6.4 9.1 9.1 9.1 8.1
0.2 2.2 7.4 7.4 4.1 2.1 7.1 6.1                                                                                                                 | 0.3 3.3
4.2 0.3
6.1 9.1
9.0 9.0                                 |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 6102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |