# 20161214_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:38:32*
*Pages: 25, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
December 13–14, 2016
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of Market Account
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 13, 2016, Robert deV. Frierson, Secretary, Office of the
at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, December Secretary, Board of Governors
14, 2016, at 9:00 a.m.1
Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve
PRESENT: Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of
Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division
Janet L. Yellen, Chair
of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman
Governors
Lael Brainard
James Bullard
Margie Shanks,3 Deputy Secretary, Office of the
Stanley Fischer
Secretary, Board of Governors
Esther L. George
Loretta J. Mester
James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of
Jerome H. Powell
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Andreas
Eric Rosengren
Lehnert, Deputy Director, Division of Financial
Daniel K. Tarullo
Stability, Board of Governors; Beth Anne Wilson,
Deputy Director, Division of International
Charles L. Evans, Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan,
Finance, Board of Governors
Neel Kashkari, and Michael Strine, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Trevor A. Reeve, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair,
Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and John C.
Williams, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
David Bowman, Andrew Figura, Joseph W. Gruber,
of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,
Ann McKeehan, and David Reifschneider, Special
respectively
Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members,
Board of Governors
Brian F. Madigan, Secretary
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Board Members, Board of Governors
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel
Antulio N. Bomfim, Robert J. Tetlow, and Joyce K.
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel
Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary
Steven B. Kamin, Economist
Affairs, Board of Governors; Wayne Passmore,
Thomas Laubach, Economist
Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics,
David W. Wilcox, Economist
Board of Governors
Thomas A. Connors, David E. Lebow, Stephen A.
Brian M. Doyle, Associate Director, Division of
Meyer, Christopher J. Waller, and William
International Finance, Board of Governors; Stacey
Wascher, Associate Economists
Tevlin, Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account
1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the 2 Attended the discussions of the Rules Regarding Availability
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. of Information and developments in financial markets and
open market operations.
3 Attended Wednesday session only.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Stephanie R. Aaronson, Assistant Director, Division of amended Rules would be published in the Federal Register
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; as an interim final rule, which would become effective
Christopher J. Gust, Assistant Director, Division immediately on publication. The Committee anticipated
of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors finalization of the Rules after any appropriate changes
were incorporated based on comments received from
Don Kim, Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, the public during the 60-day comment period following
Board of Governors; Karen M. Pence, Adviser, the Federal Register notice.
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Secretary’s note: The amended Rules were
Governors
published in the Federal Register on December
27, 2016.
Penelope A. Beattie,4 Assistant to the Secretary, Office
of the Secretary, Board of Governors Developments in Financial Markets and Open
Market Operations
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of The manager of the System Open Market Account
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors (SOMA) reported on developments in U.S. and global
financial markets during the period since the Committee
Edward Herbst and Lubomir Petrasek, Principal met on November 1–2, 2016. Nominal yields on longer-
Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board term U.S. Treasury securities rose substantially over the
of Governors period, reflecting both higher real yields and an increase
in inflation compensation. The value of the dollar on
Achilles Sangster II, Information Management Analyst, foreign exchange markets rose, U.S. equity indexes in-
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors creased considerably, and credit spreads on U.S. corpo-
rate bonds narrowed. Market pricing and survey results
Mark L. Mullinix, First Vice President, Federal Reserve indicated that market participants had come to see a high
Bank of Richmond probability of an increase of 25 basis points in the
FOMC’s target range for the federal funds rate at this
David Altig, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve meeting, and that the path of the federal funds rate an-
Bank of Atlanta ticipated by market participants for coming years had
steepened. Surveys of market participants indicated that
Michael Dotsey, Evan F. Koenig, Spencer Krane, and revised expectations for government spending and tax
Mark E. Schweitzer, Senior Vice Presidents, policy following the U.S. elections in early November
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, were seen as the most important reasons, among several
Chicago, and Cleveland, respectively factors, for the increase in longer-term Treasury yields,
the climb in equity valuations, and the rise in the dollar.
Terry Fitzgerald, Giovanni Olivei, Argia M. Sbordone,
The manager also reported on developments in money
Mark Spiegel, and Alexander L. Wolman, Vice
markets and open market operations. Market interest
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis,
rates on overnight repurchase agreements (repos) fell
Boston, New York, San Francisco, and Richmond,
during the intermeeting period. Market participants
respectively
pointed to a number of factors contributing to the de-
cline, including lower demands for funding by securities
Willem Van Zandweghe, Assistant Vice President,
dealers and the ample availability of financing from gov-
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
ernment-only money market funds (MMFs). The de-
cline in repo rates, together with the shift of MMF assets
Rules Regarding Availability of Information
toward government-only funds, had likely boosted usage
The Committee unanimously voted to amend its Rules
of the System’s overnight reverse repurchase agreement
Regarding Availability of Information (Rules) in order to
(ON RRP) facility over the period. In contrast to the
comply with the FOIA Improvement Act of 2016 and
decline in interest rates for secured money market trans-
to make a number of other technical changes.5 The
4 Attended Tuesday session only. 5 The approved Rules Regarding Availability of Information
are available at www.federalreserve.gov/monetary
policy/rules_authorizations.htm.

--- Page 3 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r_ 1_3_–_1_4_, _2_0_16_______________________P_a_g_e_ _3
actions, the effective federal funds rate generally re- unseasonably warm weather in October. Automakers’
mained near the middle of the FOMC’s ¼ to ½ percent assembly schedules suggested that motor vehicle pro-
target range. The manager also reported on the Open duction would be roughly flat in the near term, and
Market Desk’s regular review of operational readiness broader indicators of manufacturing production, such as
for a range of open market operations. the new orders indexes from national and regional man-
ufacturing surveys, pointed toward only modest gains in
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
factory output in the coming months.
domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.
There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) ap-
cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- peared to be rising at a moderate pace in the fourth quar-
riod. ter. Consumer expenditures increased modestly in Oc-
tober but were restrained by a decline in spending for
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
energy services that reflected unseasonably warm
The information reviewed for the December 13–14
weather in that month. Unit sales of light motor vehicles
meeting indicated that real gross domestic product
were higher in October and November than average
(GDP) was expanding at a moderate pace over the sec-
monthly sales in the third quarter. The components of
ond half of the year and that labor market conditions had
the nominal retail sales data used by the Bureau of Eco-
continued to strengthen in recent months. Consumer
nomic Analysis to construct its estimate of PCE rose
price inflation increased further above its pace early in
moderately in November. Recent readings on key fac-
the year but was still running below the Committee’s
tors that influence consumer spending—such as contin-
longer-run objective of 2 percent, restrained in part by
ued gains in employment, real disposable personal in-
earlier declines in energy prices and in prices of non-en-
come, and households’ net worth—were consistent with
ergy imports.
moderate real PCE growth for the fourth quarter as a
Taken together, a range of recent indicators showed that whole. In addition, consumer sentiment as measured by
labor market conditions had tightened further. Total the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers
nonfarm payroll employment increased at a solid pace in moved higher in November and early December.
October and November, and the unemployment rate de-
Recent information on housing market activity sug-
clined, reaching 4.6 percent in November. The share of
gested that real residential investment was picking up in
workers employed part time for economic reasons de-
the fourth quarter after decreasing in the previous two
creased; however, both the labor force participation rate
quarters. Starts for both new single-family homes and
and the employment-to-population ratio edged down on
multifamily units rose substantially in October. Building
net. The rates of private-sector job openings, of hiring,
permit issuance for new single-family homes—which
and of quits were generally little changed in September
tends to be a good indicator of the underlying trend in
and October at levels above those seen during much of
construction—also increased. Sales of existing homes
the current economic expansion. The four-week mov-
advanced, although new home sales dipped.
ing average of initial claims for unemployment insurance
benefits remained low. Labor productivity in the busi- Real private expenditures for business equipment and in-
ness sector was flat over the four quarters ending in the tellectual property seemed to be soft early in the fourth
third quarter. Measures of labor compensation contin- quarter. Nominal shipments of nondefense capital
ued to rise at a moderate rate. Compensation per hour goods excluding aircraft edged down in October. How-
in the business sector rose 3 percent over the four quar- ever, new orders of these capital goods rose and were
ters ending in the third quarter, and average hourly earn- running above the level of shipments, suggesting a
ings for all employees increased 2½ percent over the pickup in business spending for equipment in the near
12 months ending in November. The unemployment term. Nominal business expenditures for nonresidential
rates for African Americans, for Hispanics, and for structures declined in October, but the number of oil
whites all declined in recent months. The unemploy- and gas rigs in operation, an indicator of spending for
ment rates for African Americans and for Hispanics re- structures in the drilling and mining sector, continued to
mained above the rate for whites but were close to the edge up through early December.
levels seen just before the most recent recession.
Real government purchases looked to be rising modestly
Total industrial production was flat in October. Both in the fourth quarter. Nominal federal government
manufacturing production and mining output increased, spending in October and November pointed to in-
but the output of utilities declined markedly because of creases in real defense purchases in the fourth quarter.

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
The payrolls of state and local governments expanded, below central bank targets. Inflation in the EMEs also
on balance, in October and November, and nominal moved up, driven largely by a rebound in Chinese food
construction spending by these governments rose in Oc- prices and, in some countries, by the effects of currency
tober. depreciation.
The U.S. international trade deficit widened in October Staff Review of the Financial Situation
after narrowing in September. After increasing in Sep- Over the intermeeting period, incoming U.S. economic
tember, exports fell substantially in October, reflecting data and Federal Reserve communications reinforced
declines in exports of agricultural products, consumer market participants’ expectations for an increase in the
goods, and industrial supplies. Imports in October re- target range for the federal funds rate at the December
traced their September decline, as imports of consumer meeting. Asset price movements as well as changes in
goods and capital goods rose. The available trade data the expected path for U.S. monetary policy beyond De-
suggested that real net exports would make a negative cember appeared to be driven largely by expectations of
contribution to real U.S. GDP growth in the fourth more expansionary fiscal policy in the aftermath of U.S.
quarter. elections. Nominal Treasury yields rose across the ma-
turity spectrum, and measures of inflation compensation
Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE
based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities contin-
price index, increased almost 1½ percent over the
ued to move up. Meanwhile, broad equity price indexes
12 months ending in October, partly restrained by recent
increased, and credit spreads on corporate bonds nar-
decreases in consumer food prices and earlier declines in
rowed. Most private borrowing rates increased some-
consumer energy prices. Core PCE prices, which ex-
what, but financing conditions for nonfinancial firms
clude food and energy prices, rose about 1¾ percent
and households remained broadly accommodative.
over the same period, held down in part by decreases in
the prices of non-energy imports over a portion of this Market expectations for an increase in the target range
period and by the pass-through of earlier declines in en- for the federal funds rate at the December meeting rose
ergy prices into the prices of other goods and services. over the intermeeting period. By the end of the period,
Over the same 12-month period, total consumer prices quotes on federal funds futures contracts, without ad-
as measured by the consumer price index (CPI) rose a justment for term premiums, suggested that market par-
bit more than 1½ percent, while core CPI inflation was ticipants saw a nearly 95 percent probability of a rate
around 2 percent. The Michigan survey measure of me- hike. In addition, the expected federal funds rate path
dian longer-run inflation expectations edged up, on net, over the next few years implied by quotes on overnight
in November and early December. The measure of index swap (OIS) rates steepened. Most of the steepen-
longer-run inflation expectations for PCE prices from ing of the expected policy path occurred following the
the Survey of Professional Forecasters was unchanged U.S. elections, reportedly in part reflecting investors’
in the fourth quarter, and measures of longer-run infla- perception that the incoming Congress and Administra-
tion expectations from the Desk’s Survey of Primary tion would enact significant fiscal stimulus measures.
Dealers and Survey of Market Participants were also un- Market-based measures of uncertainty regarding mone-
changed in December. tary policy at horizons beyond one year moved up, sug-
gesting that some of the firming in OIS rates could re-
Foreign real GDP growth rebounded in the third quarter
flect a rise in term premiums. Consistent with market-
from an unusually subdued pace in the second quarter.
based estimates, respondents to the Desk’s December
This bounceback was driven primarily by stronger eco-
surveys of primary dealers and market participants as-
nomic growth in Canada and Mexico, two countries
signed a probability near 90 percent to a rate hike in De-
where the second-quarter weakness was most pro-
cember.
nounced. In the advanced foreign economies (AFEs),
recent indicators were consistent with a more moderate Nominal Treasury yields moved up considerably since
pace of economic activity in the fourth quarter. Eco- the November FOMC meeting. Intermediate- and
nomic growth also appeared to slow after its uptick in longer-term yields were boosted by roughly equal in-
the third quarter in the emerging market economies creases in real yields and inflation compensation.
(EMEs), as indicators for Mexico suggested a return to Measures of inflation compensation extended an up-
a more sustainable pace of economic growth and as in- ward trajectory that began around midyear. Changes in
vestment decelerated in China. Inflation increased in market quotes for inflation caps and floors suggested
most AFEs in recent months but remained significantly that the rise in inflation compensation reflected in part

--- Page 5 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r_ 1_3_–_1_4_, _2_0_16_______________________P_a_g_e_ _5
higher costs of protection against above-target inflation but was moderate compared with rates seen in the first
outcomes. The rise in inflation compensation appeared half of the year. Default rates and expected year-ahead
to be spurred in part by the recent climb in oil prices, default rates for nonfinancial firms declined modestly
with a notable jump after OPEC’s agreement at its No- over the intermeeting period, although both remained
vember 30 meeting to cut production. somewhat elevated compared with their ranges in recent
years. Indicators of supply and demand conditions for
Broad U.S. equity price indexes rose over the intermeet-
small business credit were generally unchanged over the
ing period, apparently boosted by investors’ expecta-
past quarter, with demand appearing to remain weak.
tions of stronger earnings growth and improved risk sen-
timent, with much of the rally coming after the U.S. elec- Gross issuance of municipal bonds remained solid in
tions. Share prices for the financial sector outperformed October, and the credit quality of state and local govern-
the broader market, while stock prices in sectors that ments was stable, as the number of ratings downgrades
typically benefit from lower interest rates, such as utili- only moderately outpaced the number of upgrades in
ties, underperformed. Implied volatility in equity mar- October and November. Yields on general obligation
kets decreased, and yield spreads of nonfinancial corpo- bonds rose somewhat more than those on comparable-
rate bonds over those of comparable-maturity Treasury maturity Treasury securities over the intermeeting pe-
securities narrowed for both investment- and riod, reportedly reflecting expected reductions in the tax
speculative-grade firms. Available reports suggested that benefit of municipal bonds.
earnings for firms in the S&P 500 index increased in the
Financing conditions for commercial real estate (CRE)
third quarter on a seasonally adjusted basis, and the im-
also remained largely accommodative. The average rate
provement in earnings was broad based across sectors.
of growth of CRE loans at banks continued to be strong
Money market flows continued to stabilize over the in- in October and November. Spreads on commercial
termeeting period following outsized movements in the mortgage-backed securities narrowed a little over the in-
period before implementation of MMF reforms in mid- termeeting period, and issuance of such securities con-
October. Assets under management at government tinued to outpace that of the first half of 2016.
MMFs rose modestly, while assets at prime MMFs were
The interest rate on 30-year fixed-rate residential mort-
about unchanged. In addition, outstanding levels of
gages moved up in line with Treasury yields, although
commercial paper (CP) and negotiable certificates of de-
the rate remained low by historical standards and mort-
posit were stable. The effective federal funds rate re-
gage availability appeared little changed. Likely in part
mained well within the FOMC’s target range. Rates on
because of the increase in mortgage rates, refinance orig-
overnight Eurodollar deposits, CP, and other short-term
inations decreased in November, but purchase origina-
unsecured instruments were close to the federal funds
tions were little changed.
rate. Overnight Treasury repo rates declined in mid-
November but stayed above the ON RRP offering rate. Consumer credit continued to be readily available for
Rates on term money market instruments increased, most borrowers, and overall loan balances increased
consistent with firming expectations for a December about 6 percent over the 12 months ending in Septem-
rate hike. ber. In the subprime sector, credit card lending stand-
ards appeared to remain tight, and extensions of new
Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms remained
credit to subprime auto loan borrowers edged down in
generally accommodative. Although gross issuance of
the third quarter. Measures of consumer credit quality
corporate bonds slowed notably in October and No-
were little changed in the third quarter.
vember from the brisk pace in the third quarter, the de-
crease in corporate bond spreads after the U.S. elections Foreign financial markets responded primarily to U.S.
suggests that the lower issuance did not reflect a tighten- developments over the intermeeting period, as market
ing of financial conditions. In addition, growth in com- participants assessed the effects of potential policy
mercial and industrial loans from banks picked up after changes resulting from the U.S. elections on foreign
having dipped some during the third quarter, issuance of economies. Spillovers from U.S. markets lifted yields
leveraged loans by nonbanks was robust, and CP out- and equity prices in most AFEs, but higher yields in the
standing at nonfinancial firms increased on balance. United States seemed to weigh on investor sentiment to-
ward EMEs, where prices of risky assets declined. On a
The credit quality of nonfinancial corporations remained
trade-weighted basis, the dollar appreciated notably
solid. The volume of corporate bond rating downgrades
against both AFE and EME currencies. In particular,
in October and November outpaced that of upgrades

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
the dollar strengthened about 10 percent against the Jap- The near-term forecast for consumer price inflation was
anese yen and 5 percent against the Mexican peso. The somewhat higher than in the previous projection, re-
declines in EME currencies and risky asset prices were flecting recent increases in energy prices. Beyond the
reportedly driven by higher U.S. yields as well as by un- near term, the inflation forecast was little revised. The
certainty about possible changes in U.S. trade policies. staff continued to project that inflation would edge up
Currency weakness prompted some EME central banks, over the next several years, as food and energy prices
such as the Bank of Mexico and the Central Bank of the along with the prices of non-energy imports were ex-
Republic of Turkey, to tighten monetary policy. How- pected to begin steadily rising in 2017. However, infla-
ever, the Central Bank of Brazil eased monetary policy tion was projected to be marginally below the Commit-
to support economic growth. tee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent in 2019.
In the euro area, investors were attentive to the consti- The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections
tutional referendum in Italy and the December meeting for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla-
of the European Central Bank (ECB). In Italy, the “No” tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years. The
vote on constitutional reform and the subsequent resig- risks to the forecast for real GDP were seen as tilted to
nation of the prime minister raised concerns that recap- the downside, reflecting the staff’s assessment that mon-
italization of the country’s banking sector would become etary policy appeared to be better positioned to offset
more difficult. However, these developments left little large positive shocks than substantial adverse ones. In
imprint on financial markets on net. At its December addition, the staff continued to see the risks to the fore-
meeting, the ECB extended its asset purchase program cast from developments abroad as skewed to the down-
for a longer period of time than market participants an- side. Consistent with the downside risks to aggregate
ticipated while reducing the pace of asset purchases. In demand, the staff viewed the risks to its outlook for the
addition, the minimum maturity for eligible securities unemployment rate as tilted to the upside. The risks to
was lowered, and the limitation on purchases of securi- the projection for inflation were seen as roughly bal-
ties with a yield below the deposit facility rate was re- anced. The downside risks from the possibility that
laxed. As a result, sovereign yield curves in the euro area longer-term inflation expectations may have edged lower
steepened somewhat. or that the dollar could appreciate more than anticipated
were seen as roughly counterbalanced by the upside risk
Staff Economic Outlook
that inflation could increase more than expected in an
In the U.S. economic projection prepared by the staff
economy that was projected to continue operating above
for the December FOMC meeting, the near-term fore-
its long-run potential.
cast was little changed from the projection prepared for
the November meeting. Real GDP growth in the sec- Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
ond half of 2016 was still expected to be faster than in Economic Outlook
the first half. The staff’s forecast for real GDP growth In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of
over the next several years was slightly higher, on bal- the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank pres-
ance, largely reflecting the effects of the staff’s provi- idents submitted their projections of the most likely out-
sional assumption that fiscal policy would be more ex- comes for real output growth, the unemployment rate,
pansionary in the coming years. These effects were sub- and inflation for each year from 2016 through 2019 and
stantially counterbalanced by the restraint from the over the longer run, based on their individual assess-
higher assumed paths for longer-term interest rates and ments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate.6
the foreign exchange value of the dollar. The staff pro- The longer-run projections represented each partici-
jected that real GDP would expand at a modestly faster pant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable
pace than potential output in 2017 through 2019. The would be expected to converge, over time, under appro-
unemployment rate was forecast to edge down gradually, priate monetary policy and in the absence of further
on net, and to continue to run below the staff’s estimate shocks to the economy. These projections and policy
of its longer-run natural rate through the end of 2019; assessments are described in the Summary of Economic
the path for the unemployment rate was a little lower Projections, which is an addendum to these minutes.
than in the previous projection.
6 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for
real output growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal
funds rate.

--- Page 7 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r_ 1_3_–_1_4_, _2_0_16_______________________P_a_g_e_ _7
In their discussion of the economic situation and the ment. Among the downside risks cited were the possi-
outlook, participants agreed that information received bility of additional appreciation of the foreign exchange
over the intermeeting period indicated that the labor value of the dollar, financial vulnerabilities in some for-
market had continued to strengthen and that economic eign economies, and the proximity of the federal funds
activity had been expanding at a moderate pace since rate to the effective lower bound. Several participants
midyear. Job gains had been solid in recent months, and also commented on the uncertainty about the outlook
the unemployment rate had declined. Household spend- for productivity growth or about the potential effects of
ing had been rising moderately, but business fixed in- tight labor markets on labor supply and inflation. For
vestment remained soft. Inflation had increased since some participants, the greater upside risks to economic
earlier in the year but was still below the Committee’s growth, the upward movement in inflation compensa-
2 percent longer-run objective, partly reflecting earlier tion over recent months, or the possibility of further in-
declines in energy prices and in prices of non-energy im- creases in oil prices had increased the upside risks to
ports. Market-based measures of inflation compensa- their inflation forecasts. However, several others
tion had moved up considerably but still were low; most pointed out that a further rise in the dollar might con-
survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expecta- tinue to hold down inflation. Participants generally
tions were little changed, on balance, in recent months. agreed that they should continue to closely monitor in-
flation indicators and global economic and financial de-
Participants expected that, with gradual adjustments in
velopments.
the stance of monetary policy, economic activity would
expand at a moderate pace and labor market conditions Regarding the household sector, the available infor-
would strengthen somewhat further. Inflation was ex- mation indicated that consumer spending had been ris-
pected to rise to 2 percent over the medium term as the ing at a moderate rate, on balance, since midyear. Par-
transitory effects of past declines in energy prices and ticipants cited a number of factors likely to support con-
non-energy import prices dissipated and the labor mar- tinued moderate gains in consumer spending. Con-
ket strengthened further. Participants indicated that re- sumer confidence remained positive. The outlook was
cently available economic data had been broadly in line for further solid gains in jobs and income, and house-
with their expectations, and they judged that near-term hold balance sheets had improved. The personal saving
risks to the economic outlook appeared roughly bal- rate was still relatively high, and household wealth had
anced. Moreover, participants generally made only mod- been boosted by ongoing gains in housing and equity
est changes to their forecasts for real GDP growth, the prices. In the housing market, recent data on starts and
unemployment rate, and inflation. About half of the permits for new residential construction suggested a
participants incorporated an assumption of more expan- firming in residential investment after two quarters of
sionary fiscal policy in their forecasts. decline. Several participants commented that housing
activity appeared to be gaining momentum in their Dis-
In their discussion of their economic forecasts, partici-
tricts, and it was noted that the rate of new construction
pants emphasized their considerable uncertainty about
still appeared to be low relative to levels that would be
the timing, size, and composition of any future fiscal and
expected based on the longer-run rate of household for-
other economic policy initiatives as well as about how
mation.
those policies might affect aggregate demand and sup-
ply. Several participants pointed out that, depending on The outlook for the business sector improved over the
the mix of tax, spending, regulatory, and other possible intermeeting period. Although nonresidential invest-
policy changes, economic growth might turn out to be ment was still weak and equipment spending had been
faster or slower than they currently anticipated. How- flat in the third quarter, orders for nondefense capital
ever, almost all also indicated that the upside risks to goods and the number of drilling rigs in operation had
their forecasts for economic growth had increased as a both turned up recently. A couple of participants re-
result of prospects for more expansionary fiscal policies ported plans for a pickup in capital spending by busi-
in coming years. Many participants underscored the nesses in their Districts, driven by stronger demand and
need to continue to weigh other risks and uncertainties increasing revenues. Surveys and information gathered
attending the economic outlook. In that regard, several from contacts in several Districts indicated an improve-
noted upside risks to U.S. economic activity from the ment in manufacturing activity as well as expectations
potential for better-than-expected economic growth for further gains in factory production in the near term.
abroad or an acceleration of domestic business invest- And the recent firming in oil prices, if sustained, was an-

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
ticipated to boost domestic energy production. In con- force and elevated levels of involuntary part-time em-
trast, conditions in the agricultural sector remained de- ployment and long-duration unemployment. A few
pressed, and a couple of reports highlighted softer activ- added that continued gradual strengthening in labor
ity in some service-sector industries. More generally, markets would help return inflation to the Committee’s
participants reported that many of their District business 2 percent objective. But some other participants were
contacts expressed greater optimism about the eco- uncertain that a period of tight labor utilization would
nomic outlook, and several participants commented that yield lasting labor market benefits or were concerned
the improved sentiment could spur stronger investment that it risked a buildup of inflationary pressures. Most
spending. Some contacts thought that their businesses participants expected that if economic growth remained
could benefit from possible changes in federal spending, moderate, as they projected, the unemployment rate
tax, and regulatory policies, while others were uncertain would be only modestly below their estimates of the
about the outlook for significant government policy longer-run normal rate of unemployment over the next
changes or were concerned that their businesses might few years, but several anticipated a more substantial un-
be adversely affected by some of the proposals under dershoot. A few participants noted the uncertainty sur-
discussion. rounding real-time estimates of the longer-run normal
rate of unemployment, and it was pointed out that geo-
Labor market conditions continued to improve over the
graphic variation in labor market conditions contributed
intermeeting period. Monthly increases in nonfarm pay-
to that uncertainty. In discussing the possible implica-
roll employment averaged nearly 180,000 over the three
tions of a more significant undershooting of the longer-
months ending in November, in line with the average
run normal rate, many participants emphasized that, as
pace of job creation over the past year. The unemploy-
the economic outlook evolved, timely adjustments to
ment rate dropped markedly to 4.6 percent in Novem-
monetary policy could be required to achieve and main-
ber; a few participants suggested that part of the decline
tain both the Committee’s maximum-employment and
might be reversed in coming months. Most participants
inflation objectives.
viewed the cumulative progress in the labor market as
having brought labor market conditions to or close to Participants generally viewed the information on infla-
those consistent with the Committee’s maximum- tion received over the intermeeting period as reinforcing
employment objective. Over the past year, broad their expectation that inflation would rise to the Com-
measures of labor underutilization that include both the mittee’s 2 percent objective over the medium term. The
unemployed and workers marginally attached to the la- 12-month change in the headline PCE price index
bor force had trended lower, the labor force participa- moved up further to 1.4 percent in October, as the rise
tion rate had been relatively steady despite downward in energy prices since the spring offset much of the de-
pressure from demographic trends, and layoffs had cline earlier in the year. Although the headline measure
fallen to low levels. National surveys reported that job was still below 2 percent, it had increased more than
availability was high and that firms were increasingly 1 percentage point over the past year. Core PCE price
finding their job openings hard to fill. Some participants inflation had also moved up moderately over the past
commented that some businesses in their Districts were year, and, over the 12 months ending in October, it was
experiencing shortages of skilled workers in some occu- 1.7 percent for a third consecutive month. Median
pations or were needing to offer higher wages to fill po- 5-to-10-year inflation expectations in the Michigan sur-
sitions. However, some others noted that aggregate vey were, on balance, stable in November and early De-
measures of wages were still rising at a subdued pace, cember, just above the low recorded in October.
suggesting that upward pressure on wages had not be- Market-based measures of inflation compensation had
come widespread. moved up considerably over the intermeeting period. A
few participants added that other readings from financial
Participants expected the labor market to strengthen
markets, such as implied probabilities of various infla-
somewhat further over the medium run, with almost all
tion outcomes derived from inflation derivatives, pricing
anticipating that the unemployment rate over the next
in the inflation swaps market, and the apparent upward
couple of years would run below their estimates of its
shift of the estimated term premium in the 10-year
longer-run normal level. Some participants saw the pos-
Treasury yield, suggested that the risks to the inflation
sibility that an extended period during which labor mar-
outlook had become more balanced around the Com-
kets remained relatively tight could continue to shrink
mittee’s 2 percent inflation objective. A couple of par-
remaining margins of underutilization, including the
ticipants noted that the recent firming in oil prices might
still-high level of prime-age workers outside the labor

--- Page 9 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r_ 1_3_–_1_4_, _2_0_16_______________________P_a_g_e_ _9
have contributed to the changes in these market-based evolved. They pointed to a number of risks that, if real-
measures. Several, however, pointed out that market- ized, might call for a different path of policy than they
based measures of inflation compensation were still low currently expected. Moreover, uncertainty regarding fis-
or that downside risks to inflation remained, given the cal and other economic policies had increased. Partici-
recent further appreciation of the dollar. pants agreed that it was too early to know what changes
in these policies would be implemented and how such
Most participants attributed the substantial changes in
changes might alter the economic outlook. It was also
financial market conditions over the intermeeting pe-
noted that fiscal and other policies were only some of
riod—including the increase in longer-term interest
the many factors that could influence the economic out-
rates, the strengthening of the dollar, the rise in equity
look and thus the appropriate course of monetary policy.
prices, and the narrowing of credit spreads—to expecta-
Moreover, many participants emphasized that the
tions for more expansionary fiscal policies in coming
greater uncertainty about these policies made it more
years or to possible reductions in corporate tax rates.
challenging to communicate to the public about the
Many participants expressed the need for caution in
likely path of the federal funds rate. Participants noted
evaluating the implications of recent financial market de-
that, in the circumstances of heightened uncertainty, it
velopments for the economic outlook, in light of the un-
was especially important that the Committee continue to
certainty about how federal spending, tax, and regulatory
underscore in its communications that monetary policy
policies might unfold and how global economic and fi-
would continue to be set to promote attainment of the
nancial conditions will evolve.
Committee’s statutory objectives of maximum employ-
In their consideration of economic conditions and mon- ment and price stability.
etary policy, participants agreed that sufficient evidence
Many participants judged that the risk of a sizable under-
had accumulated of continued progress toward the
shooting of the longer-run normal unemployment rate
Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and
had increased somewhat and that the Committee might
2 percent inflation to warrant an increase of 25 basis
need to raise the federal funds rate more quickly than
points in the target range for the federal funds rate at this
currently anticipated to limit the degree of undershoot-
meeting. Participants judged that, even after the increase
ing and stem a potential buildup of inflationary pres-
in the target range, the stance of policy would remain
sures. However, with inflation still below the Commit-
accommodative, consistent with some further strength-
tee’s 2 percent objective, it was noted that downside
ening in labor market conditions and a return of inflation
risks to inflation remained and that a moderate under-
to 2 percent over the medium term.
shooting of the longer-run normal unemployment rate
Participants discussed the implications of the economic could help return inflation to 2 percent. A couple of
outlook for the likely future path of the target range for participants expressed concern that the Committee’s
the federal funds rate. Most participants judged that a communications about a gradual pace of policy firming
gradual pace of rate increases was likely to be appropri- might be misunderstood as a commitment to only one
ate to promote the Committee’s objectives of maximum or two rate hikes per year; participants agreed that policy
employment and 2 percent inflation. A gradual pace was would need to respond appropriately to the evolving
also viewed by some participants as likely to be war- outlook. Several participants noted circumstances that
ranted because the proximity of the federal funds rate to might warrant changes to the path for the federal funds
the effective lower bound placed constraints on the abil- rate could also have implications for the reinvestment of
ity of monetary policy to respond to adverse shocks to proceeds from maturing Treasury securities and princi-
the aggregate demand for goods and services. In addi- pal payments from agency debt and mortgage-backed se-
tion, the neutral real rate—defined as the real interest curities.
rate that is neither expansionary nor contractionary
Committee Policy Action
when the economy is operating at or near its potential—
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
still appeared to be low by historical standards, and it was
ahead, members judged that the information received
noted that gradual increases in the federal funds rate
since the Committee met in November indicated that
over the next few years probably would be sufficient to
the labor market had continued to strengthen and that
return to a neutral policy stance.
economic activity had been expanding at a moderate
While viewing a gradual approach to policy firming as pace since midyear. Job gains had been solid in recent
likely to be appropriate, participants emphasized the months, and the unemployment rate had declined.
need to adjust the policy path as economic conditions Household spending had been rising moderately, but

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
business fixed investment had remained soft. Inflation After assessing the outlook for economic activity, the la-
had increased since earlier this year but was still below bor market, and inflation, members agreed to raise the
the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective, partly target range for the federal funds rate to ½ to ¾ percent.
reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and in prices This increase in the target range was viewed as appropri-
of non-energy imports. Market-based measures of infla- ate in light of the considerable progress that had been
tion compensation had moved up considerably but still made toward the Committee’s objective of maximum
were low; most survey-based measures of longer-term employment and, in view of the rise in inflation since
inflation expectations were little changed on balance. earlier in the year, the Committee’s confidence that in-
flation would rise to 2 percent in the medium term.
With respect to the economic outlook and its implica-
Members judged that, even after this increase in the tar-
tions for monetary policy, members continued to expect
get range, the stance of monetary policy remained ac-
that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary
commodative, thereby supporting some further
policy, economic activity would expand at a moderate
strengthening in labor market conditions and a return to
pace and labor market conditions would strengthen
2 percent inflation.
somewhat further. They generally observed that labor
market conditions had improved appreciably over the The Committee agreed that, in determining the timing
past year and that labor market slack had declined. and size of future adjustments to the target range for the
Members agreed that there was heightened uncertainty federal funds rate, it would assess realized and expected
about possible changes in fiscal and other economic pol- economic conditions relative to its objectives of maxi-
icies as well as their effects. However, members also mum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assess-
agreed that near-term risks to the economic outlook ap- ment would take into account a wide range of infor-
peared roughly balanced. Some members saw, with mation, including measures of labor market conditions,
gradual adjustments of the stance of monetary policy, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expecta-
only modest risk of a scenario in which an undershoot- tions, and readings on financial and international devel-
ing of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment opments. The Committee expected that economic con-
would create a sharp acceleration in prices. These mem- ditions would evolve in a manner that would warrant
bers observed that inflation continued to run below the only gradual increases in the federal funds rate and that
Committee’s 2 percent objective and that wage gains had the federal funds rate was likely to remain, for some
been subdued, and they expressed the view that inflation time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the
was likely to rise gradually, giving monetary policy time longer run. However, members emphasized that the ac-
to respond if necessary. Several members noted that if tual path of the federal funds rate would depend on the
the labor market appeared to be tightening significantly economic outlook as informed by incoming data.
more than expected, it might become necessary to adjust
The Committee also decided to maintain its existing pol-
the Committee’s communications about the expected
icy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings
path of the federal funds rate, consistent with the possi-
of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in
bility that a less gradual pace of increases could become
agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over
appropriate.
maturing Treasury securities at auction, and it antici-
At this meeting, members continued to expect that, with pated doing so until normalization of the level of the
gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, in- federal funds rate is well under way. Members noted
flation would rise to the Committee’s 2 percent objective that this policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of
over the medium term as the transitory effects of past longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help main-
declines in energy prices and non-energy import prices tain accommodative financial conditions.
dissipated and the labor market strengthened further.
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
This view was reinforced by the rise in inflation in recent
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
months and by recent increases in inflation compensa-
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
tion. Against this backdrop and in light of the current
cute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the
shortfall in inflation from 2 percent, members agreed
following domestic policy directive, to be released at
that they would continue to closely monitor actual and
2:00 p.m.:
expected progress toward the Committee’s inflation
goal. “Effective December 15, 2016, the Federal
Open Market Committee directs the Desk to
undertake open market operations as necessary

--- Page 11 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r_ 1_3_–_1_4_, _2_0_16______________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
to maintain the federal funds rate in a target term as the transitory effects of past declines in
range of ½ to ¾ percent, including overnight energy and import prices dissipate and the labor
reverse repurchase operations (and reverse re- market strengthens further. Near-term risks to
purchase operations with maturities of more the economic outlook appear roughly balanced.
than one day when necessary to accommodate The Committee continues to closely monitor
weekend, holiday, or similar trading conven- inflation indicators and global economic and fi-
tions) at an offering rate of 0.50 percent, in nancial developments.
amounts limited only by the value of Treasury
In view of realized and expected labor market
securities held outright in the System Open
conditions and inflation, the Committee de-
Market Account that are available for such op-
cided to raise the target range for the federal
erations and by a per-counterparty limit of
funds rate to ½ to ¾ percent. The stance of
$30 billion per day.
monetary policy remains accommodative,
The Committee directs the Desk to continue thereby supporting some further strengthening
rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auc- in labor market conditions and a return to 2 per-
tion and to continue reinvesting principal pay- cent inflation.
ments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-
In determining the timing and size of future ad-
backed securities in agency mortgage-backed se-
justments to the target range for the federal
curities. The Committee also directs the Desk
funds rate, the Committee will assess realized
to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap trans-
and expected economic conditions relative to its
actions as necessary to facilitate settlement of
objectives of maximum employment and 2 per-
the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed
cent inflation. This assessment will take into ac-
securities transactions.”
count a wide range of information, including
The vote also encompassed approval of the statement measures of labor market conditions, indicators
below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: of inflation pressures and inflation expectations,
and readings on financial and international de-
“Information received since the Federal Open
velopments. In light of the current shortfall of
Market Committee met in November indicates
inflation from 2 percent, the Committee will
that the labor market has continued to
carefully monitor actual and expected progress
strengthen and that economic activity has been
toward its inflation goal. The Committee ex-
expanding at a moderate pace since mid-year.
pects that economic conditions will evolve in a
Job gains have been solid in recent months and
manner that will warrant only gradual increases
the unemployment rate has declined. House-
in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate
hold spending has been rising moderately but
is likely to remain, for some time, below levels
business fixed investment has remained soft. In-
that are expected to prevail in the longer run.
flation has increased since earlier this year but is
However, the actual path of the federal funds
still below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-
rate will depend on the economic outlook as in-
run objective, partly reflecting earlier declines in
formed by incoming data.
energy prices and in prices of non-energy im-
ports. Market-based measures of inflation com- The Committee is maintaining its existing policy
pensation have moved up considerably but still of reinvesting principal payments from its hold-
are low; most survey-based measures of longer- ings of agency debt and agency mortgage-
term inflation expectations are little changed, on backed securities in agency mortgage-backed se-
balance, in recent months. curities and of rolling over maturing Treasury
securities at auction, and it anticipates doing so
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
until normalization of the level of the federal
mittee seeks to foster maximum employment
funds rate is well under way. This policy, by
and price stability. The Committee expects that,
keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-
with gradual adjustments in the stance of mon-
term securities at sizable levels, should help
etary policy, economic activity will expand at a
maintain accommodative financial conditions.”
moderate pace and labor market conditions will
strengthen somewhat further. Inflation is ex- Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C.
pected to rise to 2 percent over the medium Dudley, Lael Brainard, James Bullard, Stanley Fischer,

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Esther L. George, Loretta J. Mester, Jerome H. Powell, It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
Eric Rosengren, and Daniel K. Tarullo. would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, January 31–
February 1, 2017. The meeting adjourned at 10:05 a.m.
Voting against this action: None.
on December 14, 2016.
To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target
Notation Vote
range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors
By notation vote completed on November 22, 2016, the
voted unanimously to raise the interest rates on required
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
and excess reserve balances ¼ percentage point, to
Committee meeting held on November 1–2, 2016.
¾ percent, effective December 15, 2016. The Board of
Governors also voted unanimously to approve a ¼ per-
centage point increase in the primary credit rate (dis-
count rate) to 1¼ percent, effective December 15,
2016.7 _____________________________
Brian F. Madigan
Secretary
7 In taking this action, the Board approved requests submitted (Secretary’s note: Subsequently, the Federal Reserve Bank of
by the boards of directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis was informed by the Secretary of the Board of
Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, At- the Board’s approval of its establishment of a primary credit
lanta, Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Fran- rate of 1¼ percent, effective December 15, 2016.) This vote
cisco. This vote also encompassed approval by the Board of of the Board of Governors also encompassed approval of the
Governors of the establishment of a 1¼ percent primary renewal by all 12 Federal Reserve Banks of the existing for-
credit rate by the remaining Federal Reserve Bank, effective mulas for calculating the rates applicable to discounts and ad-
on the later of December 15, 2016, and the date such Reserve vances under the secondary and seasonal credit programs.
Bank informed the Secretary of the Board of such a request.

--- Page 13 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- ipants noted that their economic projections and assess-
tee (FOMC) meeting held on December 13–14, 2016, ments of appropriate monetary policy may change in re-
meeting participants submitted their projections of the sponse to incoming information.
most likely outcomes for real output growth, the unem-
A majority of participants viewed the level of uncertainty
ployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2016 to
associated with their individual forecasts for economic
2019 and over the longer run.1 Each participant’s pro-
growth, unemployment, and inflation as broadly similar
jection was based on information available at the time of
to the norms of the previous 20 years, though some par-
the meeting, together with his or her assessment of ap-
ticipants saw uncertainty associated with their forecasts
propriate monetary policy, including a path for the fed-
as higher than average. Most participants also judged the
eral funds rate and its longer-run value, and assumptions
risks around their projections for economic activity, the
about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes.
unemployment rate, and inflation as broadly balanced,
The longer-run projections represent each participant’s
while several participants saw the risks to their forecasts
assessment of the value to which each variable would be
of real GDP growth as weighted to the upside and the
expected to converge, over time, under appropriate
risks to their unemployment rate forecasts as tilted to the
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to
downside.
the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined
as the future path of policy that each participant deems The Outlook for Economic Activity
most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and The median of participants’ projections for the growth
inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpreta- rate of real GDP, conditional on their individual as-
tion of the Federal Reserve’s objectives of maximum sumptions about appropriate monetary policy, was
employment and stable prices. 1.9 percent in 2016, 2.1 percent in 2017, 2.0 percent in
2018, and 1.9 percent in 2019; the median of projections
Most FOMC participants expected that, under appropri-
for the longer-run normal rate of real GDP growth was
ate monetary policy, growth in real gross domestic prod-
1.8 percent. Most participants projected that economic
uct (GDP) would pick up a bit next year and run at or
growth would pick up a bit in 2017 from the current
slightly above their individual estimates of its longer-run
year’s pace and run at or slightly above their individual
rate through 2019. Almost all participants projected that
estimates of its longer-run rate through 2019. Compared
the unemployment rate would run below their estimates
with the September Summary of Economic Projections
of its longer-run normal level in 2017 and remain below
(SEP), the medians of the projections for real GDP
that level through 2019. All participants projected that
growth were slightly higher over the period from 2017
inflation, as measured by the four-quarter percentage
to 2019, while the median assessment of the longer-run
change in the price index for personal consumption ex-
growth rate was unchanged. Since September, almost
penditures (PCE), would increase over the next two
half of the participants revised up their projections for
years, and several expected inflation to slightly exceed
real GDP growth in 2018 or 2019, generally only slightly.
the Committee’s 2 percent objective in 2018 or 2019.
Those increasing their projections for output growth in
Table 1 and figure 1 provide summary statistics for the
those years cited expected changes in fiscal, regulatory,
projections.
or other policies as factors contributing to their revi-
As shown in figure 2, almost all participants expected sions. However, many participants noted that the effects
that the evolution of economic conditions would war- on the economy of such policy changes, if implemented,
rant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate to would likely be partially offset by tighter financial condi-
achieve and sustain maximum employment and 2 per- tions, including higher longer-term interest rates and a
cent inflation. Many participants judged that the appro- strengthening of the dollar.
priate level of the federal funds rate in 2019 would be
The median of projections for the unemployment rate in
close to their estimates of its longer-run normal level.
the fourth quarter of 2016 was 4.7 percent, slightly lower
However, the economic outlook is uncertain, and partic-
than in September. Based on the median projections,
1 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for
real output growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal
funds rate.

--- Page 14 ---

,stnediserp
knaB
evreseR
laredeF
dna
srebmem
draoB
evreseR
laredeF
fo
snoitcejorp
cimonocE
.1
elbaT
6102
rebmeceD
,ycilop
yratenom
etairporppa
detcejorp
fo
stnemssessa
laudividni
rieht
rednu
tnecreP
3egnaR
2ycnednetlartneC
1naideM
regnoL
9102
8102
7102
6102
regnoL
9102
8102
7102
6102
regnoL
9102
8102
7102
6102
elbairaV
nur
nur
nur
2.2–6.1
2.2–5.1
3.2–7.1
4.2–7.1
0.2–8.1
0.2–8.1
0.2–8.1
2.2–8.1
3.2–9.1
9.1–8.1
8.1
9.1
0.2
1.2
9.1
PDGlaerniegnahC
2.2–6.1
2.2–6.1
3.2–5.1
5.2–6.1
0.2–7.1
0.2–7.1
0.2–7.1
1.2–8.1
2.2–9.1
9.1–7.1
8.1
8.1
0.2
0.2
8.1
noitcejorprebmetpeS
0.5–5.4
8.4–1.4
7.4–2.4
7.4–4.4
8.4–7.4
0.5–7.4
8.4–3.4
7.4–3.4
6.4–5.4
8.4–7.4
8.4
5.4
5.4
5.4
7.4
etartnemyolpmenU
0.5–5.4
0.5–2.4
9.4–3.4
8.4–4.4
9.4–7.4
0.5–7.4
8.4–4.4
7.4–4.4
7.4–5.4
9.4–7.4
8.4
6.4
5.4
6.4
8.4
noitcejorprebmetpeS
0.2
2.2–8.1
2.2–8.1
0.2–7.1
6.1–5.1
0.2
1.2–0.2
0.2–9.1
0.2–7.1
5.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
9.1
5.1
noitaflniECP
0.2
1.2–8.1
0.2–8.1
0.2–5.1
7.1–1.1
0.2
0.2–9.1
0.2–8.1
9.1–7.1
4.1–2.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
9.1
3.1
noitcejorprebmetpeS
2.2–8.1
2.2–8.1
0.2–7.1
8.1–6.1
0.2
0.2–9.1
9.1–8.1
8.1–7.1
0.2
0.2
8.1
7.1
4noitaflniECPeroC
1.2–8.1
0.2–8.1
0.2–6.1
0.2–5.1
0.2
0.2–9.1
9.1–7.1
8.1–6.1
0.2
0.2
8.1
7.1
noitcejorprebmetpeS
detcejorP:omeM
htapycilopetairporppa
8.3–5.2
9.3–9.0
4.3–9.0
1.2–9.0
6.0
0.3–8.2
3.3–4.2
6.2–9.1
6.1–1.1
6.0
0.3
9.2
1.2
4.1
6.0
etarsdnuflaredeF
8.3–5.2
8.3–6.0
1.3–6.0
1.2–6.0
1.1–4.0
0.3–8.2
0.3–4.2
8.2–9.1
8.1–1.1
9.0–6.0
9.2
6.2
9.1
1.1
6.0
noitcejorprebmetpeS
suoiverp
eht
fo
retrauq
htruof
eht
morf
segnahc
tnecrep
era
noitaflni
fo
serusaem
htob
rof
snoitcejorp
dna
)PDG(
tcudorp
citsemod
ssorg
laer
ni
egnahc
fo
snoitcejorP
:etoN
noitpmusnoclanosreprofxedniecirpeht,ylevitcepser
,niegnahcfosetaregatnecrepehteranoitaflniECPerocdnanoitaflniECP
.detacidniraeyehtforetrauqhtruofehtotraey
htruof
eht
ni
etar
tnemyolpmenu
nailivic
egareva
eht
rof
era
etar
tnemyolpmenu
eht
rof
snoitcejorP
.ygrene
dna
doof
gnidulcxe
ECP
rof
xedni
ecirp
eht
dna
)ECP(
serutidnepxe
s’tnapicitraphcaetneserpersnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.ycilopyratenometairporppafotnemssessarehrosihnodesaberasnoitcejorps’tnapicitraphcaE
.detacidniraeyehtforetrauq
snoitcejorpehT
.ymonoceehtotskcohsrehtruffoecnesbaehtnidnaycilopyratenometairporpparednuegrevnocotdetcepxeebdluowelbairavhcaehcihwotetarehtfotnemssessa
sdnuflaredefehtrofleveltegratetairporppadetcejorpehtroetarsdnuflaredefehtrofegnartegratetairporppadetcejorpehtfotniopdimehtfoeulavehteraetarsdnuflaredefehtrof eettimmoCtekraMnepOlaredeFehtfogniteemehthtiwnoitcnujnocniedamerewsnoitcejorprebmetpeSehT
.nurregnolehtrevororaeyradnelacdefiicepsehtfodneehttaetar
htiwnoitcnujnocnietarsdnuflaredefehtro,etartnemyolpmenueht,PDGlaerniegnahcehtrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoltimbustondidtnapicitrapenO
.6102,12–02rebmetpeSno
.gniteem,6102,41–31rebmeceDehthtiwnoitcnujnocnisnoitcejorphcustimbustondidtnapicitrapenodna,gniteem,6102,12–02rebmetpeSeht
eht
si
naidem
eht
,neve
si
snoitcejorp
fo
rebmun
eht
nehW
.tsehgih
ot
tsewol
morf
degnarra
era
snoitcejorp
eht
nehw
noitcejorp
elddim
eht
si
naidem
eht
,doirep
hcae
roF
.1
.snoitcejorpelddimowtehtfoegareva
.raeyhcaenielbairavhcaerofsnoitcejorptsewoleerhtdnatsehgiheerhtehtsedulcxeycnednetlartnecehT
.2
.raeytahtnielbairavtahtrof,tsehgihottsewolmorf,snoitcejorp’stnapicitrapllasedulcniraeyneviganielbairavarofegnarehT
.3
.detcelloctoneranoitaflniECPerocrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.4
_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________

--- Page 15 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _13_–_1_4_,_ 2_0_1_6____________P_a_g_e_ _3
Figure1. Medians,centraltendencies,andrangesofeconomicprojections,2016–19andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections
Central tendency of projections
3
Range of projections
2
Actual 1
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
9
8
7
6
5
4
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesof
thevariablesareannual.

--- Page 16 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure2. FOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy: Midpointoftargetrangeortargetlevelfor
thefederalfundsrate
Percent
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
2016 2017 2018 2019 Longer run
Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual par-
ticipant’sjudgmentofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfundsrateortheappropriatetarget
levelforthefederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun. Oneparticipantdidnot
submitlonger-runprojectionsforthefederalfundsrate.

--- Page 17 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _13_–_1_4_,_ 2_0_1_6____________P_a_g_e_ _5
the anticipated path of the unemployment rate for com- December meeting as appropriate. The distributions for
ing years also shifted down a bit, with the median for the 2017 through 2019 shifted up modestly. The median
end of 2019 at 4.5 percent, 0.3 percentage point below projections of the federal funds rate continued to show
the median assessment of the longer-run normal rate of gradual increases, to 1.4 percent at the end of 2017,
unemployment, which was unchanged from September. 2.1 percent at the end of 2018, and 2.9 percent at the end
of 2019; the median of the longer-run projections of the
Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of partici-
federal funds rate was 3.0 percent. The medians of the
pants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unem-
projections for the level of the federal funds rate for
ployment rate from 2016 to 2019 and in the longer run.
2017 through 2019 were all 25 basis points higher than
The distributions of individual projections of real GDP
in the September projections. A few participants revised
growth shifted slightly higher relative to the distribution
up their assessments of the longer-run federal funds rate
of the September projections for 2017 through 2019.
25 basis points, resulting in an increase in the median of
The distributions of projections for the unemployment
13 basis points.
rate shifted modestly lower for 2016 through 2019, while
the distribution of projections for the longer-run normal In discussing their December forecasts, many partici-
rate of unemployment was unchanged. pants expressed a view that increases in the federal funds
rate over the next few years would likely be gradual in
The Outlook for Inflation
light of a short-term neutral real interest rate that cur-
In the December SEP, the median of projections for
rently was low—a phenomenon that a number of partic-
headline PCE price inflation in 2016 was 1.5 percent, a
ipants attributed to the persistence of low productivity
bit higher than in September. The median of projections
growth, continued strength of the dollar, a weak outlook
for headline PCE price inflation was 1.9 percent in 2017
for economic growth abroad, strong demand for safe
and 2.0 percent in 2018 and 2019, unchanged from Sep-
longer-term assets, or other factors—and that was likely
tember. Several participants projected that inflation will
to rise only slowly as the effects of these factors faded
slightly exceed the Committee’s objective in 2018 or
over time. Some participants noted the continued prox-
2019. The medians of projections for core PCE price
imity of short-term nominal interest rates to the effective
inflation were the same as in September, rising from
lower bound, even with an increase at this meeting, as
1.7 percent in 2016 to 1.8 percent in 2017 and 2.0 per-
limiting the Committee’s ability to increase monetary ac-
cent in 2018 and 2019.
commodation to counter possible adverse shocks to the
Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri- economy. These participants judged that, as a result, the
bution of participants’ views about the outlook for infla- Committee should take a cautious approach to removing
tion. The distributions of projections for headline and policy accommodation. Many participants noted that
core PCE price inflation shifted up slightly relative to there was currently substantial uncertainty about the
projections for the September meeting. Some partici- size, composition, and timing of prospective fiscal policy
pants attributed the upward shift in projected inflation changes, but they also commented that a more expan-
this year and next to recent data that showed somewhat sionary fiscal policy might raise aggregate demand above
higher inflation than they had expected. A few saw sustainable levels, potentially necessitating somewhat
higher inflation in 2019 in conjunction with somewhat tighter monetary policy than currently anticipated. Fur-
greater undershooting of the unemployment rate below thermore, several participants indicated that recent infla-
its longer-run normal level. tion data and the continued strengthening in labor mar-
ket conditions increased their confidence that inflation
Appropriate Monetary Policy
would move toward the 2 percent objective, making a
Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’
slightly firmer path of monetary policy appropriate.
judgments regarding the appropriate target for the fed-
eral funds rate at the end of each year from 2016 to 2019
and over the longer run.2 All participants saw an in-
crease of 25 basis points in the federal funds rate at the
2 One participant’s projections for the federal funds rate, real that cannot be forecast. Under this view, the economy cur-
GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation were in- rently is in a regime characterized by expansion of economic
formed by the view that there are multiple possible medium- activity with low productivity growth and a low short-term real
term regimes for the U.S. economy, that these regimes are per- interest rate, but longer-term outcomes for variables other
sistent, and that the economy shifts between regimes in a way than inflation cannot be usefully projected.

--- Page 18 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2016–19andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2016
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 19 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _13_–_1_4_,_ 2_0_1_6____________P_a_g_e_ _7
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2016–19andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2016
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2016–19andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2016
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _13_–_1_4_,_ 2_0_1_6____________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2016–19
Number of participants
2016
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 22 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’judgmentsofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfunds
rateortheappropriatetargetlevelforthefederalfundsrate,2016–19andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2016
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8
0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8
0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8
0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8
0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8
0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 23 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _13_–_1_4_,_ 2_0_1_6___________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges increase in uncertainty associated with fiscal, trade, im-
Percentage points migration, or regulatory policies as a factor influencing
Variable 2016 2017 2018 2019
their judgments about the degree of uncertainty sur-
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . ±0.9 ±1.7 ±2.1 ±2.1
rounding their projections. Participants cited the diffi-
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . ±0.1 ±0.8 ±1.4 ±1.9 culty of predicting the size, composition, and timing of
these policy changes as well as the magnitude and timing
Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.2 ±1.0 ±1.1 ±1.1
of their effects on the economy.
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the
root mean squared error of projections for 1996 through 2015 that
As can be seen in the right-hand column of figure 4, a
were released in the winter by various private and government fore-
casters. (The note to this table that was included in the Summary of majority of participants continued to see the risks to real
Economic Projections for the meeting of September 20–21, 2016, in- GDP growth, the unemployment rate, headline infla-
correctly stated that the error ranges were based on projections for
tion, and core inflation as broadly balanced; however,
1995 through 2015. The correct time period was 1996 through 2015.)
As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assump- fewer participants saw risks to economic growth and in-
tions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for
flation as weighted to the downside or saw risks to the
real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges im-
plied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. For unemployment rate as weighted to the upside than in
more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), September. A number of participants noted that the
“Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical
prospect of expansionary fiscal policy had increased the
Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-
60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, upside risks to economic activity and inflation, and a few
November), available at www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2007/ assessed the possibility of a reduction in regulation as
200760/200760abs.html; and Board of Governors of the Federal Re-
posing upside risks to their forecasts of economic activ-
serve System, Division of Research and Statistics (2014), “Updated
Historical Forecast Errors,” memorandum, April 9, www.federal ity. Moreover, some participants judged that the recent
reserve.gov/foia/files/20140409-historical-forecast-errors.pdf.
rise in market-based measures of inflation compensation
1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure suggested that downside risks to inflation had declined.
that has been most widely used in government and private economic However, many also pointed to various sources of
forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous
downside risk to economic activity, such as the limited
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.
potential for monetary policy to respond to adverse
Uncertainty and Risks shocks when the federal funds rate is near the effective
The left-hand column of figure 4 shows that, for each lower bound, downside risks in Europe and China, a
variable, a majority of participants judged the levels of possible increase in trade barriers, and the possibility of
uncertainty associated with their December projections a sharp rise in financial market volatility in the event that
for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, headline fiscal and other policy changes diverged from market ex-
inflation, and core inflation to be broadly similar to the pectations. In addition, some participants pointed to
average of the past 20 years.3 However, more partici- factors such as global disinflationary trends and down-
pants than in September saw uncertainty surrounding ward pressure on import prices from further strengthen-
real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, or inflation ing of the dollar as sources of downside risk to inflation.
as higher than average. Many participants mentioned an
3 Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for the discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con- economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess
sumer price inflation over the period from 1996 through 2015. the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projec-
At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” tions.

--- Page 24 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4. Uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth Risks to GDP growth
December projections December projections
18 18
September projections September projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation Risks to PCE inflation
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation Risks to core PCE inflation
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”Defini-
tionsofvariablesareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 25 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _13_–_1_4_,_ 2_0_1_6___________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the current year, 1.3 to 4.7 percent in the second
members of the Board of Governors and the year, and 0.9 to 5.1 percent in the third and
presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform fourth years. The corresponding 70 percent
discussions of monetary policy among policy- confidence intervals for overall inflation would
makers and can aid public understanding of the be 1.8 to 2.2 percent in the current year, 1.0 to
basis for policy actions. Considerable uncer- 3.0 in the second year, and 0.9 to 3.1 percent in
tainty attends these projections, however. The the third and fourth years.
economic and statistical models and relation- Because current conditions may differ from
ships used to help produce economic forecasts those that prevailed, on average, over history,
are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the participants provide judgments as to whether
real world, and the future path of the economy the uncertainty attached to their projections of
can be affected by myriad unforeseen develop- each variable is greater than, smaller than, or
ments and events. Thus, in setting the stance broadly similar to typical levels of forecast un-
of monetary policy, participants consider not certainty in the past, as shown in table 2. Partic-
only what appears to be the most likely eco- ipants also provide judgments as to whether the
nomic outcome as embodied in their projec- risks to their projections are weighted to the up-
tions, but also the range of alternative possibil- side, are weighted to the downside, or are
ities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the broadly balanced. That is, participants judge
potential costs to the economy should they oc- whether each variable is more likely to be above
cur. or below their projections of the most likely out-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical come. These judgments about the uncertainty
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including and the risks attending each participant’s projec-
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports tions are distinct from the diversity of partici-
and those prepared by the Federal Reserve pants’ views about the most likely outcomes.
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Forecast uncertainty is concerned with the risks
Federal Open Market Committee. The projec- associated with a particular projection rather
tion error ranges shown in the table illustrate than with divergences across a number of differ-
the considerable uncertainty associated with ent projections.
economic forecasts. For example, suppose a As with real activity and inflation, the out-
participant projects that real gross domestic look for the future path of the federal funds rate
product (GDP) and total consumer prices will is subject to considerable uncertainty. This un-
rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, certainty arises primarily because each partici-
3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- pant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of
tending those projections is similar to that ex- monetary policy depends importantly on the
perienced in the past and the risks around the evolution of real activity and inflation over time.
projections are broadly balanced, the numbers If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected
reported in table 2 would imply a probability of manner, then assessments of the appropriate
about 70 percent that actual GDP would ex- setting of the federal funds rate would change
pand within a range of 2.1 to 3.9 percent in the from that point forward.

# Tables

## Page_14_Table_1


|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                             |
|------------------|------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                             |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                             |
|                  | 6102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                             |
| 2ycnednetlartneC | regnoL
nur | 0.2–8.1 0.2–7.1 0.5–7.4 0.5–7.4
0.2 0.2
0.2–8.1 0.2–7.1 8.4–3.4 8.4–4.4 1.2–0.2 0.2–9.1
0.2 0.2
2.2–8.1 1.2–8.1 7.4–3.4 7.4–4.4 0.2–9.1 0.2–8.1 0.2–9.1 0.2–9.1
3.2–9.1 2.2–9.1 6.4–5.4 7.4–5.4 0.2–7.1 9.1–7.1 9.1–8.1 9.1–7.1
9.1–8.1 9.1–7.1 8.4–7.4 9.4–7.4 4.1–2.1 8.1–7.1 8.1–6.1
5.1 | 0.3–8.2 0.3–8.2
3.3–4.2 0.3–4.2
6.2–9.1 8.2–9.1
6.1–1.1 8.1–1.1
9.0–6.0
6.0 |
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                             |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                             |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                             |
|                  | 6102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                             |
| 1naideM          | regnoL
nur | 8.1 8.1 8.4 8.4 0.2 0.2
9.1 8.1 5.4 6.4 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
0.2 0.2 5.4 5.4 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
1.2 0.2 5.4 6.4 9.1 9.1 8.1 8.1
9.1 8.1 7.4 8.4 5.1 3.1 7.1 7.1                                                                                                                                     | 0.3 9.2
9.2 6.2
1.2 9.1
4.1 1.1
6.0 6.0                                     |
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                             |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                             |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                             |
|                  | 6102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                             |