# 20150318_tealbook.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:44:41*
*Pages: 51, Tables: 3*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that
material was received on a confidential basis. Redacted material is indicated by
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content. All redacted
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of
Information Act.
Content last modified 01/08/2021.

--- Page 2 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR)
Report to the FOMC
on Economic Conditions
and Monetary Policy
Book B
Monetary Policy:
Strategies and Alternatives
March 12, 2015
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
by the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

--- Page 3 ---

Authorized for Public Release
(This page is intentionally blank.)

--- Page 4 ---

Monetary Policy Strategies
The top panel of the first exhibit, “Policy Rules and the Staff Projection,”
provides near-term prescriptions for the federal funds rate from four policy rules: the
Taylor (1993) rule, the Taylor (1999) rule, an inertial version of the Taylor (1999) rule,
and a first-difference rule.1 These prescriptions take as given the staff’s baseline
projections for real activity and inflation in the near term, and they incorporate the staff’s
lower estimate of the longer-run equilibrium real federal funds rate.2 (Medium-term
prescriptions derived from dynamic simulations of the rules are discussed below.) As in
January, all of the simple rules prescribe an increase in the federal funds rate by the third
quarter. The Taylor (1993) and the Taylor (1999) rules call for sizable increases in the
federal funds rate to values of 1½ percent or higher over the near term. The inertial
Taylor (1999) rule and the first-difference rule prescribe less-sizable interest-rate
increases—to near ½ percent and just over ¼ percent in the third quarter of 2015,
respectively—because both rules place a considerable weight on keeping the federal
funds rate close to its lagged value.
In general, the current prescriptions from the simple rules using the current staff
forecast imply slightly lower policy rates than those using the previous Tealbook
forecast. This difference reflects the downward revisions in the staff’s projection for the
output gap and core PCE inflation. As explained in Tealbook, Book A, and as shown in
the lower panel of the exhibit, the staff now projects that the trajectory of the output gap
will run, on average, about ½ percentage point lower than in the previous Tealbook
through 2017, with the output gap closing in the third quarter of 2016, two quarters later
than in the January Tealbook. The staff’s projection for core PCE inflation is a bit lower
in 2015 but mostly unchanged thereafter. The top panel of the first exhibit also reports
the Tealbook-consistent estimate of the equilibrium real federal funds rate, r*, generated
using the FRB/US model. This measure is an estimate of the real federal funds rate that
would, if maintained, return output to potential in 12 quarters. Reflecting the staff’s
updated assessment of slack in the economy, the current estimate of r*, at 0.82 percent,
1 The appendix to this section provides details on each of the four rules.
2 As detailed in the box, “Changes to Interest Rates in the Longer Run,” in Tealbook, Book A, the
staff has revised its estimate of the longer-run value of the real federal funds rate down from 1¾ to
1½ percent. To facilitate comparisons, new values of the intercepts of rules, where applicable, have been
used to construct both the “Current Tealbook” and “Previous Tealbook outlook” numbers tabulated in the
exhibit.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 1 of 48

--- Page 5 ---

Policy Rules and the Staff Projection
Near-Term Prescriptions of Selected Policy Rules
2015Q2 2015Q3
Taylor (1993) rule 1.85 1.95
Previous Tealbook 2.02 2.20
Taylor (1999) rule 1.49 1.67
Previous Tealbook 1.69 2.00
Inertial Taylor (1999) rule 0.33 0.53
Previous Tealbook outlook 0.36 0.61
First-difference rule 0.22 0.29
Previous Tealbook outlook 0.38 0.66
Memo: Equilibrium and Actual Real Federal Funds Rates
Current Previous
Tealbook Tealbook
Tealbook-consistent FRB/US r* estim ate -0.82 -0.56
Actual real federal funds rate -1.27 -1.28
Note: The lines denoted "Previous Tealbook outlook" report rule prescriptions based on the previous Tealbook’s staff
outlook using the current rule specifications, which have intercept terms that have been adjusted, where applicable,
to reflect the staff’s downward revision to the longer-run real federal funds rate. Rules that have the lagged policy rate
as a right-hand-side variable jump off from the average value of the policy rate thus far in the current quarter.
Key Elements of the Staff Projection
GDP Gap PCE Prices Excluding Food and Energy
Percent Four-quarter average Percent
3.0 3.0
Current Tealbook
2 Previous Tealbook 2
2.5 2.5
1 1
2.0 2.0
0 0
1.5 1.5
-1 -1
1.0 1.0
-2 -2
-3 -3 0.5 0.5
-4 -4 0.0 0.0
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 2 of 48

--- Page 6 ---

is 26 basis points lower than the corresponding value derived from the staff’s outlook in
January. The actual real federal funds rate, at about -1¼ percent, is almost 50 basis
points below the current estimate of r*.
The second exhibit, “Policy Rule Simulations,” reports dynamic simulations of
the FRB/US model under each of the policy rules. These simulations reflect the
endogenous responses of inflation and the output gap when the federal funds rate follows
the paths implied by the different policy rules, under the assumption that the federal
funds rate is subject to an effective lower bound of 12½ basis points. The results for each
rule presented in these and subsequent simulations depend importantly on the
assumptions that policymakers will adhere to the rule in the future, and that the private
sector fully understands the policy that will be pursued as well as its implications for real
activity and inflation.
The exhibit also displays the implications of following the baseline monetary
policy assumptions adopted in the current staff forecast.3 As in January, the staff has
assumed in its current forecast that the first increase in the federal funds rate will occur at
the June FOMC meeting. After departing from its effective lower bound, the federal
funds rate is assumed to rise at a pace prescribed by the inertial Taylor (1999) rule. The
prescribed path for the federal funds rate initially increases a little more than
¼ percentage point per quarter and reaches 3 percent in the first half of 2018; the pace of
tightening subsequently slows, and the federal funds rate begins to level off near its
longer-run value of 3½ percent.
All of the policy rules in these dynamic simulations call for tightening to begin
immediately.4 The Taylor (1993) and the Taylor (1999) rules produce paths for the real
federal funds rate that lie significantly above the Tealbook baseline over the next few
years, leading to somewhat higher unemployment rates but similar trajectories for
inflation. Under the inertial Taylor (1999) rule, the real federal funds rate initially rises
3 The dynamic simulations discussed here and below incorporate the assumptions about
underlying economic conditions used in the staff’s baseline forecast, including the macroeconomic effects
of the Committee’s asset holdings from the large-scale asset purchase programs, and the staff’s downward
revision to the longer-run real federal funds rate.
4 Unlike the Tealbook baseline, the simulations employing the four policy rules make no attempt
to account for the Committee’s forward guidance regarding the start of policy firming. However, as shown
in the December Tealbook, policy rule simulations that take account of this guidance by imposing an
unemployment rate threshold only delay the departure from the effective lower bound by at most one
quarter, with negligible implications for unemployment and inflation.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 3 of 48

--- Page 7 ---

Policy Rule Simulations
Effective Nominal Federal Funds Rate Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
6 6 7.0 7.0
Taylor (1993) rule
Staff’s estimate of the natural rate
Taylor (1999) rule
Inertial Taylor (1999) rule
5 5
First-difference rule
Tealbook baseline 6.5 6.5
4 4
3 3
6.0 6.0
2 2
5.5 5.5
1 1
0 0
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 5.0 5.0
Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent 4.5 4.5
3 3
4.0 4.0
2 2 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
1 1
PCE Inflation
Four-quarter average Percent
3.0 3.0
0 0
-1 -1
2.5 2.5
-2 -2
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
2.0 2.0
Real 10-year Treasury Yield
Percent
3 3 1.5 1.5
1.0 1.0
2 2
0.5 0.5
1 1
0.0 0.0
0 0
-0.5 -0.5
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Note: The policy rule simulations in this exhibit are based on rules that respond to core inflation. This choice of rule
specification was made in light of the tendency for current and near-term core inflation rates to outperform headline
inflation rates as predictors of the medium-term behavior of headline inflation.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 4 of 48

--- Page 8 ---

above its baseline path because the federal funds rate departs from its effective lower
bound immediately, almost one quarter earlier than in the Tealbook baseline. However,
the difference is too small to have a material effect on the real longer-term interest rates
that influence economic activity in the FRB/US model, so macroeconomic outcomes are
essentially the same in this case as those under the Tealbook baseline.
The first-difference rule calls for a slightly higher real federal funds rate over the
coming year than in the Tealbook baseline. However, because the first-difference rule
responds to the expected change in the output gap rather than its level, declines in the
output gap later in the decade—expected to occur after the initial overshooting of output
relative to its potential level—generate a federal funds rate path that is below baseline
after the middle of 2017. This lower path, combined with expectations of higher price
and wage inflation in the future, leads to higher levels of resource utilization and more
inflation in the short run. Overall, this rule generates outcomes late in the decade that are
farther than the other policy rules from both the staff’s estimate of the natural rate of
unemployment and the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run inflation objective.
The third exhibit, “Optimal Control Policy under Commitment,” compares
optimal control simulations for this Tealbook’s baseline forecast with those reported in
January. Policymakers are assumed to place equal weights on keeping headline PCE
inflation close to the Committee’s 2 percent goal, on keeping the unemployment rate
close to the staff’s estimate of the natural rate of unemployment, and on minimizing
changes in the federal funds rate. The concept of optimal control that is employed here
corresponds to a commitment policy under which the decisions that policymakers make
today are assumed to constrain future policy choices.5
Compared with the January Tealbook, optimal control policy entails a lower path
of the federal funds rate, reflecting the weaker aggregate demand embedded in the current
forecast.6 Despite the more accommodative policy, the unemployment rate undershoots
the staff’s estimate of the natural rate by less than in January, consistent with the staff’s
assessment of a slightly higher trajectory for the unemployment rate. The optimal control
5 The results for optimal control policy under discretion (in which policymakers cannot credibly
commit to carrying out a plan involving policy choices that would be suboptimal at the time that these
choices have to be implemented) are similar.
6 As noted above, the current Tealbook baseline reflects the staff’s reduction in its estimate of the
longer-run real federal funds rate, and this change also contributes to the lower optimal control path for the
federal funds rate.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 5 of 48

--- Page 9 ---

Optimal Control Policy under Commitment
Effective Nominal Federal Funds Rate Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
6 6 7.0 7.0
Current Tealbook
Staff’s estimate of the natural rate
Previous Tealbook
Tealbook baseline
5 5
6.5 6.5
4 4
3 3
6.0 6.0
2 2
5.5 5.5
1 1
0 0
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 5.0 5.0
Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent 4.5 4.5
3 3
4.0 4.0
2 2 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
1 1
PCE Inflation
Four-quarter average Percent
3.0 3.0
0 0
-1 -1
2.5 2.5
-2 -2
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
2.0 2.0
Real 10-year Treasury Yield
Percent
3 3 1.5 1.5
1.0 1.0
2 2
0.5 0.5
1 1
0.0 0.0
0 0
-0.5 -0.5
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 6 of 48

--- Page 10 ---

path for headline inflation is nearly identical to the baseline path, with differences relative
to the trajectory shown in the January Tealbook mostly reflecting revisions to the staff’s
baseline projection associated with upward revisions to energy prices in the near term.
Under the optimal control policy, the federal funds rate departs from the effective
lower bound almost one quarter earlier than in the Tealbook baseline and then increases
at about the same pace as in the baseline through 2017; on average, the federal funds rate
path prescribed by optimal control is about ½ percentage point higher than the baseline
path over the next few years. Compared with the Tealbook baseline, the tighter stance of
the optimal control policy—evident from the somewhat higher path of real longer-term
rates—generates less undershooting of unemployment below the staff’s estimate of the
natural rate, while inflation converges to the Committee’s objective at about the same
pace.
OPTIMAL CONTROL WITH A NONLINEAR WAGE PHILLIPS CURVE
The optimal control simulations discussed above assume that the response of
inflation to labor market slack or tightness is modest in magnitude and linear in the
degree of resource utilization. An Alternative View box in the January Tealbook, Book
A, considered implications of a nonlinear wage Phillips curve for the staff’s inflation
projection. The special exhibit, “Optimal Control with a Nonlinear Wage Phillips
Curve,” examines the policy implications of a related specification in which wage
inflation is more sensitive to the unemployment rate gap when the labor market is tight
than when there is economic slack. As in the January box, a nonlinear wage Phillips
curve could be motivated, for instance, by the presence of downward nominal wage
rigidities, which could make wages and prices relatively unresponsive to slack during and
after economic downturns. Once the labor market reaches full employment, the
sensitivity of wages and prices to slack could surge back. Consistent with such an
asymmetric response, FRB/US estimates of the immediate response of wage inflation to
the unemployment rate gap are about twice as large using a 1985-2007 sample rather than
the 1985-2012 sample currently in use.
To capture such a nonlinearity, we replace the standard, linear wage Phillips curve
in the FRB/US model with one in which the sensitivity of wage inflation to labor market
slack is the same as in the FRB/US model when the unemployment rate is above the
staff’s estimate of its natural rate but is four times as responsive when the unemployment
rate is below the natural rate. While the calibration is meant to be illustrative, it is within
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 7 of 48

--- Page 11 ---

Optimal Control with a Nonlinear Wage Phillips Curve
Effective Nominal Federal Funds Rate Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
6 6 7.0 7.0
Linear wage Phillips curve
Staff’s estimate of the natural rate
Nonlinear wage Phillips curve
Tealbook baseline
5 5
6.5 6.5
4 4
3 3
6.0 6.0
2 2
5.5 5.5
1 1
0 0
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 5.0 5.0
Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent 4.5 4.5
3 3
4.0 4.0
2 2 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
1 1
PCE Inflation
Four-quarter average Percent
3.0 3.0
0 0
-1 -1
2.5 2.5
-2 -2
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
2.0 2.0
Real 10-year Treasury Yield
Percent
3 3 1.5 1.5
1.0 1.0
2 2
0.5 0.5
1 1
0.0 0.0
0 0
-0.5 -0.5
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Note: The nonlinear wage Phillips curve assumes that wage inflation is four times as responsive to the unemployment
rate gap when the unemployment rate is below the staff’s estimate of the natural rate than when it is above.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 8 of 48

--- Page 12 ---

the range of conventional estimates.7 In the simulation, it is assumed that both the private
sector and policymakers know that the wage Phillips curve is nonlinear and fully
understand its implications for inflation and real activity.8 In addition, as in the previous
exhibit, policymakers are assumed to commit to the prescribed policy and this
prescription is regarded as credible by the public.
Because inflation is initially below the Committee’s 2 percent target, the higher
sensitivity of wage inflation to labor market slack in the simulation with a nonlinear wage
Phillips curve makes the tradeoff between pushing inflation up toward target and
reducing the unemployment rate below the natural rate more meaningful. Accordingly,
policy is more accommodative than in the standard optimal control simulation: Real
long-term rates rise a bit more gradually and the unemployment rate undershoots the
natural rate more in the simulation with the nonlinear wage Phillips curve. Given the
tighter labor market and wage inflation’s greater sensitivity to real activity in this
specification, inflation rises faster and then slightly overshoots the Committee’s 2 percent
objective. Overall, the trajectory for inflation is about 0.1 percentage point higher than in
the standard optimal control simulation.
The result that monetary policy is more accommodative and leads to a more
pronounced undershooting of unemployment reflects the fact that inflation starts from
well below the Committee’s objective. If inflation were closer to the longer-run target,
policy would instead be tighter under optimal control with the nonlinear wage Phillips
curve than under standard optimal control, as concerns about unemployment falling
below its natural rate would weigh more heavily in policymakers’ objective function.
Two assumptions noted above point to caveats worth emphasizing. First, these
simulations assume that policymakers fully understand the wage and price dynamics of
the economy. However, our understanding of these dynamics is imperfect, limiting the
7 The calibration implies that, all else equal, a one percentage point positive unemployment gap,
leads to an immediate reduction in annualized nominal wage inflation of 0.015 percentage point, while a
one percentage point negative unemployment gap leads to an immediate increase in annualized nominal
wage inflation of 0.060 percentage point. The latter response is within two standard deviations of the
FRB/US model estimate informed by the 1985-2007 subsample. Using a different specification, Kumar
and Orrenius (2014) also report a significantly larger response of wage inflation to a fall in the
unemployment rate when the unemployment rate is low. Finally, the qualitative results of the simulation
hold under even larger asymmetries.
8 In particular, if the unemployment rate fluctuates over time around the natural rate, monetary
policy would need to keep the unemployment rate above the natural rate on average over time to prevent an
upward acceleration of inflation.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 9 of 48

--- Page 13 ---

ability of policymakers to achieve inflation outcomes near their longer-run objective in
the presence of this nonlinearity. Second, as with the earlier optimal control simulations,
this simulation embeds the critical assumption that policy is perfectly credible and that
inflation expectations remain well anchored. If the private sector doubted policymakers’
commitment to their goals and plans, the increase in inflation could be larger and more
persistent than shown in the simulations.
The final two exhibits, “Outcomes under Alternative Policies” and “Outcomes
under Alternative Policies, Quarterly,” tabulate the simulation results for key variables
under the above-described policies.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 10 of 48

--- Page 14 ---

Outcomes under Alternative Policies
(Percent change, annual rate, from end of preceding period except as noted)
Measure and policy 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
H1 H2
Real GDP
Extended Tealbook baseline1 2.2 2.3 2.3 2.0 1.6 1.5
Taylor (1993) 2.2 1.9 2.0 2.1 1.8 1.7
Taylor (1999) 2.2 1.9 2.0 2.0 1.8 1.7
Inertial Taylor (1999) 2.2 2.3 2.3 2.1 1.6 1.5
First-difference 2.2 2.5 2.5 2.3 1.9 1.7
Optimal control 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.1 1.7 1.6
Unemployment rate2
Extended Tealbook baseline1 5.3 5.2 5.1 5.0 5.0 5.2
Taylor (1993) 5.3 5.3 5.3 5.3 5.2 5.2
Taylor (1999) 5.3 5.3 5.3 5.3 5.2 5.2
Inertial Taylor (1999) 5.3 5.2 5.1 5.0 5.0 5.2
First-difference 5.3 5.1 4.9 4.8 4.7 4.8
Optimal control 5.3 5.2 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.1
Total PCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline1 -0.3 1.6 1.7 1.9 1.9 2.0
Taylor (1993) -0.3 1.5 1.6 1.8 1.9 1.9
Taylor (1999) -0.3 1.5 1.6 1.8 1.9 1.9
Inertial Taylor (1999) -0.3 1.6 1.6 1.9 1.9 2.0
First-difference -0.3 1.7 1.8 2.1 2.1 2.2
Optimal control -0.3 1.6 1.7 1.9 2.0 2.0
Core PCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline1 1.1 1.5 1.6 1.8 1.9 2.0
Taylor (1993) 1.1 1.4 1.5 1.8 1.9 1.9
Taylor (1999) 1.1 1.4 1.5 1.8 1.9 2.0
Inertial Taylor (1999) 1.1 1.5 1.6 1.8 1.9 2.0
First-difference 1.1 1.6 1.7 2.0 2.1 2.2
Optimal control 1.1 1.5 1.6 1.9 2.0 2.0
Effective nominal federal funds rate2
Extended Tealbook baseline1 0.2 0.7 1.8 2.7 3.3 3.4
Taylor (1993) 2.0 2.2 2.8 3.3 3.5 3.5
Taylor (1999) 1.6 1.9 2.7 3.4 3.5 3.5
Inertial Taylor (1999) 0.4 0.8 1.8 2.7 3.2 3.4
First-difference 0.3 0.8 2.0 2.7 2.7 2.7
Optimal control 0.4 1.0 2.2 3.0 3.4 3.5
1. In the Tealbook baseline, the federal funds rate first departs from an effective lower bound of 12½ basis points
in the second quarter of 2015. Thereafter, the federal funds rate follows the prescriptions of the inertial
Taylor (1999) rule.
2. Percent, average for the final quarter of the period.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 11 of 48

--- Page 15 ---

Outcomes under Alternative Policies, Quarterly
(Four-quarter percentage change, except as noted)
2015 2016
Measure and policy
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Real GDP
Extended Tealbook baseline1 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.7 2.8 2.7 2.7 2.6
Taylor (1993) 3.5 3.0 2.3 2.4 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3
Taylor (1999) 3.5 3.0 2.3 2.5 2.5 2.3 2.4 2.3
Inertial Taylor (1999) 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.7 2.8 2.7 2.7 2.6
First-difference 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.7 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.7
Optimal control 3.7 3.2 2.6 2.7 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.6
Unemployment rate2
Extended Tealbook baseline1 5.5 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.1 5.1 5.0 5.0
Taylor (1993) 5.5 5.4 5.4 5.4 5.3 5.3 5.3 5.2
Taylor (1999) 5.5 5.4 5.4 5.3 5.3 5.3 5.3 5.2
Inertial Taylor (1999) 5.5 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.1 5.1 5.0 5.0
First-difference 5.5 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.1 5.1 5.0 5.0
Optimal control 5.4 5.3 5.3 5.2 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.0
Total PCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline1 0.3 0.1 0.2 0.7 1.6 1.7 1.7 1.7
Taylor (1993) 0.3 0.1 0.2 0.7 1.6 1.7 1.7 1.7
Taylor (1999) 0.3 0.1 0.2 0.7 1.6 1.7 1.7 1.7
Inertial Taylor (1999) 0.3 0.1 0.2 0.8 1.7 1.7 1.8 1.8
First-difference 0.3 0.1 0.2 0.8 1.8 1.9 1.9 1.9
Optimal control 0.1 -0.1 0.0 0.6 1.8 1.9 1.9 1.9
Core PCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline1 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.6
Taylor (1993) 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.6 1.6
Taylor (1999) 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.6 1.6
Inertial Taylor (1999) 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.6 1.7 1.7
First-difference 1.3 1.2 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.8 1.8 1.8
Optimal control 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.7 1.8
Effective nominal federal funds rate2
Extended Tealbook baseline1 0.1 0.2 0.5 0.9 1.2 1.6 1.9 2.2
Taylor (1993) 0.1 2.2 2.3 2.6 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2
Taylor (1999) 0.1 1.7 1.9 2.3 2.7 2.9 3.0 3.2
Inertial Taylor (1999) 0.1 0.4 0.6 0.9 1.3 1.6 1.9 2.2
First-difference 0.1 0.5 0.9 1.3 1.6 2.0 2.4 2.7
Optimal control 0.4 0.8 1.1 1.4 1.8 2.1 2.4 2.8
1. In the Tealbook baseline, the federal funds rate first departs from an effective lower bound of 12½ basis points in the second quarter
of 2015. Thereafter, the federal funds rate follows the prescriptions of the inertial Taylor (1999) rule.
2. Percent, average for the quarter.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 12 of 48

--- Page 16 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Appendix
POLICY RULES USED IN “MONETARY POLICY STRATEGIES”
The table below gives the expressions for the selected policy rules used in “Monetary
Policy Strategies.” In the table, Rt denotes the effective nominal federal funds rate for quarter t,
while the right-hand-side variables include the staff's projection of trailing four-quarter core PCE
inflation for the current quarter and three quarters ahead (nt and ^t+3|t), the output gap estimate
for the current period (gapt), and the forecast of the three-quarter-ahead annual change in the
output gap (A4gap),-3,). The value of policymakers' longer-run inflation objective, denoted nLR, is
2 percent.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Taylor (1993) rule Rt = rLR +nt + 0.5 (nt — nLR) + 0.5gapt
Taylor (1999) rule Rt = rRR +nt + 0.5 (nt — nLR) + gapt
Inertial Taylor (1999) rule Rt = 0.85Rt_1 + 0.15(rLR + nt + 0.5(nt — n;LR) + gapt)
First-difference rule Rt — Rt-i + 0.5(^t+3|t nLR) + 0.5&4gapt+3it
The first two of the selected rules were studied by Taylor (1993, 1999), while the inertial
Taylor (1999) rule has been featured prominently in recent analysis by Board staff.1 The
intercepts of these rules are chosen so that they are consistent with a 2 percent longer-run
inflation objective and a longer-run real interest rate, denoted rLR, of 1/ percent, a value used in
the FRB/US model.2 The prescriptions of the first-difference rule do not depend on the level of
the output gap or the longer-run real interest rate; see Orphanides (2003).
Near-term prescriptions from the four policy rules are calculated using Tealbook
projections for inflation and the output gap. For the rules that include the lagged policy rate as a
right-hand-side variable—the inertial Taylor (1999) rule, and the first-difference rule—the lines
denoted “Previous Tealbook outlook” report prescriptions derived from the previous Tealbook
projections for inflation and the output gap, while using the same lagged funds rate value as in the
prescriptions computed for the current Tealbook. When the Tealbook is published early in a
quarter, this lagged funds rate value is set equal to the actual value of the lagged funds rate in the
previous quarter, and prescriptions are shown for the current quarter. When the Tealbook is
published late in a quarter, the prescriptions are shown for the next quarter, and the lagged policy
rate, for each of these rules, including those that use the “Previous Tealbook outlook,” is set equal
1 See Erceg and others (2012).
2 For the March 2015 Tealbook, the staff revised the longer-run value of the real interest rate from
1% percent to 1/ percent.
Page 13 of 48

--- Page 17 ---

to the average value for the policy rate thus far in the quarter. For the subsequent quarter, these
rules use the lagged values from their simulated, unconstrained prescriptions.
References
Erceg, Christopher, Jon Faust, Michael Kiley, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David López-Salido,
Stephen Meyer, Edward Nelson, David Reifschneider, and Robert Tetlow (2012). “An
Overview of Simple Policy Rules and Their Use in Policymaking in Normal Times and
Under Current Conditions.” Memo sent to the Committee on July 18, 2012.
Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 50 (July), pp. 9831022.
Taylor, John B. (1993). “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 39 (December), pp. 195214.
Taylor, John B. (1999). “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B. Taylor,
ed., Monetary Policy Rules. University of Chicago Press, pp. 319341.
ESTIMATES OF THE EQUILIBRIUM AND ACTUAL REAL FEDERAL FUNDS RATES
An estimate of the equilibrium real federal funds rate appears as a memo item in the first
exhibit, “Policy Rules and the Staff Projection.” The concept of the short-run equilibrium real
rate underlying the estimate corresponds to the level of the real federal funds rate that is
consistent with output reaching potential in 12 quarters using an output projection from FRB/US,
the staff’s large-scale econometric model of the U.S. economy. This estimate depends on a very
broad array of economic factors, some of which take the form of projected values of the model’s
exogenous variables. The memo item in the exhibit reports the “Tealbook-consistent” estimate of
r*, which is generated after the paths of exogenous variables in the FRB/US model are adjusted
so that they match those in the extended Tealbook forecast. Model simulations then determine
the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the output gap conditional on the exogenous
variables in the extended baseline forecast.
The estimated actual real federal funds rate reported in the exhibit is constructed as the
difference between the federal funds rate and the trailing four-quarter change in the core PCE
price index. The federal funds rate is specified as the midpoint of the target range for the federal
funds rate on the Tealbook, Book B, publication date.
FRB/US MODEL SIMULATIONS
The exhibits of “Monetary Policy Strategies” that report results from simulations of
alternative policies are derived from dynamic simulations of the FRB/US model. Each simulated
policy rule is assumed to be in force over the whole period covered by the simulation. For the
optimal control simulations, the dotted line labeled “Previous Tealbook” is derived from the
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 14 of 48

--- Page 18 ---

previous Tealbook projection. When the Tealbook is published early in a quarter, all of the
simulations begin in that quarter. However, when the Tealbook is published late in a quarter, all
of the simulations begin in the subsequent quarter.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 15 of 48

--- Page 19 ---

(This page is intentionally blank.)
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 16 of 48

--- Page 20 ---

Monetary Policy Alternatives
This Tealbook presents three alternative draft FOMC statements—labeled A, B,
and C—for the Committee’s consideration. In addition to providing different
possibilities for characterizing incoming information and the outlook, these alternatives
offer a variety of options for forward guidance regarding the federal funds rate.
The Committee’s March meeting is taking place against a backdrop in which
continued improvement in the labor market is juxtaposed with a significant shortfall in
inflation from the Committee’s 2 percent objective. While many participants may be
confident that conditions consistent with maximum employment may be reached fairly
soon, they may be less confident about the trajectory for inflation.
The key judgment to be made at this meeting is whether the Committee can
replace the “patient” language that is now associated with a two-meeting delay before
liftoff with more flexible, data-dependent forward guidance that would put
decisionmaking about the first increase in the target federal funds rate in play at the June
meeting or later. Under Alternative B, the Committee would modify its forward
guidance in a manner that signals that an increase in the target range is possible as early
as June provided that the Committee has seen further improvement in the labor market
and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to 2 percent over the medium
term. Under Alternative A, the statement would indicate that policymakers want to see
clear evidence that inflation is turning up before they would increase the federal funds
rate. In contrast, under Alternative C, policymakers would communicate that an increase
in the target range for the federal funds rate will likely be appropriate at the June meeting.
With regard to forward guidance, Alternative B replaces the Committee’s
previous assessment that “it can be patient in beginning to normalize the stance of
monetary policy.” The new guidance states that, consistent with the Committee’s
previous postmeeting statement, an increase in the federal funds rate “remains unlikely at
the April FOMC meeting” and notes the Committee’s anticipation that the first increase
in the federal funds rate will be appropriate when the Committee “has seen further
improvement in the labor market” and is “reasonably confident” that inflation will move
back to 2 percent “over the medium term.” Alternative B further adds that this “change
in the forward guidance does not indicate that the Committee has decided on the timing
of the initial increase in the target range.” The Committee would presumably drop the
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 17 of 48

--- Page 21 ---

reference to the April decision from future statements, but may want to retain some
indication that the timing of the initial increase has not been decided.
The draft statement for Alternative A extends the notion of being patient by
adding the condition that the federal funds rate will remain at its current level “until
inflation is clearly moving up toward 2 percent.” In addition, the Committee would
assert the intention to “use its tools as necessary to return inflation to 2 percent in two to
three years.” In contrast, the statement under Alternative C indicates that the Committee
judges that economic conditions “will likely warrant an increase in the target range for
the federal funds rate in a couple of meetings.” Under this alternative, the Committee
would also retain the qualification that “slower” progress toward the Committee’s dual
objectives would likely cause the initial increase in the target range to occur later than
currently expected; the converse stipulation that faster progress would result in an earlier
tightening would be dropped in light of the indication that a tightening will soon occur
under that alternative.
Under Alternatives A and B, the Committee would retain the language stating
that, in determining “how long to maintain” the current target range, it will assess
progress toward its dual objectives. Under Alternative C, however, the Committee would
state that it will assess progress toward its objectives to determine “future adjustments of
the target range,” meaning both the initial and subsequent adjustments.
With respect to the Committee’s characterization of its approach to removing
policy accommodation, under Alternatives A and B the Committee would reaffirm its
intention to take a “balanced approach.” Under Alternative C, the “balanced approach”
phrase would be dropped in favor of language emphasizing the data dependence of the
Committee’s policy decisions. The new language would state that “in response to
unanticipated economic and financial developments, the Committee will adjust the target
federal funds rate to best promote the attainment of its objectives of maximum
employment and 2 percent inflation.” The text of all three alternatives would reiterate
that economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds
rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run.
With regard to balance sheet policy, under all three alternatives, the Committee
would maintain its existing reinvestment policy.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 18 of 48

--- Page 22 ---

Concerning the characterization of current economic conditions, Alternative B
would incorporate three key changes relative to the January statement: It would use
“moderate” instead of “solid” to describe the expansion in economic activity; note that
export growth had weakened; and acknowledge that measures of inflation compensation
have reversed part of their previous decline but remain low. Relative to Alternative B,
the corresponding language under Alternatives C and A reflect brighter and more
downbeat tones, respectively, than that for Alternative B in their characterizations of
economic activity, labor market conditions, household spending, business fixed
investment, export growth, and market-based measures of inflation compensation. Data
to be received between the publication of this Tealbook and the second day of the March
FOMC meeting could lead to revisions in the first paragraph of each of the draft
statements.
Regarding the Committee’s outlook for inflation, with energy price declines now
expected to stay in the rear-view mirror, all of the alternative statements would describe
near-term inflation as anticipated to “remain near its recent low level” (instead of decline
further). In contrast with Alternative B, under Alternative C the Committee would say it
expects inflation to rise gradually “to” (not toward) 2 percent over the medium term,
while Alternative A would say the rise toward 2 percent is expected to be “very” gradual.
Finally, Alternative A would add that the Committee is concerned that inflation could run
substantially below 2 percent for a protracted period.
Subsequent pages present: the January FOMC statement; the draft statements for
March under Alternatives A, B, and C; supporting arguments for the three alternatives;
and a draft directive.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 19 of 48

--- Page 23 ---

JANUARY 2015 FOMC STATEMENT
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December
suggests that economic activity has been expanding at a solid pace. Labor market
conditions have improved further, with strong job gains and a lower unemployment rate.
On balance, a range of labor market indicators suggests that underutilization of labor
resources continues to diminish. Household spending is rising moderately; recent
declines in energy prices have boosted household purchasing power. Business fixed
investment is advancing, while the recovery in the housing sector remains slow. Inflation
has declined further below the Committee’s longer-run objective, largely reflecting
declines in energy prices. Market-based measures of inflation compensation have
declined substantially in recent months; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market
indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its
dual mandate. The Committee continues to see the risks to the outlook for economic
activity and the labor market as nearly balanced. Inflation is anticipated to decline
further in the near term, but the Committee expects inflation to rise gradually toward 2
percent over the medium term as the labor market improves further and the transitory
effects of lower energy prices and other factors dissipate. The Committee continues to
monitor inflation developments closely.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the
federal funds rate remains appropriate. In determining how long to maintain this target
range, the Committee will assess progress—both realized and expected—toward its
objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take
into account a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions,
indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and
international developments. Based on its current assessment, the Committee judges that
it can be patient in beginning to normalize the stance of monetary policy. However, if
incoming information indicates faster progress toward the Committee’s employment and
inflation objectives than the Committee now expects, then increases in the target range
for the federal funds rate are likely to occur sooner than currently anticipated.
Conversely, if progress proves slower than expected, then increases in the target range
are likely to occur later than currently anticipated.
4. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from
its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-
backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. This policy,
by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels, should
help maintain accommodative financial conditions.
5. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after employment
and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some
time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as
normal in the longer run.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 20 of 48

--- Page 24 ---

FOMC STATEMENT—MARCH 2015 ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December
January suggests indicates that growth in economic activity has been expanding at
a solid pace moderated. Labor market conditions have improved further, with strong
job gains and a lower unemployment rate. On balance, a range of labor market
indicators suggests that underutilization of labor resources continues to diminish, but
wage increases remain subdued. Household spending is rising moderately; recent
earlier declines in energy prices have boosted household purchasing power.
Business fixed investment is advancing modestly, export growth has weakened,
while and the recovery in the housing sector remains slow. Inflation has declined
further below the Committee’s longer-run objective, largely partly reflecting earlier
declines in energy prices. Market-based measures of inflation compensation have
declined substantially in recent months remain well below levels observed last
summer; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained
stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market
indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its
dual mandate. The Committee continues to see the risks to the outlook for economic
activity and the labor market as nearly balanced. Inflation is anticipated to decline
further remain near its recent low level in the near term. , but The Committee
expects inflation to rise very gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term as the
labor market improves further and the transitory effects of lower earlier energy prices
price declines and other factors dissipate. However, the Committee is concerned
that inflation could run substantially below the 2 percent objective for a
protracted period and continues to monitor inflation developments closely.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for
the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In determining how long to maintain this
target range, the Committee will assess progress—both realized and expected—
toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This
assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of
labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations,
and readings on financial and international developments. Based on its current
assessment, the Committee judges that it can be patient in beginning to normalize the
stance of monetary policy until inflation is clearly moving up toward 2 percent.
However, if incoming information indicates faster progress toward the Committee’s
employment and inflation objectives than the Committee now expects, then increases
in the target range for the federal funds rate are likely to occur sooner than currently
anticipated. Conversely, if progress proves slower than expected, then increases in
the target range are likely to occur later than currently anticipated. The Committee
is prepared to use its tools as necessary to return inflation to 2 percent in two to
three years.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 21 of 48

--- Page 25 ---

4. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions.
5. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after
employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions
may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the
Committee views as normal in the longer run.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 22 of 48

--- Page 26 ---

FOMC STATEMENT—MARCH 2015 ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December
January suggests that economic activity has been is expanding at a solid moderate
pace. Labor market conditions have improved further, with strong job gains and a
lower unemployment rate. On balance, A range of labor market indicators suggests
that underutilization of labor resources continues to diminish. Household spending is
rising moderately; recent earlier declines in energy prices have boosted household
purchasing power. Business fixed investment is advancing, while the recovery in the
housing sector remains slow and export growth has weakened. Inflation has
declined further below the Committee’s longer-run objective, largely reflecting
earlier declines in energy prices. Market-based measures of inflation compensation
have declined substantially in recent months have reversed part of their previous
decline but remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations
have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market
indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its
dual mandate. The Committee continues to see the risks to the outlook for economic
activity and the labor market as nearly balanced. Inflation is anticipated to decline
further remain near its recent low level in the near term, but the Committee expects
inflation to rise gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term as the labor market
improves further and the transitory effects of lower earlier energy prices price
declines and other factors dissipate. The Committee continues to monitor inflation
developments closely.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for
the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In determining how long to maintain this
target range, the Committee will assess progress—both realized and expected—
toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This
assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of
labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations,
and readings on financial and international developments. Based on its current
assessment Consistent with its previous statement, the Committee judges that it
can be patient in beginning to normalize the stance of monetary policy an increase in
the target range for the federal funds rate remains unlikely at the April FOMC
meeting. The Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the
target range for the federal funds rate when it has seen further improvement in
the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its
2 percent objective over the medium term. This change in the forward guidance
does not indicate that the Committee has decided on the timing of the initial
increase in the target range. However, if incoming information indicates faster
progress toward the Committee’s employment and inflation objectives than the
Committee now expects, then increases in the target range for the federal funds rate
are likely to occur sooner than currently anticipated. Conversely, if progress proves
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 23 of 48

--- Page 27 ---

slower than expected, then increases in the target range are likely to occur later than
currently anticipated.
4. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions.
5. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after
employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions
may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the
Committee views as normal in the longer run.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 24 of 48

--- Page 28 ---

FOMC STATEMENT—MARCH 2015 ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December
January suggests indicates that economic activity has been expanding at a solid pace
on average in recent quarters. Labor market conditions have improved further,
with strong job gains and a lower unemployment rate. On balance, A wide range of
labor market indicators suggests that underutilization of labor resources continues to
diminish the labor market is approaching conditions consistent with maximum
employment. Household spending is rising moderately solidly; recent earlier
declines in energy prices have boosted household purchasing power. Business fixed
investment is advancing, while the recovery in the housing sector remains slow.
Inflation has declined further below the Committee’s longer-run objective, largely
reflecting earlier declines in energy prices. Market-based measures of inflation
compensation have declined substantially in recent months increased; survey-based
measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market
indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its
dual mandate. The Committee continues to see the risks to the outlook for economic
activity and the labor market as nearly balanced. Inflation is anticipated to decline
further remain near its recent low level in the near term, but the Committee expects
inflation to rise gradually toward to 2 percent over the medium term as the labor
market improves further and the transitory effects of lower earlier energy prices
price declines and other factors dissipate. The Committee continues to monitor
inflation developments closely.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for
the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In determining how long to maintain this
future adjustments of the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee
will assess progress—both realized and expected—toward its objectives of maximum
employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide
range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of
inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and
international developments. Based on its current assessment, the Committee judges
that it can be patient in beginning to normalize the stance of monetary policy
economic conditions will likely warrant an increase in the target range for the
federal funds rate in a couple of meetings. However, if incoming information
indicates faster slower progress toward the Committee’s employment and inflation
objectives than the Committee now expects, then increases in the target range for the
federal funds rate are likely to occur sooner than currently anticipated. Conversely, if
progress proves slower than expected, then increases in the target range are the initial
increase is likely to occur later than currently anticipated.
4. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 25 of 48

--- Page 29 ---

auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions.
5. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent. Based on its economic outlook, the Committee currently
anticipates that even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent
levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal
funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run. In
response to unanticipated economic and financial developments, the Committee
will adjust the target federal funds rate to best promote the attainment of its
objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 26 of 48

--- Page 30 ---

THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B
The Committee may view the information received during the intermeeting period
as consistent with an assessment that the current target range of the federal funds rate
remains appropriate for at least another meeting. However, policymakers may want to
drop “patient” from the postmeeting statement because they may judge that an increase in
the target range may be warranted at the June meeting. The Committee may therefore
choose to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate while updating its
forward guidance, as in Alternative B.
In light of the latest readings on the labor market, showing strong job gains and a
further decline in the unemployment rate over the intermeeting period, members may
consider it appropriate to again indicate in the Committee’s postmeeting statement that
the underutilization of labor resources “continues to diminish.” Policymakers might also
continue to judge that resource slack remains. They may point to the persistent absence
of price and wage pressures despite large declines in the unemployment rate. More
broadly, policymakers may judge that a range of other labor-market indicators continues
to indicate that resource utilization is lower than suggested by the unemployment rate
alone; they might for example point to the below-trend labor force participation rate, the
still-elevated share of those who are working part time but would prefer a full-time job,
and the still-high share of unemployed workers who have been out of work for six
months or more.
Some policymakers might be inclined to signal that the target range for the federal
funds rate is likely to be raised sooner than what would be suggested by the language of
Alternative B. In light of the further improvement in labor market conditions in January
and February, they may judge that levels of resource slack are low and are poised to be
eliminated altogether in the near future. They may be concerned that prolonging a policy
of near-zero short-term interest rates, and maintaining below-normal policy rates for
some time once the economy returns to full employment, would risk pushing the
unemployment rate well below levels consistent with maximum sustainable employment
and fuel an undesirably large rise in inflation over the medium run. Nonetheless, they
may remain cautious in their judgment about the momentum in economic activity in light
of the recent downward revision to real GDP growth in the fourth quarter as well as
weaker incoming data on spending and international trade in the current quarter.
Furthermore, they might note that inflation remains well below the Committee’s
objective, and judge that inflation expectations remain well anchored and that there are as
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 27 of 48

--- Page 31 ---

yet no signs of increasing wage and price pressures. They might also note that the higher
foreign exchange value of the dollar implies less accommodative financial conditions, all
else equal. Moreover, participants might see the experience of other countries exiting
from periods of long-standing high levels of policy accommodation—most notably
Sweden and Japan, countries for which the departure from the effective lower bound
proved premature and subsequently was reversed—as suggesting that it may be better to
err on the side of commencing policy firming later, rather than earlier.1 They may
therefore conclude that the costs of waiting another couple of meetings before increasing
the target range for the federal funds rate are likely outweighed by the risks of removing
accommodation too early.
Some policymakers may be concerned that the extended period of near-zero
interest rates is increasing incentives for risk-taking in the financial sector, with potential
for undermining financial stability in the future. However, they may note that signs of
excessive risk-taking are not widespread, and use of short-term financing instruments and
indicators of leverage have remained at moderate levels to date. Moreover, a premature
tightening of policy might itself pose risks to financial stability—namely by undermining
the economic recovery, increasing loan losses, and thereby impairing the balance sheets
of financial institutions. Policymakers may accordingly conclude that the statement
language provided under Alternative B—by signaling that the first increase in the federal
funds rate may, but need not, take place as early as June—gives the Committee ample
flexibility to take financial stability concerns into account while supporting its
employment and inflation objectives.
Conversely, some participants may be concerned that the updated forward
guidance in Alternative B—in particular the signal that the process of policy
normalization may begin as early as June—might be premature. They may be concerned
that persistently low market-based measures of inflation compensation might be an
indication that the credibility of the Committee’s commitment to its 2 percent inflation
objective is in question. However, as survey-based measures of longer-term inflation
expectations have so far remained stable and as market-based measures of inflation
compensation have, over the intermeeting period, reversed some of their earlier declines,
these participants may now be less concerned that changes in market-based measures of
1 For an account of the relevant foreign experience, see the memo, “Foreign Experience with
Liftoff from the Effective Lower Bound,” by Andrea De Michelis, Michiel De Pooter, and Paul Wood, sent
to the Committee on January 16, 2015.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 28 of 48

--- Page 32 ---

inflation compensation in recent quarters reflect a fundamental shift in inflation
expectations rather than movements in risk or liquidity premiums.2 Alternatively, they
may see risks that weakness in economic activity abroad might have significant
repercussions for the U.S. economy—especially if that weakness intensified, along the
lines of the “Greek Exit with Severe Spillovers” scenario in the “Risks and Uncertainty”
section of Tealbook, Book A. However, weighing these risks against the assessment that
there has so far been only a modest spillover of weakness abroad to U.S. growth, these
policymakers may recognize that under Alternative B, the Committee would retain the
latitude to adjust the stance of monetary policy as necessary in response to softer-than-
expected data. Consequently, before signaling the potential provision of greater policy
accommodation, policymakers may prefer to wait for further information about inflation
expectations and the economic situation abroad and its implications for the U.S. outlook,
and thus choose statement language as proposed in Alternative B.
On average, respondents to both the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and to the
Desk’s Survey of Market Participants place odds of about 30 percent on the first increase
in the target range for the federal funds rate occurring in June, but consider an increase in
September almost as likely. In addition, the majority of respondents to both surveys
expects a modification in forward guidance at this meeting that removes the “patient”
language. Accordingly, overall, the new language in Alternative B is not likely to
surprise many market participants.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE C
Some policymakers may be more confident that the expansion has gained
sufficient momentum such that economic slack—if any should still remain—will likely
be absorbed fairly quickly, and they may see inflation as likely to move back toward 2
percent in short order. In support of this view, policymakers might highlight the strong
expansion in payroll employment as well as the decline in the unemployment rate over
the past year. In particular, these policymakers might note that the unemployment rate, at
5.5 percent in February, has reached the upper end of the central tendency of participants’
longer-run projections for the unemployment rate given in the December SEP, raising the
2 Five-to-ten-year-ahead inflation forecasts from the Michigan survey in February, as well as
forecasts from the first-quarter SPF for CPI inflation five and ten years ahead, and PCE inflation five years
ahead ticked down by just about one tenth—well with their historical ranges—and the ten-year-ahead SPF
forecast for PCE prices remained unchanged. Short-term forecasts from those surveys varied mostly in line
with observed changes in gasoline prices.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 29 of 48

--- Page 33 ---

possibility that the unemployment gap may already have closed. Policymakers might
also point to the fact that oil prices recently appear to have leveled off, and that oil futures
prices suggest that energy prices will no longer be reducing headline inflation relative to
core inflation.
These policymakers might also see increased momentum in U.S. economic
activity in the period ahead, and point for example to the elevated consumer confidence
and the solid growth in real consumption expenditures shown in the revised data for the
fourth quarter. Accordingly, these policymakers may regard it as appropriate to indicate
that a first increase in the target range for the federal funds rate at the June meeting is
more likely than suggested by Alternative B; consequently, they may prefer Alternative
C.
Policymakers may also be concerned that the path for the federal funds rate
currently expected by market participants could imply an overly accommodative policy.
They may judge that the current low levels of inflation largely reflect transitory effects of
earlier declines in energy prices and thus may expect headline inflation to rise toward 2
percent before long. Participants may point to increases in market-based measures of
inflation compensation that came in the wake of the recent upturn in energy prices, and
they may regard earlier declines in these measures observed since summer as
predominantly reflecting changes in risk or liquidity premiums rather than a decline in
longer-run inflation expectations. Thus, they may view the balance of the evidence,
including information from survey measures, as suggesting that longer-run expected
inflation has not declined. In contrast, they may already see a significant risk that the
unemployment rate could substantially undershoot its natural rate, a development that
might generate higher actual wage and price inflation in the future, and in turn boost
expected inflation above 2 percent as the labor market tightens. These policymakers
might cite the scenario “Faster Growth with Higher Inflation” in the “Risks and
Uncertainty” section of Tealbook, Book A, as encapsulating some of the risks they have
in mind. They also might emphasize that all of the simple monetary policy rule
prescriptions and the optimal control simulations presented in the “Monetary Policy
Strategies” section of Tealbook, Book B, call for an immediate policy tightening. Based
on these judgments, some participants may want to signal that an initial increase in rates
by June is quite likely.
A decision to issue a statement along the lines of Alternative C would likely
surprise market participants to some extent. Although respondents to the Survey of
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 30 of 48

--- Page 34 ---

Primary Dealers and the Survey of Market Participants place, on average, the highest
odds on the first target-range increase to occur in June, at 30 percent, these odds are not
very high, and respondents consider it, on average, twice as likely that the first increase
will occur only after the June meeting. In addition, the views expressed in the surveys
are disperse, and quite a few respondents view dates later than June as the most likely.
Many market participants might thus be surprised by the high likelihood placed by
Alternative C on an increase in the target range for the federal rate at the June meeting. If
so, in response to a statement like that in Alternative C, medium- and longer-term real
interest rates would likely rise, inflation compensation would likely fall, equity prices
would probably decline, and the dollar appreciate. However, to the extent that investors
interpreted the statement as reflecting a more positive outlook for economic activity and
inflation, and accepted that outlook as correct, equity prices and inflation compensation
would not fall as much or could even rise.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A
In light of the information received over the intermeeting period on inflation,
economic developments abroad, and the restraining effects of the appreciation of the
dollar, some policymakers may be concerned that the durability of the current expansion
is at risk, or that inflation is likely to remain well below 2 percent for the foreseeable
future. Accordingly, these policymakers may regard it as appropriate that the Committee
more clearly specify these concerns as a reason to be patient in beginning to normalize
the stance of monetary policy, as in the statement under Alternative A. While
acknowledging that job gains in January and February were “solid,” and that the
unemployment rate fell further, these policymakers might judge that subdued nominal
wage growth and other indicators of labor market utilization suggest that appreciable
slack remains in the labor market.
Some policymakers may note that, over the last few years, inflation has
persistently fallen short of the Committee’s 2 percent objective without much sign of
moving back up again; they may be concerned that “inflation could run substantially
below the 2 percent objective for a protracted period.” They may take little comfort from
the stability of survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations, pointing, for
example, to the behavior of survey expectations in Japan that failed to reflect a decade-
long experience of very low, even negative, inflation rates. These participants may judge
that market-based measures of inflation compensation provide a more useful gauge of
longer-term inflation expectations. While these market-based measures have increased,
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 31 of 48

--- Page 35 ---

on balance, over the intermeeting period, policymakers might point to their still-low
levels and interpret these as suggesting that inflation expectations may have begun to
drift down—possibly along the lines of the scenario “Lower Long-Term Inflation
Expectations” that is considered in the “Risks and Uncertainty” section of Tealbook,
Book A—or that the potential costs of low inflation outcomes have increased. In
addition, they might be concerned about the possible implications for prices and personal
incomes of low growth in labor compensation. Containing such risks might be a
particular concern for policymakers because the effective lower bound on policy rates
and the Federal Reserve’s already-large balance sheet could limit the Committee’s
flexibility in responding to downside outcomes. In response, some participants may want
to signal the Committee’s readiness to use its tools as necessary to move inflation back
up again.
Some policymakers may read the incoming data since the January meeting as
suggesting that real GDP growth is likely to be no more than moderate in coming
quarters. While they might judge that the recent decline in energy prices has raised
household purchasing power, they might see this effect as likely to be transitory, and they
might note the relatively weak retail sales data for January and February. They could
also point to weakness in business investment and residential construction, in the face of
a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy, as signs that the underlying trend in
private domestic demand remains unsatisfactory. These participants may also be
concerned that the prospects for continued moderate growth over coming quarters have
been damaged by weakness in key European economies and the strong appreciation of
the dollar. They may regard the weakness in energy prices over recent months as an
indicator that global growth is on a lower path than before, with adverse implications for
U.S. net exports. Based on these judgments, some participants may want to lay out more
stringent conditions than in Alternative B (or the current statement), for beginning to
normalize the stance of monetary policy.
An announcement like that in Alternative A would likely surprise market
participants. The third paragraph of the alternative not only retains the Committee’s
existing “patient” language, but also adds the requirement that inflation should clearly
move up toward 2 percent before beginning to normalize the stance of monetary policy,
and hints at the possible provision of additional policy accommodation. In response to
such a statement, investors would likely push further into the future their expectation of
the date of the first increase in the target range for the federal funds rate. Medium- and
longer-term real interest rates would likely decline, inflation compensation and equity
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 32 of 48

--- Page 36 ---

prices might rise, and the dollar could depreciate. However, insofar as investors
interpreted the statement as reflecting a more downbeat assessment of the outlook for
economic growth and inflation, equity prices would not rise as much or could even
decline, and inflation compensation could fall.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 33 of 48

--- Page 37 ---

DIRECTIVE
The directive that was issued after the January meeting appears on the next page.
It is followed by a draft of the March directive for Alternatives A, B, and C. This draft
directive is the same for all three alternative statements; it is also identical to the January
directive.
Regarding balance sheet policies, the draft directive continues to instruct the Desk
to maintain the current policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of
agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 34 of 48

--- Page 38 ---

January 2015 Directive
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee seeks
monetary and financial conditions that will foster maximum employment and price
stability. In particular, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain such conditions. The
Committee directs the Desk to maintain its policy of rolling over maturing Treasury
securities into new issues and its policy of reinvesting principal payments on all agency
debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities. The
Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed
securities transactions. The System Open Market Account manager and the secretary
will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s
balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of
maximum employment and price stability.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 35 of 48

--- Page 39 ---

Directive for March 2015 Alternatives A, B, and C
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee seeks
monetary and financial conditions that will foster maximum employment and price
stability. In particular, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain such conditions. The
Committee directs the Desk to maintain its policy of rolling over maturing Treasury
securities into new issues and its policy of reinvesting principal payments on all agency
debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities. The
Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed
securities transactions. The System Open Market Account manager and the secretary
will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s
balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of
maximum employment and price stability.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 36 of 48

--- Page 40 ---

Projections
BALANCE SHEET, INCOME, AND MONETARY BASE
The staff has developed a projection of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and
income statement that is broadly consistent with the monetary policy assumptions
incorporated in the staff’s forecast presented in Tealbook, Book A. In particular, the
projection is based on the assumptions that the first increase in the target range for the
federal funds rate will occur in the second quarter of 2015, and that rollovers of maturing
Treasury securities and the reinvestment of principal received on agency securities will
cease in the fourth quarter of 2015. From that point forward, the SOMA portfolio shrinks
through redemptions of maturing Treasury securities and agency debt securities as well as
paydowns of principal from agency MBS. Regarding the Federal Reserve’s use of its
policy normalization tools, we assume that the level of overnight reverse repurchase
agreements (ON RRPs) runs at $100 billion through the end of 2018 and then falls to zero
by the end of 2019, and that term deposits and term RRPs are not used during the
normalization period.1,2 The bullets below highlight some key features of the projections
for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and income statement under these assumptions.
 Balance sheet. As shown in the exhibit “Total Assets and Selected Balance Sheet
Items” and in the table that follows, the size of the portfolio is normalized in the
second quarter of 2021, at which point total assets stand at $2.2 trillion, with
about $2 trillion in total SOMA securities holdings.3 Total assets and securities
holdings increase thereafter, keeping pace with growth in currency in circulation
and Federal Reserve Bank capital.
1 Use of RRPs or term deposits results in a shift in the composition of Federal Reserve liabilities—
a decline in reserve balances and an equal increase in RRPs or term deposits—but does not produce an
overall change in the size of the balance sheet.
2 RRPs associated with foreign official and international accounts remain around $135 billion
throughout the projection period.
3 The size of the balance sheet is considered normalized when reserve balances revert to an
assumed $100 billion steady state level. At this time, the size of the securities portfolio is primarily
determined by the level of currency in circulation plus Federal Reserve capital and the projected steady-
state level of reserve balances.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 37 of 48

--- Page 41 ---

March Tealbook January Tealbook
Total Assets
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Reserve Balances
Billions of dollars
5500
Monthly
5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Billions of dollars
4000
Monthly
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
SOMA Treasury Holdings
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
SOMA Agency MBS Holdings
Billions of dollars
3000
Monthly
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Total Assets and Selected Balance Sheet Items
Billions of dollars
2200
Monthly
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 38 of 48

--- Page 42 ---

Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections --March Tealbook
(Billions of dollars)
Feb 28, 2015 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 2025
Total assets 4,488 4,458 3,658 2,664 2,262 2,463 2,689
Selected assets
Loans and other credit extensions* 2 0 0 0 0 0 0
Securities held outright 4,237 4,232 3,471 2,508 2,128 2,340 2,575
U.S. Treasury securities 2,460 2,463 2,056 1,357 1,191 1,580 1,964
Agency debt securities 37 33 4 2 2 2 2
Agency mortgage-backed securities 1,740 1,737 1,412 1,149 935 757 608
Unamortized premiums 204 191 148 115 91 79 69
Unamortized discounts -18 -17 -13 -11 -8 -7 -6
Total other assets 42 44 44 44 44 44 44
Total liabilities 4,430 4,398 3,586 2,573 2,147 2,318 2,505
Selected liabilities
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 1,307 1,375 1,550 1,678 1,827 1,997 2,185
Reverse repurchase agreements 340 235 235 135 135 135 135
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 2,776 2,783 1,796 756 180 180 180
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 2,513 2,703 1,716 675 100 100 100
U.S. Treasury, General Account 35 75 75 75 75 75 75
Other deposits 228 5 5 5 5 5 5
Interest on Federal Reserve Notes due to U.S. 2 0 0 0 0 0 0
Treasury
Total capital 58 60 72 91 115 145 184
Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
*Loans and other credit extensions includes primary, secondary, and seasonal credit; central bank liquidity swaps; and net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 39 of 48

--- Page 43 ---

 Federal Reserve remittances. The next exhibit, “Income Projections,” shows the
implications of the balance sheet projection and interest rate assumptions for
Federal Reserve income.4 Remittances to the Treasury are projected to be about
$90 billion this year (down a bit from their $100 billion peak in 2014) and then to
decline further over the next three years. Annual remittances reach their trough at
about $25 billion in 2018; no deferred asset is recorded.5 The Federal Reserve’s
cumulative remittances from 2009 through 2025 are about $1 trillion,
approximately $200 billion above the staff estimate of the amount that would
have been observed had there been no asset purchase programs.6
 Unrealized gains or losses. The unrealized gain or loss position of the SOMA
portfolio is influenced importantly by the level of interest rates. The staff
estimates that the portfolio was in an unrealized gain position of about $210
billion as of the end of February.7 Reflecting the assumed rise in long-term
interest rates over the next several years, the position is projected to shift to an
unrealized loss by the end of this year, with projected year-end unrealized losses
peaking at $260 billion in 2017. At this date, roughly $120 billion of the
unrealized losses can be attributed to the portfolio of U.S. Treasury securities and
$140 billion to the portfolio of MBS. The unrealized loss position then narrows
through 2025, as securities acquired under the large-scale asset purchase
programs mature or pay down and new securities are added to the portfolio at
then-current market rates.
 Term premium effects. As shown in the table, “Projections for the 10-Year
Treasury Term Premium Effect,” the effect of the Federal Reserve’s elevated
stock of longer-term securities on the term premium embedded in the 10-year
4 We assume the interest rate paid on reserve balances remains 25 basis points as long as the
federal funds rate remains at its effective lower bound. In addition, we assume that, once firming of the
policy rate begins, the spread between the interest rate paid on reserve balances and the ON RRP rate is 25
basis points. Moreover, we assume that the effective federal funds rate will average about 15 basis points
below the rate paid on reserve balances and about 10 basis points above the ON RRP rate.
5 In the event that a Federal Reserve Bank’s earnings fall short of the amount necessary to cover
its operating costs, pay dividends, and equate surplus to capital paid-in, a deferred asset would be recorded.
6 The staff estimate is obtained by linear interpolation from 2006 to 2025 of actual 2006 income
and projected 2025 income.
7 The Federal Reserve reports the level and the change in the quarter-end net unrealized gain/loss
position of the SOMA portfolio to the public in the “Federal Reserve Banks Combined Quarterly Financial
Reports,” available on the Board’s website at
http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_fedfinancials.htm#quarterly.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 40 of 48

--- Page 44 ---

March Tealbook January Tealbook
Interest Income
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Interest Expense
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Realized Capital Gains
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Remittances to Treasury
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
−20
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
−20
Deferred Asset
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Memo: Unrealized Gains/Losses
Billions of dollars
120
End of year
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Income Projections
Billions of dollars
400
End of year
300
200
100
0
−100
−200
−300
−400
−500
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 41 of 48

--- Page 45 ---

Projections for the 10-Year Treasury Term Premium Effect
(Basis Points)
March January
Date
Tealbook Tealbook
Quarterly Averages
2015:Q1 -113 -112
Q2 -108 -107
Q3 -103 -102
Q4 -98 -97
2016:Q1 -94 -92
Q2 -89 -88
Q3 -85 -83
Q4 -81 -79
2017:Q4 -66 -64
2018:Q4 -54 -53
2019:Q4 -45 -44
2020:Q4 -38 -36
2021:Q4 -32 -31
2022:Q4 -28 -26
2023:Q4 -23 -21
2024:Q4 -18 -17
2025:Q4 -13 -12
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 42 of 48

--- Page 46 ---

Treasury yield in the first quarter of 2015 is estimated to be negative 113 basis
points. Over the next couple of years, the term premium effect diminishes at a
pace of about 5 basis points per quarter, reflecting the projected normalization of
the portfolio.
 Monetary base. As shown in the final table, “Projections for the Monetary Base,”
once the normalization process begins in the second quarter of 2015, the monetary
base first grows less rapidly and then shrinks through the second quarter of 2021,
primarily because redemptions of securities generate corresponding reductions in
reserve balances. Starting around mid-2021, after reserve balances are assumed
to have stabilized at $100 billion, the monetary base begins to expand in line with
the increase in currency in circulation.8
8 The projection for the monetary base depends critically on the FOMC’s choice of tools during
normalization. In this projection, a steady $100 billion take-up in an ON RRP facility is assumed and,
therefore, the level of the monetary base is lower than it would otherwise be until 2019 (when the facility is
phased out). The projected growth rate of the monetary base, however, is generally unaffected. If the
FOMC employs additional reserve-draining tools during normalization, however, the projected level of
reserve balances and the monetary base could decline quite markedly.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 43 of 48

--- Page 47 ---

Projections for the Monetary Base
(Percent change, annual rate; not seasonally adjusted)
March January
Date
Tealbook Tealbook
Quarterly
2015:Q1 1.7 36.3
Q2 13.3 4.2
Q3 0.2 0.7
Q4 0.4 1.1
2016:Q1 -4.3 -3.7
Q2 -13.9 -13.1
Q3 -11.0 -10.8
Q4 -9.1 -9.0
Annual
2017 -10.3 -9.7
2018 -15.6 -14.5
2019 -14.4 -13.2
2020 -14.9 -13.4
2021 -5.5 -5.6
2022 4.2 3.8
2023 4.3 3.9
2024 4.3 3.9
2025 4.3 3.9
Note: For years, Q4 to Q4; for quarters, calculated from corresponding average levels.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 44 of 48

--- Page 48 ---

MONEY
M2 is expected to increase modestly faster than nominal GDP, on average, in the
first half of 2015. Thereafter, M2 is projected to contract slightly through early 2016 and
then to grow slowly over the remainder of the forecast horizon as the projected increase
in the target range for the federal funds rate and the associated rise in the opportunity cost
of holding money restrains money demand.9 The increase in the opportunity cost is
expected to slow M2 growth to a pace below that of nominal GDP in 2016 and, to a
lesser extent, in 2017. In previous forecasts, staff had assumed that M2 growth will be
additionally restrained by businesses and households reallocating a portion of the M2
balances accumulated during and after the financial crisis to other investments. However,
in light of the continued strong growth in M2, staff is no longer assuming such a
reallocation.
9 The three-month Treasury bill rate is assumed to begin rising in 2015:Q1—one quarter earlier than the
time at which the staff projects the target range for the federal funds rate to be raised above its effective
lower bound. Subsequently, the Treasury bill rate is assumed to continue rising through the end of the
forecast period, implying an increasing opportunity cost of holding M2 balances.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 45 of 48

--- Page 49 ---

M2 Monetary Aggregate Projections
(Percent change, annual rate; seasonally adjusted)*
Quarterly
2015: Q1 8.0
Q2 2.9
Q3 -3.6
Q4 -2.8
2016: Q1 -1.4
Q2 0.0
Q3 0.6
Q4 0.9
2017: Q1 1.5
Q2 1.9
Q3 2.1
Q4 2.2
Annual
2015 1.1
2016 0.0
2017 2.0
Note: This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the
Tealbook forecast. Actual data through March 2, 2015; projections
thereafter.
* Quarterly growth rates are computed from quarter averages. Annual
growth rates are calculated using the change from fourth quarter of
previous year to fourth quarter of year indicated. snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Page 46 of 48

--- Page 50 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
Abbreviations
ABS asset-backed securities
BEA Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce
BHC bank holding company
CDS credit default swaps
C&I commercial and industrial
CLO collateralized loan obligation
CMBS commercial mortgage-backed securities
CPI consumer price index
CRE commercial real estate
Desk Open Market Desk
ECB European Central Bank
EME emerging market economy
FDIC Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
FOMC Federal Open Market Committee; also, the Committee
GCF general collateral finance
GDI gross domestic income
GDP gross domestic product
LIBOR London interbank offered rate
MBS mortgage-backed securities
NIPA national income and product accounts
OIS overnight index swap
ON RRP overnight reverse repurchase agreement
PCE personal consumption expenditures
repo repurchase agreement
RMBS residential mortgage-backed securities
RRP reverse repurchase agreement
SCOOS Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms
Page 47 of 48

--- Page 51 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) March 12, 2015
SEP Summary of Economic Projections
SFA Supplemental Financing Account
SLOOS Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices
SOMA System Open Market Account
TBA to be announced (for example, TBA market)
TGA U.S. Treasury’s General Account
TIPS Treasury inflation-protected securities
TPE Term premium effects
Page 48 of 48

# Tables

## Page_14_Table_1


| 2015   |    | 2016   | 2017   | 2018   |
|--------|----|--------|--------|--------|
| H1     | H2 |        |        |        |


## Page_15_Table_1


| 2015   |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|--------|----|----|----|----|----|----|
| Q1     | Q2 | Q3 | Q4 | Q1 | Q2 | Q3 |


## Page_49_Table_1


| M2 Monetary Aggregate Projections
(Percent change, annual rate; seasonally adjusted)*                                                                |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Quarterly
2015: Q1 8.0
Q2 2.9
Q3 -3.6
Q4 -2.8
2016: Q1 -1.4
Q2 0.0
Q3 0.6
Q4 0.9
2017: Q1 1.5
Q2 1.9
Q3 2.1
Q4 2.2
Annual
2015 1.1
2016 0.0
2017 2.0 |