# 20150729_tealbook.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:45:41*
*Pages: 55, Tables: 2*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that
material was received on a confidential basis. Redacted material is indicated by
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content. All redacted
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of
Information Act.
Content last modified 01/08/2021.

--- Page 2 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR)
Report to the FOMC
on Economic Conditions
and Monetary Policy
Book B
Monetary Policy:
Strategies and Alternatives
July 23, 2015
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
by the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

--- Page 3 ---

Authorized for Public Release
(This page is intentionally blank.)

--- Page 4 ---

Monetary Policy Strategies
The top panel of the first exhibit, “Policy Rules and the Staff Projection,”
provides near-term prescriptions for the federal funds rate from four policy rules: the
Taylor (1993) rule, the Taylor (1999) rule, an inertial version of the Taylor (1999) rule,
and a first-difference rule.1 These prescriptions take as given the staff’s baseline
projections for real activity and inflation in the near term. Medium-term prescriptions
derived from dynamic simulations of the rules are discussed below. All of the Taylor-
type rules prescribe an immediate increase in the federal funds rate. The Taylor (1993)
and Taylor (1999) rules call for sizable increases in the federal funds rate to values of
1 percent or higher over the near term. The inertial Taylor (1999) rule prescribes less-
sizable interest-rate increases—to just over ¼ percent this quarter and just under
½ percent in the next quarter—because this rule places a considerable weight on keeping
the federal funds rate close to its lagged value. The first-difference rule, which responds
to expected changes in the output gap and does not depend on a measure of the longer-
run real interest rate, calls for values of the federal funds rate of just under ¼ percent in
the third and fourth quarters.
All four simple rules prescribe policy rates for the current and next quarters that
are similar to their prescriptions in the June Tealbook. As explained in Tealbook, Book
A, and as shown in the lower-left panel of the exhibit, the percent deviation of output
from potential is essentially the same as in the previous Tealbook through 2017. The
staff’s projection for core PCE inflation rises a bit more slowly toward 2 percent,
reflecting some limited pass-through from recent declines in energy prices and a more
persistent slowdown in health-care services inflation.
The top panel of the first exhibit also reports the Tealbook-consistent estimate of
the equilibrium real federal funds rate, r*, generated using the FRB/US model. This
measure is an estimate of the real federal funds rate that would, if maintained, return
output to potential in 12 quarters. The current estimate of r*, -0.06, is essentially the
same as the current-quarter estimate derived from the staff’s outlook in June. The actual
real federal funds rate, at about −1.1 percent, is over 100 basis points below the current
1 The appendix to this section provides details on each of the four rules.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 1 of 52

--- Page 5 ---

Policy Rules and the Staff Projection
Near-Term Prescriptions of Selected Policy Rules1
2015:Q3 2015:Q4
Taylor (1993) rule 1.77 1.92
Previous Tealbook 1.78 1.95
Taylor (1999) rule 1.16 1.40
Previous Tealbook 1.18 1.44
Inertial Taylor (1999) rule 0.28 0.45
Previous Tealbook outlook 0.29 0.46
First-difference rule 0.13 0.20
Previous Tealbook outlook 0.16 0.26
Memo: Equilibrium and Actual Real Federal Funds Rates2
Current Current Quarter Estimate Previous
Tealbook as of Previous Tealbook Tealbook
Tealbook-consistent FRB/US r* es timate −0.06 −0.14 −0.30
Actual real federal funds rate −1.11 −1.18
1.For rules that have a lagged policy rate as a right-hand-side variable, the lines denoted "Previous Tealbook outlook" report rule prescriptions based
on the previous Tealbook’s staff outlook, but jumping off from the realized value for the policy rate last quarter.
2.Estimates of r * may change at the beginning of a quarter even when the staff outlook is unchanged because the twelve-quarter horizon covered by
the calculation has rolled forward one quarter. Therefore, whenever the Tealbook is published early in the quarter, the memo includes an extra column
labeled "Current Quarter Estimate as of Previous Tealbook" to facilitate comparison with the current Tealbook estimate.
Key Elements of the Staff Projection
GDP Gap PCE Prices Excluding Food and Energy
Percent Four-quarter average Percent
3.0 3.0
Current Tealbook
2 Previous Tealbook 2
2.5 2.5
1 1
2.0 2.0
0 0
1.5 1.5
-1 -1
1.0 1.0
-2 -2
-3 -3 0.5 0.5
-4 -4 0.0 0.0
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 2 of 52

--- Page 6 ---

estimate of r*. This difference between r* and the actual real federal funds rate is well
within the range recorded thus far this year.
The second exhibit, “Policy Rule Simulations,” reports dynamic simulations of
the FRB/US model under each of the policy rules. These simulations reflect the
endogenous responses of inflation and the output gap when the federal funds rate follows
the paths implied by the different policy rules, subject to an effective lower bound of
12½ basis points for the federal funds rate. The results for each rule presented in these
and subsequent simulations depend importantly on the assumptions that policymakers
will adhere to the rule in the future and that the private sector fully understands the policy
that will be pursued as well as its implications for real activity and inflation.
The second exhibit also displays the implications, in FRB/US, of following the
baseline monetary policy assumptions in the current staff forecast.2 As discussed in
Tealbook, Book A, the staff assumes that the first increase in the federal funds rate will
occur at the September FOMC meeting. After departing from its effective lower bound,
the federal funds rate is assumed to rise at the pace prescribed by the inertial version of
the Taylor (1999) rule. The federal funds rate increases about 20 basis points per quarter
for three years, reaching 3 percent in early 2019; the pace of tightening subsequently
slows, and the federal funds rate converges to its longer-run value of 3½ percent.
All of the Taylor-type policy rules in these dynamic simulations call for policy
firming to begin this quarter.3 The first-difference rule calls for firming to begin in the
fourth quarter. The Taylor (1993) and Taylor (1999) rules produce paths for the real
federal funds rate that lie significantly above the Tealbook baseline over the next few
years, leading to somewhat higher unemployment rates but similar trajectories for
inflation. Under the inertial Taylor (1999) rule, the federal funds rate initially rises a bit
2 The dynamic simulations discussed here and below incorporate the assumptions about
underlying economic conditions that are used in the staff’s baseline forecast, including the macroeconomic
effects of the Committee’s asset holdings from the large-scale asset purchase programs.
3 Policy firming also begins in the third quarter under the Tealbook baseline policy. However,
because it occurs late in the quarter, the quarterly average value for the federal funds rate remains within
the current target range.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 3 of 52

--- Page 7 ---

Policy Rule Simulations
Effective Nominal Federal Funds Rate Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
6 6 6.0 6.0
Taylor (1993) rule
Staff’s estimate of the natural rate
Taylor (1999) rule
Inertial Taylor (1999) rule
5 5
First-difference rule
Tealbook baseline
4 4
5.5 5.5
3 3
2 2
5.0 5.0
1 1
0 0
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
4.5 4.5
Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent
3 3
4.0 4.0
2 2 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
1 1
PCE Inflation
Four-quarter average Percent
3.0 3.0
0 0
-1 -1
2.5 2.5
-2 -2
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
2.0 2.0
Real 10-year Treasury Yield
Percent
3 3 1.5 1.5
1.0 1.0
2 2
0.5 0.5
1 1
0.0 0.0
0 0
-0.5 -0.5
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Note: The policy rule simulations in this exhibit are based on rules that respond to core inflation. This choice of rule
specification was made in light of the tendency for current and near-term core inflation rates to outperform headline
inflation rates as predictors of the medium-term behavior of headline inflation.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 4 of 52

--- Page 8 ---

above baseline but subsequently tracks the baseline path almost exactly. Macroeconomic
outcomes are essentially the same as under the Tealbook baseline.4
The real federal funds rate path implied by the first-difference rule over the next
couple of years is also similar to that in the Tealbook baseline, but it is somewhat lower
than the baseline beginning in 2018. This pattern results from the slower pace of
economic growth expected to occur late in the decade—after output overshoots its
potential value—because the first-difference rule responds to the expected change in the
output gap rather than its level. The lower path of the federal funds rate in the medium
run, in conjunction with expectations of higher price and wage inflation in the future,
leads to both higher levels of resource utilization and more inflation in the short run.
Overall, the first-difference rule generates outcomes late in the decade for the
unemployment rate and the inflation rate that, compared with the outcomes associated
with other policy rules, are farther from the staff’s estimates of the natural rate of
unemployment and the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run inflation objective.
The third exhibit, “Optimal Control Policy under Commitment,” compares
optimal control simulations for this Tealbook’s baseline forecast with those reported in
June. Policymakers are assumed to place equal weights on keeping headline PCE
inflation close to the Committee’s 2 percent goal, on keeping the unemployment rate
close to the staff’s estimate of the natural rate of unemployment, and on minimizing
changes in the federal funds rate. The concept of optimal control that is employed here
corresponds to a commitment policy under which the plans that policymakers make today
are assumed to constrain future policy choices.5
Under the optimal control policy, the real federal funds rate tracks the baseline
closely. Accordingly, the path of the real 10-year Treasury yield under the optimal
control policy is also virtually the same as in the Tealbook baseline, leading to essentially
the same macroeconomic outcomes.
4 The prescriptions and outcomes of the inertial Taylor (1999) rule and the Tealbook baseline
policy are so close that in most of the panels of the exhibit the lines for the inertial Taylor (1999) rule are
not visible.
5 The results for optimal control policy under discretion (in which policymakers cannot credibly
commit to carrying out a plan involving policy choices that would be suboptimal at the time that these
choices have to be implemented) are similar.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 5 of 52

--- Page 9 ---

Optimal Control Policy under Commitment
Effective Nominal Federal Funds Rate Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
6 6 6.0 6.0
Optimal control (current Tealbook)
Current Tealbook estimate
Optimal control (previous Tealbook)
of the natural rate
Tealbook baseline
5 5 Previous Tealbook estimate
of the natural rate
4 4
5.5 5.5
3 3
2 2
5.0 5.0
1 1
0 0
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
4.5 4.5
Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent
3 3
4.0 4.0
2 2 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
1 1
PCE Inflation
Four-quarter average Percent
3.0 3.0
0 0
-1 -1
2.5 2.5
-2 -2
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
2.0 2.0
Real 10-year Treasury Yield
Percent
3 3 1.5 1.5
1.0 1.0
2 2
0.5 0.5
1 1
0.0 0.0
0 0
-0.5 -0.5
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 6 of 52

--- Page 10 ---

The optimal control path for the federal funds rate is largely similar to its path in
the June Tealbook, as the staff’s assessments of resource slack and inflation are little
changed. Accordingly, the path for longer-term real rates implied by the optimal control
tracks closely the path of the previous Tealbook. Although the path of the unemployment
rate under the optimal control policy is lower than in the previous Tealbook, the
unemployment rate gap is about unchanged due to an offsetting reduction in the staff’s
estimate of the natural rate.
OPTIMAL CONTROL POLICY UNDER COMMITMENT WITH ALTERNATIVE
PREFERENCES FOR LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES
One of the assumptions embedded in the standard optimal control simulations
discussed above is that welfare losses due to unemployment are symmetric around the
staff’s estimate of the natural rate of unemployment. However, policymakers may regard
the cost of the unemployment rate being below the natural rate as considerably smaller
than the cost of being above the natural rate by the same amount. This could be so for a
variety of reasons, including that high unemployment could lead to skill deterioration and
thus to persistently low output, while the tight labor market in an economy operating
below the natural rate may lead workers and employers to undertake greater investment
in human capital and thus result in persistently higher productivity. Policymakers may,
instead, choose to ignore unemployment rate deviations as a pragmatic response to
uncertainty about estimates of the natural rate of unemployment on the grounds that
policy responses to poorly estimated unemployment gaps could lead to policy mistakes.
To model the first, we consider a policymaker who attaches no losses to
unemployment falling below the natural rate but who retains the usual aversion to
unemployment that exceeds the natural rate. To model the second, we consider a
policymaker who places no weight on unemployment rate deviations, whether positive or
negative, thus narrowing the arguments in the loss function to inflation deviations and
policy rate changes.6 The fourth exhibit, “Optimal Control Policy under Commitment
With Alternative Preferences for Labor Market Outcomes,” displays optimal control
simulations under these alternative preferences.
6 Optimal control simulations that place a low weight on penalizing deviations of unemployment
from the natural rate are also consistent with preferences that are more concerned with stabilizing inflation.
Calibrations that reduce the weight placed on policy rate changes produce similar results.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 7 of 52

--- Page 11 ---

Optimal Control Policy under Commitment
With Alternative Preferences for Labor Market Outcomes
Effective Nominal Federal Funds Rate Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
6 6 6.0 6.0
Optimal control (current Tealbook)
Staff’s estimate of the natural rate
OC zero weight on unemployment
5 below the natural rate 5
OC zero weight on unemployment
4 Tealbook baseline 4
5.5 5.5
3 3
2 2
5.0 5.0
1 1
0 0
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
4.5 4.5
Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent
3 3
4.0 4.0
2 2 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
1 1
PCE Inflation
Four-quarter average Percent
3.0 3.0
0 0
-1 -1
2.5 2.5
-2 -2
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
2.0 2.0
Real 10-year Treasury Yield
Percent
3 3 1.5 1.5
1.0 1.0
2 2
0.5 0.5
1 1
0.0 0.0
0 0
-0.5 -0.5
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Note: The lines labeled ‘‘Optimal control (current Tealbook)’’ correspond to the current Tealbook baseline optimal control policy under
commitment, which embeds the assumption that policymakers’ loss function places equal weights on squared deviations of inflation, the
unemployment gap, and federal funds rate changes. The lines labeled ‘‘OC zero weight on unemployment below the natural rate’’ correspond
to a loss function that places no weight on the unemployment gap when unemployment falls below the staff’s estimate of the natural rate.
The lines labeled ‘‘OC zero weight on unemployment’’ correspond to a loss function that places no weight on the unemployment gap.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 8 of 52

--- Page 12 ---

Given that, under the baseline outlook, inflation is running substantially below
target for the next few years, the first alternative optimal control simulation—the one
which ascribes no costs to undershooting the natural rate of unemployment—advocates a
substantially more accommodative policy path compared with the standard case of
optimal control with equal and symmetric weights. The federal funds rate departs from
the effective lower bound in the same quarter as in the standard optimal control
simulation, but its ensuing rise is more gradual, with the federal funds rate increasing, on
average, 10 basis points per quarter over the next three years, compared to 20 basis points
per quarter in the optimal control simulation with standard preferences. The
unemployment rate undershoots the staff’s estimate of the natural rate significantly more
than in the standard case, and inflation returns to the Committee’s 2 percent objective
faster and subsequently remains slightly above target for some time. That a scenario of
this nature would result in the unemployment rate undershooting the natural rate is an
outcome that might be expected; the substantial magnitude of the undershooting is a
manifestation of the estimated low sensitivity of inflation to resource slack in the
FRB/US model.
Given the staff outlook, with an unemployment rate that is expected to undershoot
the natural rate for some time, the second alternative optimal control simulation—the one
that ascribes no cost to deviations of unemployment above or below the natural rate of
unemployment—results in a qualitatively similar but more accommodative version of the
asymmetric case on the horizon shown. The differences in these alternatives’ policy
paths stem from the greater willingness of the policymaker who places no weight on
labor market outcomes to tolerate overshooting of the natural rate of unemployment in
the period beyond the horizon shown. This policymaker is thus more amenable to easing
policy aggressively early on and tightening aggressively later.7
There are some important caveats attached to these findings. Notably, the results
are sensitive to a number of maintained modelling assumptions, including that inflation
7 The dominating feature of the simulations is the willingness of the policymaker who is
indifferent to the labor market to overshoot the natural rate more substantially and for a longer duration.
Note that the binding portion of the overshoot occurs beyond the horizon shown. This leads the indifferent
policymaker to choose a more accommodative path that boosts inflation early on. This result is robust to
reducing the relative weight assigned to changes in the federal funds rate. With a lower weight on changes
in the federal funds rate, both alternative optimal control simulations tolerate a slightly more rapid pace of
increase in the federal funds rate on some portion of the horizon but produce very similar paths for the real
10-year Treasury yield relative to their counterpart with similar preference over the labor market but
stronger preference for small changes in the federal funds rate.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 9 of 52

--- Page 13 ---

expectations would remain well anchored as policymakers pushed the unemployment rate
well below the natural rate for an extended period. Even if inflation expectations were to
remain anchored, it is uncertain whether the estimated low sensitivity of inflation to
resource slack in the FRB/US model holds for a path of the unemployment rate far from
the staff’s baseline projection.
The final exhibit, “Outcomes under Alternative Policies,” tabulates the simulation
results for key variables under the policy rules described above.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 10 of 52

--- Page 14 ---

Outcomes under Alternative Policies
(Percent change, annual rate, from end of preceding period except as noted)
Measure and policy 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
H1 H2
Real GDP
Extended Tealbook baseline1 1.1 2.0 2.3 2.1 2.0 1.7
Taylor (1993) 1.1 1.7 2.0 2.1 2.1 1.9
Taylor (1999) 1.1 1.8 2.0 2.0 2.0 1.8
Inertial Taylor (1999) 1.1 2.0 2.3 2.1 2.0 1.7
First-difference 1.1 2.0 2.5 2.3 2.1 1.8
Optimal control 1.1 2.0 2.4 2.2 2.0 1.7
Unemployment rate2
Extended Tealbook baseline1 5.4 5.2 5.2 5.1 5.0 5.0
Taylor (1993) 5.4 5.3 5.4 5.4 5.2 5.1
Taylor (1999) 5.4 5.3 5.3 5.3 5.2 5.1
Inertial Taylor (1999) 5.4 5.2 5.2 5.1 5.0 5.0
First-difference 5.4 5.2 5.1 5.0 4.8 4.7
Optimal control 5.4 5.2 5.1 5.1 5.0 4.9
Total PCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline1 0.0 0.7 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9
Taylor (1993) 0.0 0.7 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9
Taylor (1999) 0.0 0.7 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9
Inertial Taylor (1999) 0.0 0.7 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9
First-difference 0.0 0.8 1.8 1.9 2.0 2.1
Optimal control 0.0 0.7 1.6 1.8 1.9 1.9
Core PCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline1 1.2 1.4 1.5 1.7 1.8 1.9
Taylor (1993) 1.2 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.8 1.9
Taylor (1999) 1.2 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.8 1.9
Inertial Taylor (1999) 1.2 1.4 1.5 1.7 1.8 1.9
First-difference 1.2 1.4 1.7 1.8 2.0 2.1
Optimal control 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.7 1.9 1.9
Effective nominal federal funds rate2
Extended Tealbook baseline1 0.1 0.4 1.3 2.1 2.8 3.2
Taylor (1993) 0.1 1.9 2.4 2.9 3.3 3.5
Taylor (1999) 0.1 1.4 2.1 2.8 3.3 3.5
Inertial Taylor (1999) 0.1 0.5 1.3 2.1 2.8 3.2
First-difference 0.1 0.4 1.4 2.3 2.7 2.8
Optimal control 0.1 0.4 1.2 2.0 2.8 3.3
1. In the Tealbook baseline, the federal funds rate first departs from an effective lower bound of 12½ basis points
in September of 2015. Thereafter, the federal funds rate follows the prescriptions of the inertial Taylor (1999) rule.
2. Percent, average for the final quarter of the period.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 11 of 52

--- Page 15 ---

(This page is intentionally blank.)
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 12 of 52

--- Page 16 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Appendix
POLICY RULES USED IN “MONETARY POLICY STRATEGIES”
The table below gives the expressions for the selected policy rules used in “Monetary
Policy Strategies.” In the table, Rt denotes the effective nominal federal funds rate for quarter t,
while the right-hand-side variables include the staff's projection of trailing four-quarter core PCE
inflation for the current quarter and three quarters ahead (nt and nt+3t), the output gap estimate
1
for the current period (gapt), and the forecast of the three-quarter-ahead annual change in the
output gap (A4gap, ,). The value of policymakers' longer-run inflation objective, denoted nR, is
3
2 percent.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Taylor (1993) rule Rt = rLR +nt + 0.5 (nt — nLR) + 0.5gapt
Taylor (1999) rule Rt = rRR +nt + 0.5 (nt — nLR) + gapt
Inertial Taylor (1999) rule Rt = 0.85Rt_1 + 0.15(rLR + nt + 0.5(nt — n;LR) + gapt)
First-difference rule Rt = Rt-! + 0.5(rct+3|t — nLR') + 0.5^4gapt+3\t
The first two of the selected rules were studied by Taylor (1993, 1999), while the inertial
version of the Taylor (1999) rule has been featured prominently in analysis by Board staff.1 The
intercepts of these rules are chosen so that they are consistent with a 2 percent longer-run
inflation objective and a longer-run real interest rate, denoted rLR, of 1^ percent, a value used in
the FRB/US model. The prescriptions of the first-difference rule do not depend on the level of
the output gap or the longer-run real interest rate; see Orphanides (2003).
Near-term prescriptions from the four policy rules are calculated using Tealbook
projections for inflation and the output gap. For the rules that include the lagged policy rate as a
right-hand-side variable—the inertial Taylor (1999) rule and the first-difference rule—the lines
labelled “Previous Tealbook outlook” report prescriptions derived from the previous Tealbook
projections for inflation and the output gap, while using the same lagged funds rate value as in the
prescriptions computed for the current Tealbook. When the Tealbook is published early in a
quarter, this lagged funds rate value is set equal to the actual value of the lagged funds rate in the
previous quarter, and prescriptions are shown for the current quarter. When the Tealbook is
published late in a quarter, the prescriptions are shown for the next quarter, and the lagged policy
rate, for each of these rules, including those that use the “Previous Tealbook outlook,” is set equal
to the average value for the policy rate thus far in the quarter. For the subsequent quarter, these
rules use the lagged values from their simulated, unconstrained prescriptions.
1 See, for example, Erceg and others (2012).
Page 13 of 52

--- Page 17 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
ESTIMATES OF THE EQUILIBRIUM AND ACTUAL REAL FEDERAL FUNDS RATES
An estimate of the equilibrium real federal funds rate appears as a memo item in the first
exhibit, “Policy Rules and the Staff Projection.” The concept of the short-run equilibrium real
rate underlying the estimate corresponds to the level of the real federal funds rate that is
consistent with output reaching potential in 12 quarters using an output projection from FRB/US,
the staff's large-scale econometric model of the U.S. economy. This estimate depends on a very
broad array of economic factors, some of which take the form of projected values of the model's
exogenous variables. The memo item in the exhibit reports the “Tealbook-consistent” estimate of
r*, which is generated after the paths of exogenous variables in the FRB/US model are adjusted
so that they match those in the extended Tealbook forecast. Model simulations then determine
the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the output gap conditional on the exogenous
variables in the extended baseline forecast.
The estimated actual real federal funds rate reported in the exhibit is constructed as the
difference between the federal funds rate and the trailing four-quarter change in the core PCE
price index. The federal funds rate is specified as the midpoint of the target range for the federal
funds rate on the Tealbook, Book B, publication date.
FRB/US MODEL SIMULATIONS
The exhibits of “Monetary Policy Strategies” that report results from simulations of
alternative policies are derived from dynamic simulations of the FRB/US model. Each simulated
policy rule is assumed to be in force over the whole period covered bythe simulation; this period
extends several decades beyond the time horizon shown in the exhibits. The simulations are
conducted under perfect foresight and are predicated on the staff's extended Tealbook projection,
which includes the macroeconomic effects of the Committee's large-scale asset purchase
programs. When the Tealbook is published early in a quarter, all of the simulations begin in that
quarter. However, when the Tealbook is published late in a quarter, all of the simulations begin
in the subsequent quarter.
COMPUTATION OF THE OPTIMAL CONTROL POLICY UNDER COMMITMENT
The optimal control simulations posit that policymakers minimize a discounted sum of
weighted squared deviations of four-quarter headline PCE inflation (n^ce) from the Committee's
2 percent objective, of squared deviations of the unemployment rate fromthe staff's estimate of
the natural rate (this difference is also known as the unemployment rate gap, ugapt), and of
squared changes in the federal funds rate. The resulting loss function, shown below, embeds the
assumptions that policymakers discount the future using a quarterly discount factor ft = 0.9963
and place equal weights on squared deviations of inflation, the unemployment gap, and federal
funds rate changes (that is, = Augap =AR).
Page 14 of 52

--- Page 18 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
= y 0T (C* - nLRy + Au3ap(.ugapt+T')2 +AR(Rt+T -Rt+T_x)2}
<T = 0
The optimal control policy is the path for the federal funds rate that minimizes the above
loss function in the FRB/US model, subject to the effective lower bound constraint on nominal
interest rates, under the assumption of perfect foresight, and conditional on the staff's extended
Tealbook projection. Policy tools other than the federal funds rate are taken as given and
subsumed within the Tealbook baseline. The path chosen by policymakers today is assumed to
be credible, meaning that decision makers in the model see this path as being a binding
commitment on the future Committees; the optimal control policy takes as given the lagged value
of the federal funds rate but is otherwise unconstrained by policy decisions made prior to the
simulation period. The discounted losses are calculated over a period that ends sufficiently far
into the future that extending that period farther would not affect the policy prescriptions shown
in the exhibits.
References
Erceg, Christopher, Jon Faust, Michael Kiley, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David Lopez-Salido,
Stephen Meyer, Edward Nelson, David Reifschneider, and Robert Tetlow (2012). “An
Overview of Simple Policy Rules and Their Use in Policymaking in Normal Times and
Under Current Conditions.” Memo sent to the Committee on July18, 2012.
Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 50 (July), pp. 983-1022.
Taylor, John B. (1993). “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 39 (December), pp. 195-214.
Taylor, John B. (1999). “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B. Taylor,
ed., Monetary Policy Rules. University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-341.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Page 15 of 52

--- Page 19 ---

(This page is intentionally blank.)
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 16 of 52

--- Page 20 ---

Monetary Policy Alternatives
Available data show continuing improvement in labor market conditions this year
and indicate that the first-quarter weakness in economic growth was largely transitory.
However, both core and headline inflation continue to run below the Committee’s
2 percent objective. As presented in the “Financial Developments” section of Tealbook,
Book A, participants in the Desk’s Primary Dealer Survey continue to place very little
weight on policy firming commencing in July; they place about 40 percent average
probability on the first rate increase happening in September and about 35 percent
average probability on an increase happening in the fourth quarter. Financial-market
measures suggest broadly similar probabilities.1 Market-implied expectations about the
path for the federal funds rate for late-2015 and late-2016 continue to lie within the
central tendency of the “dot plot” from the June Summary of Economic Projections,
while the expected value for late-2017 again lies well below the central tendency.
Against this backdrop, the draft alternative statements presented below offer a
range of policy choices as well as a range of assessments about recent economic
developments and the Committee’s progress toward its objectives. If the Committee
chooses not to raise the target range at this meeting, a key issue will be how to convey the
Committee’s sense of the likelihood of various future economic outcomes and policy
actions. The draft statement associated with Alternative B is intended to convey the
message that the economy has been evolving in such a way that the Committee might
decide to raise the target range in September if it sees continued progress toward its
objectives. In Alternative A, the draft statement is intended to signal that the Committee
believes the conditions for policy firming will not be met by September, particularly
because of the risk that inflation could run substantially below 2 percent for a protracted
period. By contrast, under Alternative C the Committee would announce that it was
raising the target range for the federal funds rate at this meeting.
The draft statement associated with Alternative B characterizes job gains in recent
months as “solid” and acknowledges cumulative improvement in the labor market “since
early this year,” indicating that the Committee is focusing not just on the recent pace of
1 The probability of departure from the effective lower bound in a given month is calculated from
federal funds futures prices assuming that the effective federal funds rate is expected to average
37.5 basis points immediately after the target range increase.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 17 of 52

--- Page 21 ---

improvement in the labor market but also on the cumulative improvement since it
established the criteria for policy firming at its March meeting. Alternative B also
observes that inflation continued to run below 2 percent, partly reflecting earlier declines
in energy prices, but does not refer to energy price developments over the intermeeting
period because they have not materially affected the 12-month inflation rate or the
outlook for inflation over the medium term. Under Alternative B, the Committee would
note that the housing sector has shown “additional improvement” and characterize
household spending, business fixed investment, and net exports as it did in its June
statement. The draft statement would leave the economic outlook unchanged and also
announce that the Committee wants to see “some” further improvement in the labor
market before policy firming, signaling that progress has been made toward the labor
market criterion that the FOMC first stated in March. The unchanged description of the
inflation outlook suggests that the Committee’s degree of confidence that inflation will
move back to its 2 percent inflation objective over the medium term is also roughly
unchanged.
In the draft statement for Alternative A, the Committee would provide an
assessment of inflation and the labor market, relative to the Committee’s goals, that
would indicate that a target range increase in September was not likely. Though the
Committee would acknowledge “solid” job gains, it would also state that it is concerned
that “inflation could run substantially below the 2 percent objective for a protracted
period.” Moreover, under Alternative A, the Committee would judge that “economic and
financial developments abroad” have tilted the risks to the outlook for the labor market
“to the downside.” In light of these risks to the economic outlook, the draft statement in
Alternative A would provide a more stringent condition for policy normalization, saying
that the Committee will not raise its target range until it projects that “inflation will reach
2 percent within one to two years,” and the Committee would indicate that it “is prepared
to use all of its tools as necessary to return inflation to 2 percent within one to two years”
if inflation “does not begin to rise soon.”
In the draft statement associated with Alternative C the Committee would
announce that its criteria for policy firming—laid out in March—have been met and that
it has decided to increase the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points.
Under Alternative C, the Committee’s statement would refer to “appreciable
improvement in labor market conditions since early this year” while acknowledging that
inflation continues to run below the Committee’s 2 percent objective. The Committee
would announce its expectation that the labor market will be “reaching” levels consistent
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 18 of 52

--- Page 22 ---

with the Committee’s dual mandate, and state that it is “reasonably confident that
inflation will rise to 2 percent over the medium term as the labor market improves
further.” Nonetheless, the Committee would note that “the stance of monetary policy
remains highly accommodative,” but would delete the reference to policy
accommodation provided through the balance sheet.
Under Alternatives A and B, the Committee would retain the “balanced approach”
language that it has provided for quite some time to characterize how it plans to conduct
policy after tightening begins. Under Alternative C, the Committee would state that, in
determining future adjustments to the target range, it will assess either “realized and
expected deviations from its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent
inflation,” or “realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of
maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.” Alternative C also offers the option of
stating that the Committee “will take a balanced approach to pursuing those objectives.”
Furthermore, the draft statement associated with Alternative C says that the path of the
federal funds rate will “depend on the incoming data.” All three alternatives retain
language indicating that, even once employment and inflation are close to mandate-
consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the federal
funds rate below levels the Committee judges as normal in the longer run.
The next seven pages contain the June postmeeting statement and the draft
statements associated with the three alternatives; they are followed by cases for each
alternative. After that is a discussion about a draft implementation note for Alternative C
that would be released concurrently with the Committee’s statement, followed by the
draft directives for Alternatives A and B as well as the proposed text of the
implementation note.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 19 of 52

--- Page 23 ---

JUNE 2015 FOMC STATEMENT
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April suggests
that economic activity has been expanding moderately after having changed little
during the first quarter. The pace of job gains picked up while the unemployment rate
remained steady. On balance, a range of labor market indicators suggests that
underutilization of labor resources diminished somewhat. Growth in household
spending has been moderate and the housing sector has shown some improvement;
however, business fixed investment and net exports stayed soft. Inflation continued
to run below the Committee’s longer-run objective, partly reflecting earlier declines
in energy prices and decreasing prices of non-energy imports; energy prices appear to
have stabilized. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain low;
survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market
indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its
dual mandate. The Committee continues to see the risks to the outlook for economic
activity and the labor market as nearly balanced. Inflation is anticipated to remain
near its recent low level in the near term, but the Committee expects inflation to rise
gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term as the labor market improves
further and the transitory effects of earlier declines in energy and import prices
dissipate. The Committee continues to monitor inflation developments closely.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for
the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In determining how long to maintain this
target range, the Committee will assess progress—both realized and expected—
toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This
assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of
labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations,
and readings on financial and international developments. The Committee anticipates
that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate when it
has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that
inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term.
4. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions.
5. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after
employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions
may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the
Committee views as normal in the longer run.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 20 of 52

--- Page 24 ---

ALTERNATIVE A FOR JULY 2015
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April June
suggests that economic activity has been expanding moderately after having changed
little during the first quarter. The pace of job gains picked up while was solid and
the unemployment rate remained steady declined. On balance, a range of labor
market indicators suggests that underutilization of labor resources diminished
somewhat. Growth in household spending has been moderate and the housing sector
has shown some improvement; however, business fixed investment and net exports
stayed soft. Inflation continued to run below the Committee’s longer-run objective,
partly reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing prices of non-energy
imports; energy prices appear to have stabilized. Market-based measures of inflation
compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market
indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its
dual mandate. Inflation is anticipated to remain near its recent low level in the near
term, but the Committee expects inflation to rise gradually toward 2 percent over the
medium term as the labor market improves further and the transitory effects of earlier
declines in energy and import prices dissipate. The Committee continues to monitor
inflation developments closely. However, in light of economic and financial
developments abroad, the Committee continues to sees the risks to the outlook for
economic activity and the labor market as nearly balanced tilted to the downside.
Moreover, the Committee is concerned that inflation could run substantially
below the 2 percent objective for a protracted period.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for
the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In determining how long to maintain this
target range, the Committee will assess progress—both realized and expected—
toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This
assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of
labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations,
and readings on financial and international developments. The Committee anticipates
judges that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate
when it has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident
projects that inflation will move back to its reach 2 percent objective over the
medium term within one to two years.
4. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions. If
inflation does not begin to rise soon, the Committee is prepared to use all of its
tools as necessary to return inflation to 2 percent within one to two years.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 21 of 52

--- Page 25 ---

5. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after
employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions
may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the
Committee views as normal in the longer run.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 22 of 52

--- Page 26 ---

ALTERNATIVE B FOR JULY 2015
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April June
suggests indicates that economic activity has been expanding moderately after having
changed little during the first quarter in recent months. Growth in household
spending has been moderate and the housing sector has shown some additional
improvement; however, business fixed investment and net exports stayed soft. The
pace of labor market continued to improve, with solid job gains picked up while
the and declining unemployment rate remained steady. On balance, a range of labor
market indicators suggests that underutilization of labor resources has diminished
somewhat since early this year. Inflation continued to run below the Committee’s
longer-run objective, partly reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing
prices of non-energy imports; energy prices appear to have stabilized. Market-based
measures of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-
term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market
indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its
dual mandate. The Committee continues to see the risks to the outlook for economic
activity and the labor market as nearly balanced. Inflation is anticipated to remain
near its recent low level in the near term, but the Committee expects inflation to rise
gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term as the labor market improves
further and the transitory effects of earlier declines in energy and import prices
dissipate. The Committee continues to monitor inflation developments closely.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for
the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In determining how long to maintain this
target range, the Committee will assess progress—both realized and expected—
toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This
assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of
labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations,
and readings on financial and international developments. The Committee anticipates
that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate when it
has seen some further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident
that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term.
4. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions.
5. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after
employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 23 of 52

--- Page 27 ---

may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the
Committee views as normal in the longer run.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 24 of 52

--- Page 28 ---

ALTERNATIVE C FOR JULY 2015
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April June
suggests indicates that economic activity has been expanding moderately after having
changed little during the first quarter in recent months. Growth in household
spending has been moderate and the housing sector has shown some improvement
continued to strengthen; however, business fixed investment and net exports stayed
soft. The pace of labor market continued to improve, with solid job gains picked
up while the and declining unemployment rate remained steady. On balance, a range
of labor market indicators suggests that underutilization of labor resources diminished
somewhat shows an appreciable improvement in labor market conditions since
early this year. Inflation continued to run below the Committee’s longer-run
objective, partly reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing prices of
non-energy imports; energy prices appear to have stabilized. Market-based measures
of inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term
inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate
adjustments in the stance of monetary policy accommodation, economic activity
will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market indicators continuing to move
toward reaching levels the Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate. The
Committee continues to see the risks to the outlook for economic activity and the
labor market as nearly balanced. Although inflation is anticipated to remain near its
recent low level in the near term, but the Committee expects is reasonably confident
that inflation to will rise gradually toward to 2 percent over the medium term as the
labor market improves further and the transitory effects of earlier declines in energy
and import prices dissipate. The Committee continues to monitor inflation
developments closely.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for
the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In light of the considerable progress
that has been achieved toward the attainment of the Committee’s objective of
maximum employment, and the Committee’s expectation that inflation will rise,
over the medium term, to its 2 percent objective, the Committee decided to raise
the target range for the federal funds to ¼ to ½ percent. Even after this
adjustment, the stance of policy remains highly accommodative and will
continue to support a strong economy.
4. In determining how long to maintain this future adjustments of the target range, the
Committee will assess progress—both realized and expected—toward [ deviations
from | economic conditions relative to ] its objectives of maximum employment and
2 percent inflation [ , and will take a balanced approach to pursuing those
objectives ]. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information,
including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and
inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The
Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the
federal funds rate when it has seen further improvement in the labor market and is
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 25 of 52

--- Page 29 ---

reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the
medium term. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after employment and
inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time,
warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as
normal in the longer run. However, the actual path of the target for the federal
funds rate will depend on the incoming data.
5. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions.
6. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent.
For Alternative C, the “Directive” section of this Tealbook, Book B includes a document
titled “Actions to Implement Monetary Policy.” That document includes the directive as
well as a list of Federal Reserve actions to implement the Committee’s monetary policy
decision; it would be an addendum to the Committee’s postmeeting statement at the time
of liftoff and after subsequent meetings.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 26 of 52

--- Page 30 ---

THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B
Growth in household spending continues to be moderate, and the housing sector
has shown additional improvement. In the labor market, recent solid job gains and the
decline in the unemployment rate contributed to improvement in overall labor market
conditions, but looking across a broad range of indicators, policymakers may believe that
there is room for further improvement. Participants may be encouraged by the
cumulative improvement in the labor market since early this year and by the observation
that inflation expectations appear to be well-anchored. Even so, they may judge that the
12-month inflation rate is likely to run below 2 percent for some time as it will continue
to be affected by the large energy price declines witnessed late last year, and they may
worry that the recent decline in the price of oil may further delay the projected return of
inflation to 2 percent. Policymakers may thus want to wait for incoming data to confirm
or deny their outlook that the economic expansion will support further improvement in
the labor market and that inflation will return to 2 percent over the medium term. If so,
participants may deem it appropriate to issue a statement like that in Alternative B, which
would acknowledge that “underutilization of labor resources has diminished since early
this year,” and also indicate that it will be appropriate to raise the target range after the
Committee has seen only “some” further improvement in the labor market and is
reasonably confident that inflation will return to 2 percent over the medium term.
With the unemployment rate having declined from 5.7 percent in January to
5.3 percent in June, some policymakers may judge that the economy is at or close to
maximum employment and that a solid economic expansion is under way, making them
feel confident that inflation will move back to 2 percent over the medium term. These
policymakers may thus feel that the Committee’s criteria for policy firming have been
met. But with inflation continuing to run below the Committee’s objective, these
policymakers may see the benefits of waiting for further information—including two
employment reports prior to the September meeting—outweighing the risks of needing to
raise interest rates more rapidly later.
Other participants may be concerned that inflation is not likely to return to
2 percent over the medium term, perhaps because they judge that there is still appreciable
slack in labor markets—they may cite still-high involuntary part-time employment and
surprisingly low labor force participation, for example—and anticipate only a slow
reduction in that slack. They may think it likely that the Committee will need to provide
further policy accommodation to reach its objectives in the next few years. These
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 27 of 52

--- Page 31 ---

participants may nonetheless judge that, with the economy expanding moderately and the
unemployment rate having declined to levels near the longer-run normal values reported
in the Committee’s Summary of Economic Projections, they would want to await further
information before announcing additional stimulus. Moreover, they may take some
reassurance from the observation that survey measures of longer-term inflation
expectations appear well anchored. Policymakers may thus choose to forego additional
accommodation for now, but be alert to possible indications that the economy is not
expanding at a satisfactory rate or that inflation expectations are moving down.
A statement like that included in Alternative B would probably elicit little market
reaction, but it is difficult to be sure. Financial-market and survey measures suggest
market participants do not expect a change in the target range in July, see a good chance
of an increase in September, but put similar or only slightly smaller odds on an increase
in the fourth quarter. That said, two-thirds of respondents to the Desk surveys reported
that they see September as the most likely meeting for the initial increase. It is difficult
to assess how market participants will interpret the insertion of the word “some” in the
third paragraph of the draft statement associated with Alternative B. Most respondents
expect no changes to forward guidance at this meeting. Market participants could see the
insertion of the word “some” as indicating that the Committee views the economy
progressing in line with its outlook, which would lead to little change in the probability of
a rate increase in September and a more muted market reaction. Alternatively, if market
participants view the insertion of “some” as a signal that the Committee is more likely
than not to raise the target range in September, then interest rates will likely increase
some, equity prices could fall, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar would likely
rise.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE C
Policymakers may view continued solid job gains, the decline of the
unemployment rate to 5.3 percent, the pickup in consumer spending, and improvements
in the housing sector as confirmation that the slowdown in economic growth observed in
the first quarter was mostly transitory and that a solid economic expansion is under way.
These policymakers might judge that there has been appreciable improvement in labor
market conditions since early this year. They might also point to the net increase in
consumer energy prices in recent months as reasons that they are reasonably certain that
inflation will, over the medium term, return to the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run
objective. That is, these policymakers might view the two criteria for policy firming—
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 28 of 52

--- Page 32 ---

first included in the Committee’s March statement—as having been met. In addition,
policymakers may note that, for the past several meetings, most of the simple policy rules
and the optimal control simulations in the “Monetary Policy Strategies” section of
Tealbook, Book B, have called for policy tightening to begin. Therefore, they may
support issuing a statement along the lines of Alternative C, which announces a 25 basis-
point increase in the target range for the federal funds rate to ¼ to ½ percent.2
Policymakers may believe that the slower-than-anticipated recovery in output and
employment over the past several years reflects, to a large extent, a step-down in trend
productivity growth from its pre-crisis value. Even with modest output growth,
participants may judge that the recent strength in the labor market is likely to persist,
contributing to a fairly prompt increase in inflation to 2 percent or even higher. They
might view the alternative simulation “Weak Labor Productivity, Strong Labor Market”
in the “Risks and Uncertainty” section of Tealbook, Book A as better reflecting their
views about the economic outlook than does the staff’s baseline projection. These
policymakers may be particularly concerned that inflation could persistently exceed
2 percent if inflation expectations rise as the unemployment rate undershoots its longer-
run normal level.
Policymakers also may be concerned that the path for the federal funds rate
currently expected by market participants is too shallow. In light of the high level of
excess reserves held by the banking system, and amid some signs that banks have been
easing their credit standards, participants may have become concerned about an
unexpected sharp increase in lending that could boost aggregate demand and cause
inflation to rise above the Committee’s 2 percent objective for a prolonged period.
Policymakers may be concerned that a rapid, and unexpected, tightening of monetary
policy in response to accelerating inflation could result in material losses at financial
institutions and disorderly conditions in financial markets. Additionally, some
policymakers might see delaying the initial increase in the target range as also increasing
the risk of a steep rise in the federal funds rate at a later date. Although these risks may
not feature prominently in policymakers’ baseline forecasts, they might judge that the
adverse consequences are sufficiently severe to justify policy firming at this time.
2 Alternatively, the Committee might view the language in the draft statement for Alternative C as
premature in present circumstances but might nonetheless discuss whether this language, especially
paragraphs 2, 3, and 4, would be appropriate when the time arrives to raise the target range for the federal
funds rate above its effective lower bound.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 29 of 52

--- Page 33 ---

According to the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and the Desk’s Survey of
Market Participants, respondents see little likelihood that the Committee will decide to
change the target range for the federal funds rate at this meeting. The implied probability
of a policy tightening in July derived from prices of financial derivatives is similarly low.
If the Committee issued a statement similar to Alternative C, medium- and longer-term
real interest rates would most likely rise and investors may also revise up their
expectations about the pace of policy firming. Equity prices and inflation compensation
would likely decline, and the dollar would appreciate.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A
Policymakers may see substantial risk that inflation will run persistently below
the Committee’s stated goal, as both core and headline inflation have continued to run
well below 2 percent. They might also view the recent decline in crude oil prices as a
harbinger for headline inflation well below 2 percent later this year. Though potentially
encouraged by recent job gains, these policymakers might point to the decline in the labor
force participation rate in June as evidence that, in the current environment, measures of
the unemployment rate mask the amount of slack in the labor market. They might also
cite relatively subdued wage gains as an indication that significant labor market slack
remains. With inflation expectations seemingly well-anchored, policymakers may see
little cost to the unemployment rate falling below its longer-run normal level. Moreover,
they may be worried that inflation expectations could fall in response to an already
prolonged period of low inflation or that soft spending data indicate the economic
expansion is not currently robust enough to support further improvement in the labor
market. These policymakers may want to offer more-stringent criteria for policy firming
than those in Alternative B; accordingly, they may support Alternative A, which states
that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate when the
Committee “projects that inflation will reach 2 percent within one or two years” and
emphasizes that the Committee “is prepared to use all of its tools as necessary” to achieve
this goal if inflation “does not begin to rise soon.”
For some policymakers, recent events in China and Greece may have tilted to the
downside the balance of risks to the outlook for the labor market and inflation. They
might be concerned that a deterioration of financial conditions and consumer confidence
in China will generate an appreciable slowdown in growth of economic activity in that
country which could spill over to other emerging markets and cause the dollar to
appreciate further. Additionally, if Greece exits the euro area, these policymakers may
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 30 of 52

--- Page 34 ---

fear that spillovers could cause a recession in the region. They might see the alternative
simulations “China-Driven EME Slump with Stronger Dollar” and “Greek Exit with
Strong Spillovers” in the “Risks and Uncertainty” section of Tealbook, Book A as
encompassing some of the risks that they have in mind. If either scenario plays out,
policymakers may judge that the Federal Reserve will need to provide greater policy
accommodation in order to offset the effects on the domestic economy from weak global
demand and downward pressure on inflation from an appreciation of the dollar. They
may also view the recent decline in metals prices as a signal that global demand has
already weakened. Participants might therefore favor language in the second paragraph
of Alternative A that indicates that “in light of economic and financial developments
abroad, the Committee sees the risks to the outlook for economic activity and the labor
market as tilted to the downside.” They also may favor the new language that appears at
the end of paragraph 4 of Alternative A—language that says the Committee is prepared to
provide additional accommodation if inflation does not begin to rise soon.
No respondent to the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers or the Desk’s Survey of
Market Participants noted an expectation that the Committee would announce further
policy accommodation in July or thereafter. If the Committee issued a statement along
the lines of the draft associated with Alternative A, investors would push out their
expectations about the most probable date of the first increase in the target range for the
federal funds rate; they might also revise down their expectations of how quickly the
Committee will raise the target range thereafter. Longer-term real yields would likely
decline, and equity prices and inflation compensation could rise. However, if investors
saw a statement like Alternative A as reflecting a downbeat assessment for global
economic conditions, equity prices and inflation compensation might fall.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 31 of 52

--- Page 35 ---

DIRECTIVE AND IMPLEMENTATION NOTE
The June directive appears after this introductory discussion. That same directive
would be issued in July if the Committee adopts Alternative A or B, which maintain the
current target range for the federal funds rate.
The directive for Alternative C, which raises the target range, is included in an
implementation note that would be released with the FOMC’s policy statement to
communicate actions the Federal Reserve was taking to implement the Committee’s
decision.3 The draft implementation note shown for Alternative C is intended as a model
that could be used at the time of the first increase in the target range, whether the increase
occurs in July or later, and after subsequent FOMC meetings. (Struck-out text indicates
language deleted from the current directive; bold, red, underlined text indicates language
added to the current directive.)
The current draft of the implementation note reflects a few revisions relative to
the text proposed in June. The changes are:
1) The first sentence in the current directive (the sentence that describes the FOMC’s
dual mandate) was struck because this information is conveyed in the
Committee’s policy statement.
2) For clarity, an effective date was added to the directive; as discussed below, the
staff recommends that changes in the target range take effect the day after a policy
decision is announced so that such decisions may be supported by corresponding
changes to all of the overnight administered rates.
3) Language was added to the directive to make clear that “overnight” RRPs can
have a maturity of more than one day when necessary to span a weekend or
holiday.
4) The description in the directive of the practical limit on the Desk’s RRP
operations was revised slightly to say that the Desk can conduct ON RRPs in
amounts “limited only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the
SOMA that are available for such operations.” The Desk’s operational statement
3 The implementation note was described in a memo sent to the Committee on June 10, 2015,
called “Proposal for Communicating Details Regarding the Implementation of Monetary Policy at Liftoff
and After” by Deborah Leonard and Gretchen Weinbach.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 32 of 52

--- Page 36 ---

will indicate that the value of Treasury securities in the SOMA available for RRP
operations is about $2 trillion and explain how staff derived that operational limit.
During the policy normalization process, the FOMC’s decisions to change the
target range will be implemented primarily by making corresponding changes to the
Federal Reserve’s overnight administered rates—the interest rates paid on required and
excess reserves, the ON RRP rate, and the primary credit rate. In order to provide
maximum clarity to the markets and the public and to increase the likelihood that the
effective federal funds rate will fall within the new target range as soon as the new range
becomes effective, the staff recommends that changes to the target range for the federal
funds rate and changes to the administered rates all be effective on the day after the
Committee’s decision.4 With this timing, the Desk would be able to support the
Committee’s decision to change the target range for the federal funds rate, beginning on
the date that decision becomes effective, by conducting ON RRP operations at the new
rate specified by the FOMC.5
This approach is consistent with the staff’s recommendation that intermeeting
changes in the administered rates—if any prove necessary to foster federal funds trading
within the FOMC’s target range—be announced at 4:30 p.m., when markets are closed,
and take effect the next day.
Note that the sentence in the current directive that begins “The Committee seeks
conditions in reserve markets… ” has been struck from the directive, as was the case in
the illustrative example shown in the June memo.
As indicated by what is now the first sentence of the draft directive shown in the
implementation note, staff recommends the Desk be instructed to undertake open market
4 While changes to the Reserve Banks’ primary credit rates would generally be effective on the
day after a Committee decision to change the target range for the federal funds rate, the timing could be
affected by when Reserve Bank boards of directors submit discount rate recommendations. The staff
proposes that, on the day of the FOMC’s policy action, the Board approve Reserve Bank boards’
recommendations for changes in the discount rate that accord with the FOMC’s decision to change the
target range, effective on the following day. Discount rate recommendations that are submitted during the
24 hours following the release of the FOMC’s postmeeting statement could be approved to take effect on
the day following the FOMC meeting. As in the past, requests for discount rate changes from one or more
Reserve Bank boards of directors might sometimes be received and approved more than a day after the
FOMC’s policy action.
5 The Desk plans to conduct an ON RRP operation each day, typically at 12:45 p.m. That is the
latest time that is operationally feasible, given that transactions will settle through the tri-party repo system.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 33 of 52

--- Page 37 ---

operations as necessary to keep the federal funds rate in its target range, specifically
including overnight and term reverse repurchase agreements according to parameters
approved by the Committee. The baseline expectation is that reverse repos as specified
in the directive will be the only open market operations needed to support interest on
excess reserves to keep the federal funds rate in the FOMC’s target range. Nonetheless, a
directive that authorizes the Desk to conduct other types of open market operations if
necessary may communicate to the public that the Committee has given the Desk latitude
to respond quickly to unexpected circumstances in order to maintain the federal funds
rate in the FOMC’s target range.6 Any use of such authority would be limited and aimed
at alleviating transitory factors; in the event of more persistent issues, it would be
appropriate for the FOMC to consider whether it wants to revise the directive. The Desk
would consult with the Chair and inform the FOMC of any plans to conduct open market
operations other than the reverse repos specified in the directive.
Finally, regarding balance sheet policies, the draft directive associated with each
of the alternative statements continues to instruct the Desk to maintain the current policy
of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-
backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing
Treasury securities into new issues.
6 For example, in the event that the federal funds rate were trading above the target range for
idiosyncratic technical reasons, a repo operation might signal to the market that the Federal Reserve stands
ready to move the rate back into the target range. Or in response to a major payment system disruption, it
might prove useful for the Desk to conduct repo operations to address potential liquidity shortages in
money markets. Although the latter scenario may be covered by paragraph 5B of the Domestic
Authorization, broad authority in the directive may provide additional assurance to market participants.
Additionally, it might be valuable for the Desk to have some operational flexibility to adjust its mode of
executing reverse repo operations, for example retaining the ability to conduct a fixed-quantity RRP
operation, in response to unexpected technical issues.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 34 of 52

--- Page 38 ---

June 2015 Directive
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee seeks
monetary and financial conditions that will foster maximum employment and price
stability. In particular, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain such conditions. The
Committee directs the Desk to maintain its policy of rolling over maturing Treasury
securities into new issues and its policy of reinvesting principal payments on all agency
debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities. The
Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed
securities transactions. The System Open Market Account manager and the secretary
will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s
balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of
maximum employment and price stability.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 35 of 52

--- Page 39 ---

Directive for July 2015 Alternatives A and B
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee seeks
monetary and financial conditions that will foster maximum employment and price
stability. In particular, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain such conditions. The
Committee directs the Desk to maintain its policy of rolling over maturing Treasury
securities into new issues and its policy of reinvesting principal payments on all agency
debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities. The
Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed
securities transactions. The System Open Market Account manager and the secretary
will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s
balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of
maximum employment and price stability.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 36 of 52

--- Page 40 ---

Implementation Note for July 2015 Alternative C
Release Date: July 29, 2015
Actions to Implement Monetary Policy
The Federal Reserve has taken the following actions to implement the monetary policy
stance adopted and announced by the Federal Open Market Committee on July 29, 2015:
 The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted [ unanimously ] to raise
the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances to [ 0.50 ] percent,
effective July 30, 2015.
 As part of its policy decision, the Federal Open Market Committee voted to authorize
and direct the Open Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until
instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Open Market Account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
“Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee seeks
monetary and financial conditions that will foster maximum employment and price
stability. In particular, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. Effective July 30, 2015,
the Committee directs the Desk to undertake open market operations as necessary to
maintain such conditions the federal funds rate in a target range of [ ¼ to ½ ]
percent, including: (1) overnight reverse repurchase operations (and reverse
repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when necessary to
accommodate weekend, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at an offering
rate of [ 0.25 ] percent and in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury
securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available
for such operations; and (2) term reverse repurchase operations as authorized in
the resolution on term RRP operations approved by the Committee at its March
17-18, 2015, meeting.
“The Committee directs the Desk to maintain its policy of continue rolling over
maturing Treasury securities into new issues and its policy of to continue reinvesting
principal payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in
agency mortgage-backed securities. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage
in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the
Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” The System
Open Market Account manager and the secretary will keep the Committee informed
of ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect the
attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and
price stability.
More information regarding open market operations may be found on the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York’s website.
When this document is released to the public, the blue text will be a link to the
relevant page on the FRBNY website.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 37 of 52

--- Page 41 ---

 The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted [ unanimously ] to
approve a [ ¼ ] percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to [ 1.00 ] percent,
effective July 30, 2015. In taking this action, the Board approved requests submitted
by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of….
This information will be updated as appropriate to reflect decisions of the Federal Open
Market Committee or the Board of Governors regarding details of the Federal Reserve’s
operational tools and approach used to implement monetary policy.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 38 of 52

--- Page 42 ---

Projections
BALANCE SHEET, INCOME, AND MONETARY BASE
The staff has developed a projection of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and
income statement that is broadly consistent with the monetary policy assumptions
incorporated in the staff’s forecast presented in Tealbook, Book A. As in the June
Tealbook scenario, we assume that policy firming will occur at the September FOMC
meeting and that reinvestments of maturing Treasury securities and the reinvestment of
principal received on agency securities will continue through the first quarter of 2016.
Reinvestments cease in the second quarter, and thereafter the SOMA portfolio shrinks
through redemptions of maturing Treasury and agency debt securities as well as
paydowns of principal from agency MBS. Regarding the Federal Reserve’s use of its
policy normalization tools, we assume that the level of overnight reverse repurchase
agreements (ON RRPs) runs at $100 billion through the end of 2018 and then falls to zero
by the end of 2019, and that term deposits and term RRPs are not used during the
normalization period.1,2 The bullets below highlight some key features of the projections
for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and income statement under these assumptions.
 Balance sheet. As shown in the exhibit “Total Assets and Selected Balance Sheet
Items” and in the table that follows, the size of the portfolio is normalized in the
second quarter of 2021, the same quarter as in the June Tealbook.3 Once reserve
balances reach their new steady-state level, total assets stand at $2.3 trillion, with
about $2.1 trillion in total SOMA securities holdings. Total assets and securities
holdings increase thereafter, keeping pace with growth in currency in circulation
and Federal Reserve Bank capital.
1 Use of RRPs or term deposits would result in a shift in the composition of Federal Reserve
liabilities—a decline in reserve balances and an equal increase in RRPs or term deposits—but would not
produce an overall change in the size of the balance sheet.
2 We also assume that RRPs associated with foreign official and international accounts remain
around $166 billion throughout the projection period.
3 The size of the balance sheet is considered normalized when reserve balances reach an assumed
$100 billion steady-state level. At this time, the size of the securities portfolio is primarily determined by
the level of currency in circulation plus Federal Reserve capital, the balances held in the Treasury general
account, and the projected steady-state level of reserve balances.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 39 of 52

--- Page 43 ---

July Tealbook Baseline June Tealbook
July Tealbook Higher Interest Rates
Total Assets
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Reserve Balances
Billions of dollars
5500
Monthly
5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Billions of dollars
3500
Monthly
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
SOMA Treasury Holdings
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
SOMA Agency MBS Holdings
Billions of dollars
3000
Monthly
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Total Assets and Selected Balance Sheet Items
Billions of dollars
2200
Monthly
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 40 of 52

--- Page 44 ---

Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections --July Tealbook
(Billions of dollars)
Jun 30, 2015 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 2025
Total assets 4,479 4,454 3,773 2,752 2,340 2,524 2,730
Selected assets
Loans and other credit extensions* 2 0 0 0 0 0 0
Securities held outright 4,229 4,224 3,579 2,589 2,199 2,394 2,609
U.S. Treasury securities 2,461 2,461 2,116 1,393 1,216 1,590 1,956
Agency debt securities 36 33 4 2 2 2 2
Agency mortgage-backed securities 1,732 1,730 1,459 1,194 981 802 650
Unamortized premiums 198 191 151 117 93 81 71
Unamortized discounts -18 -17 -13 -10 -8 -7 -6
Total other assets 47 49 49 49 49 49 49
Total liabilities 4,421 4,395 3,702 2,661 2,226 2,379 2,547
Selected liabilities
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 1,324 1,363 1,537 1,661 1,800 1,954 2,121
Reverse repurchase agreements 558 266 266 166 166 166 166
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 2,530 2,761 1,894 830 255 255 255
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 2,242 2,606 1,739 674 100 100 100
U.S. Treasury, General Account 254 150 150 150 150 150 150
Other deposits 34 5 5 5 5 5 5
Interest on Federal Reserve Notes due to U.S. 3 0 0 0 0 0 0
Treasury
Total capital 58 60 71 90 114 145 183
Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
*Loans and other credit extensions includes primary, secondary, and seasonal credit; central bank liquidity swaps; and net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 41 of 52

--- Page 45 ---

 Federal Reserve remittances. The next exhibit, “Income Projections,” shows the
implications of the balance sheet projection and interest rate assumptions for
Federal Reserve income.4 Remittances to the Treasury are projected to be about
$90 billion this year, down a bit from their $100 billion peak in 2014, and then to
decline further over the next few years. Annual remittances reach their trough of
roughly $35 billion in 2019; no deferred asset is recorded.5 The Federal
Reserve’s cumulative remittances from 2009 through 2025 are about $1 trillion,
approximately $270 billion above the staff estimate of the amount that would
have been observed had there been no asset purchase programs, and roughly $5
billion less than in the June Tealbook projection.6
 Unrealized gains or losses. The unrealized gain or loss position of the SOMA
portfolio is influenced importantly by the level of interest rates. The staff
estimates that the portfolio was in an unrealized gain position of about $110
billion as of the end of June.7 Reflecting the assumed rise in longer-term interest
rates over the next several years, the position is projected to shift to an unrealized
loss by the middle of 2016 and record a peak unrealized loss of about $200 billion
in 2019, nearly unchanged from the June Tealbook. At the end of that year,
roughly $95 billion of the unrealized losses can be attributed to the portfolio of
Treasury securities and $110 billion to the portfolio of agency MBS. The
unrealized loss position then narrows through 2025, as securities acquired under
the large-scale asset purchase programs mature or pay down and new securities
are added to the portfolio at par.
4 We assume the interest rate paid on reserve balances remains at 25 basis points as long as the
federal funds rate remains at its effective lower bound. In addition, we assume that, once firming of the
policy rate begins, the spread between the interest rate paid on reserve balances and the ON RRP rate is
25 basis points. Moreover, we assume that the effective federal funds rate will average about 15 basis
points below the rate paid on reserve balances and about 10 basis points above the ON RRP rate.
5 In the event that a Federal Reserve Bank’s earnings fall short of the amount necessary to cover
its operating costs, pay dividends, and equate surplus to capital paid-in, a deferred asset for interest on
Federal Reserve notes would be recorded.
6 The staff estimate of remittances had there been no asset purchase programs is a linear
interpolation from 2006 to 2025 of actual 2006 income and projected 2025 income.
7 The Federal Reserve reports the level and the change in the quarter-end net unrealized gain/loss
position of the SOMA portfolio to the public in the “Federal Reserve Banks Combined Quarterly Financial
Reports,” available on the Board’s website at
http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_fedfinancials.htm#quarterly.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 42 of 52

--- Page 46 ---

July Tealbook Baseline June Tealbook
July Tealbook Higher Interest Rates
Interest Income
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Interest Expense
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Realized Capital Gains
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Remittances to Treasury
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
−20
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
−20
Deferred Asset
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Memo: Unrealized Gains/Losses
Billions of dollars
120
End of year
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Income Projections
Billions of dollars
400
End of year
300
200
100
0
−100
−200
−300
−400
−500
−600
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 43 of 52

--- Page 47 ---

 Interest rate sensitivity. To illustrate the sensitivity of the projections to the path
of interest rates, we compare the July Tealbook baseline projections to a scenario
in which, after policy firming begins in the third quarter of 2015, all interest rates
gradually rise a total of 200 basis points above the staff forecast and remain at that
level over the projection period.8,9 Relative to the baseline projection, the size of
the balance sheet is not materially affected, and SOMA net income follows the
same general contour, but with a significant difference in magnitude. As shown
in the dashed blue line in the exhibit, “Income Projections,” cumulative annual
interest expense is larger than under the baseline by roughly $130 billion during
the normalization period, years 2016 through 2020. As a result, net income is less
than in the baseline and annual remittances to the Treasury reach a trough of near
zero in 2018. In the later years of the projection period, net income is projected to
rise above that of the baseline scenario as Treasury securities are purchased at
higher yields. Under the higher interest rate path, cumulative remittances from
2009 to 2025 are approximately $900 billion, about $100 billion less than in the
July Tealbook baseline. Finally, under the higher rate path, the unrealized loss
position peaks at approximately $530 billion in 2017.
 Term premium effects. As shown in the table “Projections for the 10-Year
Treasury Term Premium Effect,” the effect of the Federal Reserve’s elevated
stock of longer-term securities on the term premium embedded in the 10-year
Treasury yield in the third quarter of 2015 is estimated to be negative 108 basis
points, nearly unchanged from the June Tealbook. Over the next couple of years,
the term premium effect diminishes at a pace of about 5 basis points per quarter,
reflecting the projected shrinking of the portfolio. A key input into our term
premium effect model is the duration of the SOMA Treasury portfolio; refer to
the “History and Projections for the Characteristics of SOMA Treasury Holdings”
box for more information on this measure.
8 Interest rates include the federal funds rate; the 5, 10, and 30 year Treasury yields; the 30 year
conventional fixed-rate residential mortgage rate, and the agency MBS current coupon.
9 These interest rate shocks are phased in over eight quarters. Rates are assumed to stay at this
higher level throughout the projection period. While we allow for agency MBS prepayments to change as a
result of this shock, no other general feedback to the macroeconomy is incorporated. A more
comprehensive assessment of the interest rate risk inherent in the Federal Reserve’s current portfolio that
includes this feedback is presented in Cashin, Ferris, Kim, and Klee (2015), “The Federal Reserve’s
Balance Sheet and Income: Projections using the 2015 Dodd-Frank Adverse Stress Test Scenario,” FEDS
Note, forthcoming.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 44 of 52

--- Page 48 ---

Projections for the 10-Year Treasury Term Premium Effect
(Basis Points)
Date July Tealbook July Tealbook June
Baseline Higher Interest Rates TealBook
Quarterly Averages
2015:Q3 -108 -109 -107
Q4 -103 -104 -102
2016:Q1 -99 -100 -98
Q2 -94 -95 -93
Q3 -90 -91 -88
Q4 -85 -87 -84
2017:Q4 -70 -71 -69
2018:Q4 -58 -59 -57
2019:Q4 -49 -50 -48
2020:Q4 -41 -42 -40
2021:Q4 -35 -36 -35
2022:Q4 -30 -31 -30
2023:Q4 -25 -25 -24
2024:Q4 -19 -20 -19
2025:Q4 -14 -14 -14
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 45 of 52

--- Page 49 ---

History and Projections for the
Characteristics of SOMA Treasury Holdings
This box reviews the history and projected future behavior of two important
characteristics of the SOMA’s holdings of Treasury securities—the weighted average
duration of the portfolio and the portfolio’s value in terms of 10year equivalents.1 Before
the financial crisis, the weightedaverage duration of the SOMA Treasury portfolio
hovered around 2.7 years. As shown by the light blue line in the top panel, following the
onset of the crisis in August 2007, the duration of Treasury holdings jumped as shorter
dated securities were sold or allowed to mature without replacement. As a result of the
maturity extension program and the flowbased asset purchase program, which
increased holdings of longerdated Treasury securities in the portfolio, duration
continued to increase during late 2011 and 2012.2 Duration peaked in early 2013, and as of
June 1, 2015, SOMA Treasury duration stood around 7 years.
Going forward, under the current balance sheet assumptions, the weightedaverage
duration of SOMA Treasury holdings is expected to continue to decline a bit over the next
two years before rising, as the end to reinvestments results in shorterdated Treasury
securities rolling off the portfolio.3,4 However, after the balance sheet normalizes in size
in 2021, Treasury duration is projected to decline as the Desk resumes purchasing
securities to expand the size of the portfolio.5 If purchases are spread across the
maturity distribution following the Federal Reserve’s historical practice in purchasing
Treasury securities of different maturities, shown by the light blue dashed line, duration
declines slowly.6 However, if purchases are directed instead solely to Treasury bills
initially (the “bill replenishment strategy”) to actively bring the portfolio’s Treasury
holdings back to its historical proportion of onethird bills, as shown by the dark blue
dashed line, weightedaverage duration drops noticeably over the course of one year
from May 2021 to June 2022.7
1 Duration is the weighted average of the times until bonds’ fixed cash flows are received. The 10
year equivalents of the SOMA Treasury portfolio is the dollar amount of 10year Treasury securities that
the Federal Reserve would hold in order to produce the same duration as its actual holdings.
2 The weighted average duration of the securities purchased under the first and second asset
purchase programs was roughly in line with the duration of the SOMA portfolio at that time, and so
SOMA duration did not materially increase as a result of those programs.
3 As of June 2015, 50 percent of the Treasury securities held in the SOMA will mature in less than 5
years, 24 percent will mature in 5 and 10 years, 5 percent will mature in 10 and 20 years, and 21 percent
will mature in more than 20 years.
4 If SOMA coupon securities mature and the Committee wishes to reinvest these proceeds at
Treasury auctions, in general, the Desk rolls over the maturing securities held in the SOMA into newly
issued securities in proportion to the issue amounts of the new securities, and the Federal Reserve
receives the interest rate determined competitively in the public auction of the newly issued securities.
5 These purchases would be in the secondary market.
6 Specifically, precrisis, purchases in both the secondary and primary markets were aimed at
maintaining a liquid portfolio, while avoiding significantly distorting prices or liquidity of specific
Treasury securities. Consequently, SOMA holdings comprised an array of Treasury securities with
varying remaining maturities.
7 This bill replenishment strategy is used in the staff baseline presented in Tealbook, Book B.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
‐
‐
‐
‐
‐
‐
‐
‐
‐
‐
‐
‐
Page 46 of 52

--- Page 50 ---

Either investment strategy will result in SOMA Treasury holdings having a much higher
weighted‐average duration in 2025 than prior to the crisis. This increase in duration
relative to before the crisis reflects, in large part, the fact that the Treasury has and is
expected to continue to extend the weighted average maturity of its debt over time.
This point can be seen by the light brown line which illustrates how the weighted‐average
duration of the SOMA Treasury portfolio would have evolved in a scenario where the
portfolio grew primarily with currency growth, and the Federal Reserve followed its
normal reinvestment and secondary market purchase policy.
The effect of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet decisions on long‐term rates has often
been analyzed in terms of the so‐called “10‐year equivalent” value of the portfolio.
Similar to the duration of the portfolio, as shown in the bottom panel, SOMA Treasury 10‐
year equivalents increased substantially after the onset of the financial crisis and
subsequent recession. Going forward, after reinvestment ceases, the 10‐year equivalent
value of SOMA Treasury holdings is projected to fall reflecting the decrease in the size of
the SOMA Treasury portfolio.8 When purchases of Treasury coupon securities resume
after the balance sheet normalizes in size, the 10‐year equivalent value of the Treasury
portfolio is projected to increase. Under the historical purchase strategy, the inflection
point in the 10‐year equivalents occurs sooner and is larger than under the bill‐
replenishment strategy, because the securities purchased under this strategy will have
longer duration than those purchased under bill‐replenishment strategy.
8 Ten‐year equivalents declines between 2017 and 2021 while duration increases because the rise in
duration is more than offset by the shrinking of the SOMA Treasury portfolio.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 47 of 52

--- Page 51 ---

 Monetary base. As shown in the final table, “Projections for the Monetary Base,”
once policy firming begins in the third quarter of 2015, the monetary base first
grows less rapidly and then shrinks through the second quarter of 2021, primarily
because redemptions of securities generate corresponding reductions in reserve
balances. Starting around mid-2021, after reserve balances are assumed to have
stabilized at $100 billion, the monetary base begins to expand in line with the
increase in currency in circulation.10
10 The projection for the monetary base depends critically on the FOMC’s choice of tools during
normalization. In this projection, a steady $100 billion take-up in an ON RRP facility is assumed and,
therefore, the level of the monetary base is lower than it would otherwise be until 2019 (when the facility is
assumed to be phased out). The projected growth rate of the monetary base, however, is generally
unaffected. If the FOMC employs additional reserve-draining tools during normalization or ON RRP take-
up is larger than assumed, the projected level of reserve balances and the monetary base could decline quite
markedly.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 48 of 52

--- Page 52 ---

Projections for the Monetary Base
(Percent change, annual rate; not seasonally adjusted)
July Tealbook July Tealbook June
Date
Baseline Higher Interest Rates Tealbook
Quarterly
2015:Q3 26.2 26.1 14.4
Q4 6.3 6.1 0.2
2016:Q1 -0.2 -0.3 -0.2
Q2 -4.9 -5.2 -5.3
Q3 -9.7 -10.2 -10.5
Q4 -8.9 -9.2 -9.6
Annual
2017 -9.7 -9.8 -10.2
2018 -14.6 -14.7 -15.4
2019 -13.3 -13.3 -14.1
2020 -13.1 -13.2 -14.0
2021 -5.1 -4.5 -4.4
2022 3.3 3.3 3.5
2023 3.4 3.4 3.6
2024 3.4 3.4 3.6
2025 3.4 3.4 3.7
Note: For years, Q4 to Q4; for quarters, calculated from corresponding average levels.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 49 of 52

--- Page 53 ---

MONEY
M2 is expected to grow sluggishly in the third quarter of 2015 and then contract
through the third quarter of 2016 as the assumed increase in the target range for the
federal funds rate and the associated rise in the opportunity cost of holding money
restrains money demand. Over the remainder of the projection period, the increase in
opportunity cost is expected to hold M2 growth below that of nominal GDP in 2017 and
in 2018.
M2 Monetary Aggregate Projections
(Percent change, annual rate; seasonally adjusted)*
Quarterly
2015: Q2 5.0
Q3 2.2
Q4 -2.4
2016: Q1 -1.2
Q2 -0.6
Q3 -0.1
Q4 0.6
2017: Q1 1.3
Q2 1.6
Q3 1.7
Q4 1.8
2018: Q1 2.1
Q2 2.5
Q3 2.8
Q4 3.0
Annual
2015 3.1
2016 -0.3
2017 1.6
2018 2.7
Note: This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates
in the Tealbook forecast. Actual data through July 13, 2015;
projections thereafter.
* Quarterly growth rates are computed from quarter averages. Annual
growth rates are calculated using the change from fourth quarter of
previous year to fourth quarter of year indicated.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Page 50 of 52

--- Page 54 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
Abbreviations
ABS asset-backed securities
BEA Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce
BHC bank holding company
CDS credit default swaps
C&I commercial and industrial
CLO collateralized loan obligation
CMBS commercial mortgage-backed securities
CPI consumer price index
CRE commercial real estate
Desk Open Market Desk
ECB European Central Bank
EME emerging market economy
FDIC Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
FOMC Federal Open Market Committee; also, the Committee
GCF general collateral finance
GDI gross domestic income
GDP gross domestic product
GSIBs globally systemically important banking organizations
HQLA high-quality liquid assets
ISM Institute for Supply Management
LIBOR London interbank offered rate
MBS mortgage-backed securities
MMFs money market funds
NIPA national income and product accounts
OIS overnight index swap
ON RRP overnight reverse repurchase agreement
PCE personal consumption expenditures
Page 51 of 52

--- Page 55 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) July 23, 2015
repo repurchase agreement
RMBS residential mortgage-backed securities
RRP reverse repurchase agreement
SCOOS Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms
SEP Summary of Economic Projections
SFA Supplemental Financing Account
SLOOS Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices
SOMA System Open Market Account
TBA to be announced (for example, TBA market)
TGA U.S. Treasury’s General Account
TIPS Treasury inflation-protected securities
TPE Term premium effects
Page 52 of 52

# Tables

## Page_14_Table_1


| 2015   |    | 2016   | 2017   | 2018   |
|--------|----|--------|--------|--------|
| H1     | H2 |        |        |        |


## Page_53_Table_1


| M2 Monetary Aggregate Projections
(Percent change, annual rate; seasonally adjusted)*                                                                                                      |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Quarterly
2015: Q2 5.0
Q3 2.2
Q4 -2.4
2016: Q1 -1.2
Q2 -0.6
Q3 -0.1
Q4 0.6
2017: Q1 1.3
Q2 1.6
Q3 1.7
Q4 1.8
2018: Q1 2.1
Q2 2.5
Q3 2.8
Q4 3.0
Annual
2015 3.1
2016 -0.3
2017 1.6
2018 2.7 |