# 20150429_tealbook.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:44:41*
*Pages: 51, Tables: 2*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that
material was received on a confidential basis. Redacted material is indicated by
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content. All redacted
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of
Information Act.
Content last modified 01/08/2021.

--- Page 2 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR)
Report to the FOMC
on Economic Conditions
and Monetary Policy
Book B
Monetary Policy:
Strategies and Alternatives
April 23, 2015
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
by the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

--- Page 3 ---

Authorized for Public Release
(This page is intentionally blank.)

--- Page 4 ---

Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015 (Corrected)
Monetary Policy Strategies
The top panel of the first exhibit, “Policy Rules and the Staff Projection,”
provides near-term prescriptions for the federal funds rate from four policy rules: the
Taylor (1993) rule, the Taylor (1999) rule, an inertial version of the Taylor (1999) rule,
and a first-difference rule.1 These prescriptions take as given the staff’s baseline
projections for real activity and inflation in the near term. Medium-term prescriptions
derived from dynamic simulations of the rules are discussed below. As in March, all of
the simple rules prescribe an increase in the federal funds rate by the third quarter. The
Taylor (1993, 1999) rules call for sizable increases in the federal funds rate to values of
1¼ percent or higher over the near term. The inertial Taylor (1999) rule and the first-
difference rule prescribe less-sizable interest-rate increases—to near ½ percent and just
over ¼ percent in the third quarter of 2015, respectively—because both rules place a
considerable weight on keeping the federal funds rate close to its lagged value.
Compared with the previous Tealbook, three of the four simple rules call for
slightly lower policy rates for the second and third quarter of this year, reflecting a wider
output gap in the staff’s near-term projection.2 As explained in Tealbook, Book A, and as
shown in the lower-left panel of the exhibit, the staff now projects that the trajectory of
the output gap will run, on average, about ¼ percentage point lower than in the previous
Tealbook through 2018. The staff’s projection for core PCE inflation is a bit higher for
2015 than in the March Tealbook and little changed thereafter. The top panel of the first
exhibit also reports the Tealbook-consistent estimate of the equilibrium real federal funds
rate, r*, generated using the FRB/US model. This measure is an estimate of the real
federal funds rate that would, if maintained, return output to potential in 12 quarters.
Reflecting the staff’s updated assessment of slack in the economy over the next few
years, the current estimate of r*, at 0.09 percent, is 39 basis points lower than the
estimate for the current quarter derived from the staff forecast shown in the March
Tealbook. The actual real federal funds rate, at about −1¼ percent, is almost 110 basis
points below the current estimate of r*.
1 The appendix to this section provides details on each of the four rules.
2 The exception is the first-difference rule, which responds to slightly larger positive changes in
the output gap projected in the near term.
Page 1 of 48
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release

--- Page 5 ---

Policy Rules and the Staff Projection
Near-Term Prescriptions of Selected Policy Rules1
2015Q2 2015Q3
Taylor (1993) rule 1.75 1.85
Previous Tealbook 1.85 1.95
Taylor (1999) rule 1.17 1.36
Previous Tealbook 1.49 1.67
Inertial Taylor (1999) rule 0.28 0.44
Previous Tealbook outlook 0.33 0.53
First-difference rule 0.24 0.32
Previous Tealbook outlook 0.22 0.29
Memo: Equilibrium and Actual Real Federal Funds Rates
2
Current Current Quarter Estimate Previous
Tealbook as of Previous Tealbook Tealbook
Tealbook-consistent FRB/US r* es timate -0.09 0.30 0.10
Actual real federal funds rate -1.1 8 -1.2 7
1.For rules that have a lagged policy rate as a right-hand-side variable, the lines denoted "Previous Tealbook outlook" report rule prescriptions based
on the previous Tealbook’s staff outlook, but jumping off from the realized value for the policy rate last quarter.
2.Estimates of r * may change at the beginning of a quarter even when the staff outlook is unchanged because the twelve-quarter horizon covered by
the calculation has rolled forward one quarter. Therefore, whenever the Tealbook is published early in the quarter, the memo includes an extra column
labeled "Current Quarter Estimate as of Previous Tealbook" to facilitate comparison with the current Tealbook estimate.
Key Elements of the Staff Projection
GDP Gap PCE Prices Excluding Food and Energy
Percent Four-quarter average Percent
3.0 3.0
Current Tealbook
2 Previous Tealbook 2
2.5 2.5
1 1
2.0 2.0
0 0
1.5 1.5
-1 -1
1.0 1.0
-2 -2
-3 -3 0.5 0.5
-4 -4 0.0 0.0
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015 (Corrected)
Page 2 of 48

--- Page 6 ---

The second exhibit, “Policy Rule Simulations,” reports dynamic simulations of
the FRB/US model under each of the policy rules. These simulations reflect the
endogenous responses of inflation and the output gap when the federal funds rate follows
the paths implied by the different policy rules, subject to an effective lower bound of
12½ basis points for the federal funds rate. The results for each rule presented in these
and subsequent simulations depend importantly on the assumptions that policymakers
will adhere to the rule in the future, and that the private sector fully understands the
policy that will be pursued as well as its implications for real activity and inflation.
The second exhibit also displays the implications of following the baseline
monetary policy assumptions adopted in the current staff forecast.3 As discussed in
Tealbook, Book A, the staff now assumes that the first increase in the federal funds rate
will occur at the September FOMC meeting. After departing from its effective lower
bound, the federal funds rate is assumed to rise at the pace prescribed by the inertial
Taylor (1999) rule. The federal funds rate increases about 25 basis points per quarter for
three years, reaching 3 percent in the second half of 2018; the pace of tightening
subsequently slows, and the federal funds rate begins to level off near its longer-run value
of 3½ percent.
All of the policy rules in these dynamic simulations call for tightening to begin
immediately. The Taylor (1993) and the Taylor (1999) rules produce paths for the real
federal funds rate that lie significantly above the Tealbook baseline over the next few
years, leading to somewhat higher unemployment rates but similar trajectories for
inflation. Under the inertial Taylor (1999) rule, the federal funds rate departs from its
effective lower bound in 2015:Q2 and the real federal funds rate briefly rises above the
baseline path. However, these differences are too minor to have a material effect on the
real longer-term interest rates that influence economic activity in the FRB/US model.
Consequently, macroeconomic outcomes are essentially the same in this case as those
under the Tealbook baseline.
The first-difference rule implies a path for the real federal funds rate that over the
next couple of years is slightly higher than the Tealbook baseline, but that is somewhat
lower after 2017. As the first-difference rule responds to the expected change in the
3 The dynamic simulations discussed here and below incorporate the assumptions about
underlying economic conditions used in the staff’s baseline forecast, including the macroeconomic effects
of the Committee’s asset holdings from the large-scale asset purchase programs.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 3 of 48

--- Page 7 ---

Policy Rule Simulations
Effective Nominal Federal Funds Rate Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
6 6 7.0 7.0
Taylor (1993) rule
Staff’s estimate of the natural rate
Taylor (1999) rule
Inertial Taylor (1999) rule
5 5
First-difference rule
Tealbook baseline 6.5 6.5
4 4
3 3
6.0 6.0
2 2
5.5 5.5
1 1
0 0
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 5.0 5.0
Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent 4.5 4.5
3 3
4.0 4.0
2 2 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
1 1
PCE Inflation
Four-quarter average Percent
3.0 3.0
0 0
-1 -1
2.5 2.5
-2 -2
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
2.0 2.0
Real 10-year Treasury Yield
Percent
3 3 1.5 1.5
1.0 1.0
2 2
0.5 0.5
1 1
0.0 0.0
0 0
-0.5 -0.5
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Note: The policy rule simulations in this exhibit are based on rules that respond to core inflation. This choice of rule
specification was made in light of the tendency for current and near-term core inflation rates to outperform headline
inflation rates as predictors of the medium-term behavior of headline inflation.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 4 of 48

--- Page 8 ---

output gap rather than its level, this pattern results from the slower pace of economic
growth expected to occur late in the decade, after output overshoots its potential level.
This ultimately lower path of the federal funds rate, in conjunction with expectations of
higher price and wage inflation in the future, leads to higher levels of resource utilization
and more inflation in the short run. Overall, this rule generates outcomes late in the
decade for the unemployment and inflation rates that, compared with the outcomes
associated with other policy rules, are farther from the staff’s estimate of the natural rate
of unemployment and the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run inflation objective,
respectively.
The third exhibit, “Optimal Control Policy under Commitment,” compares
optimal control simulations for this Tealbook’s baseline forecast with those reported in
March. Policymakers are assumed to place equal weights on keeping headline PCE
inflation close to the Committee’s 2 percent goal, on keeping the unemployment rate
close to the staff’s estimate of the natural rate of unemployment, and on minimizing
changes in the federal funds rate. The concept of optimal control that is employed here
corresponds to a commitment policy under which the plans that policymakers make today
are assumed to constrain future policy choices.4
Reflecting the weaker aggregate demand embedded in the current staff forecast
(relative to the March forecast), optimal control policy entails a lower path of the federal
funds rate and lower longer-term real rates than in the previous Tealbook. Despite the
more-accommodative stance of policy, the unemployment rate undershoots the staff’s
estimate of the natural rate by less than in March, consistent with the staff’s assessment
of slightly less momentum in economic activity through 2018. Over the same period, the
higher degree of labor market slack results in a slightly lower level of inflation relative to
the optimal control path in March.
From December of last year through March of this year, optimal control policy
has been less accommodative than the Tealbook baseline. However, optimal control
policy now provides about the same level of accommodation as the Tealbook
baseline. Though the federal funds rate departs from the effective lower bound one
quarter earlier than in the baseline and remains somewhat above the baseline through
4 The results for optimal control policy under discretion (in which policymakers cannot credibly
commit to carrying out a plan involving policy choices that would be suboptimal at the time that these
choices have to be implemented) are similar.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 5 of 48

--- Page 9 ---

Optimal Control Policy under Commitment
Effective Nominal Federal Funds Rate Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
6 6 7.0 7.0
Current Tealbook
Staff’s estimate of the natural rate
Previous Tealbook
Tealbook baseline
5 5
6.5 6.5
4 4
3 3
6.0 6.0
2 2
5.5 5.5
1 1
0 0
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 5.0 5.0
Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent 4.5 4.5
3 3
4.0 4.0
2 2 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
1 1
PCE Inflation
Four-quarter average Percent
3.0 3.0
0 0
-1 -1
2.5 2.5
-2 -2
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
2.0 2.0
Real 10-year Treasury Yield
Percent
3 3 1.5 1.5
1.0 1.0
2 2
0.5 0.5
1 1
0.0 0.0
0 0
-0.5 -0.5
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 6 of 48

--- Page 10 ---

2018, optimal control policy prescribes a lower federal funds rate path after 2019.
Accordingly, differences between the real longer-term rate under optimal control and the
Tealbook baseline are only minor and the outcomes for the unemployment rate and
inflation are nearly identical.
OPTIMAL CONTROL IN THE PRESENCE OF TERM-PREMIUM SHOCKS
Longer-term yields, which are an important variable through which monetary
policy affects the economy, depend not only on current and expected future short-term
rates but also on term premiums. These premiums can vary for many reasons that are
often not well understood, but at times they have been volatile in the wake of monetary
policy announcements. The special exhibit, “Optimal Control in the Presence of Term-
Premium Shocks,” examines the implications for policy of two scenarios in which term
premiums diverge from the baseline path. One risk to the staff’s outlook is that financial
markets could overreact around the time of the first increase in the federal funds rate,
resulting in a greater tightening of financial conditions than intended —a “tightening
tantrum.” Another risk, emphasized in the most recent Quantitative Surveillance report,
is that term premiums could remain exceptionally low for a protracted period of time
after the onset of tightening, as was the case during the “conundrum” episode of
20042005.
In the “tightening tantrum” scenario, the term premiums on the FRB/US model’s
5-year, 10-year and 30-year Treasury rates are assumed to jump by 120 basis points in
2015:Q3; subsequently, premiums are assumed to revert to their baseline values in about
a year. This calibration of the shock is meant to be largely illustrative; however, a shock
of this magnitude and duration is similar to the estimated cumulative increase in term
premiums during the “taper tantrum” episode from the summer of 2013 through the end
of the same year. In this scenario policymakers and financial market participants are
assumed to correctly anticipate the shocks.5
As shown by the blue dashed line in the bottom-left panel of the exhibit, the
temporary increase in term premiums in the tightening-tantrum scenario results in a sharp
spike in the real 10-year Treasury yield in the second half of 2015. Policymakers do not
immediately try to offset the effect of the spike in the term premium on longer-term rates,
5 The simulation starts in 2015:Q2, at which time the policymakers understand that term premiums
will rise in 2015:Q3 and know the pace at which they will revert back to baseline.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 7 of 48

--- Page 11 ---

Optimal Control in the Presence of Term-Premium Shocks
Effective Nominal Federal Funds Rate Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
6 6 7.0 7.0
Standard optimal control
Staff’s estimate of the natural rate
Optimal control (tightening tantrum)
Optimal control (conundrum)
5 5
Tealbook baseline
6.5 6.5
4 4
3 3
6.0 6.0
2 2
5.5 5.5
1 1
0 0
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 5.0 5.0
Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent 4.5 4.5
3 3
4.0 4.0
2 2 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
1 1
PCE Inflation
Four-quarter average Percent
3.0 3.0
0 0
-1 -1
2.5 2.5
-2 -2
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
2.0 2.0
Real 10-year Treasury Yield
Percent
3 3 1.5 1.5
1.0 1.0
2 2
0.5 0.5
1 1
0.0 0.0
0 0
-0.5 -0.5
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 8 of 48

--- Page 12 ---

because they have a preference for minimizing changes in the federal funds rate.
However, monetary policy is still more accommodative than in the “standard optimal
control” simulation, which does not include term premium shocks and uses the staff’s
baseline forecast. The federal funds rate departs from the effective lower bound in
2015:Q3, one quarter later than in the standard optimal control simulation, and is, on
average, about 30 basis points lower from 2016 to 2020 than in standard optimal control.
This lower path for the federal funds rate mitigates somewhat the sharp initial spike in
longer-term rates and results in real 10-year Treasury yields that are slightly below those
of standard optimal control in 2016 through 2020.
Notwithstanding the easing of policy, the initial spike in longer-term real interest
rates implies that the unemployment rate is around 0.1 percentage point higher than in the
standard optimal control simulations, on average, through the beginning of 2018.6 As a
result, the unemployment rate reaches the staff’s estimate of the natural rate in mid-2017,
three quarters later than under standard optimal control. However, inflation is little
changed from its path in the standard optimal control simulation in part because of the
low sensitivity of inflation to slack in the FRB/US model and in part because the more
accommodative policy helps offset the small deflationary effects of the term-premium
shocks.
In the conundrum scenario, shown by the pink dotted lines, term premiums fall
below their baseline path for four quarters and revert back to baseline within a year.7 The
fall in the term premiums, which is larger and more persistent than initially expected by
policymakers, leads to a 10-year nominal Treasury rate that is roughly constant for three
quarters, despite increases in the federal funds rate, much as was the case in the
conundrum of 2004. Because policymakers do not foresee the duration of these
unexpectedly low longer-term rates, they tighten policy less than would be appropriate if
they had fully anticipated the fall in term premiums. The unemployment rate declines
more rapidly than in the standard optimal control simulation through mid-2016.
Thereafter, the higher path for the federal funds rate pushes up real 10-year Treasury
6 The spike in longer-term interest rates lowers aggregate demand and raises the unemployment
rate in part through an appreciation of the dollar of about 4 percent above baseline in 2015:Q3.
7 In the conundrum scenario, a sequence of four unexpected shocks lowers the 10-year term
premium by around 70 basis points below the baseline path at its trough by the end of 2015. Term
premiums return to their baseline values by the end of 2016.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 9 of 48

--- Page 13 ---

Outcomes under Alternative Policies
(Percent change, annual rate, from end of preceding period except as noted)
Measure and policy 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
H1 H2
Real GDP
Extended Tealbook baseline1 1.2 2.4 2.4 2.1 1.8 1.7
Taylor (1993) 1.2 1.9 2.1 2.1 2.0 1.9
Taylor (1999) 1.2 2.0 2.1 2.1 1.9 1.8
Inertial Taylor (1999) 1.2 2.3 2.4 2.1 1.8 1.7
First-difference 1.2 2.4 2.5 2.3 2.0 1.8
Optimal control 1.2 2.3 2.4 2.2 1.9 1.7
Unemployment rate2
Extended Tealbook baseline1 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.1 5.1 5.1
Taylor (1993) 5.4 5.5 5.5 5.4 5.3 5.2
Taylor (1999) 5.4 5.4 5.4 5.4 5.3 5.2
Inertial Taylor (1999) 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.1 5.1 5.1
First-difference 5.4 5.3 5.1 5.0 4.9 4.9
Optimal control 5.4 5.3 5.2 5.1 5.0 5.1
Total PCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline1 -0.2 1.5 1.6 1.8 1.9 2.0
Taylor (1993) -0.3 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.9 1.9
Taylor (1999) -0.3 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.9 1.9
Inertial Taylor (1999) -0.3 1.5 1.6 1.8 1.9 2.0
First-difference -0.2 1.6 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.1
Optimal control -0.2 1.5 1.6 1.8 1.9 2.0
Core PCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 1.9 2.0
Taylor (1993) 1.2 1.4 1.5 1.7 1.9 1.9
Taylor (1999) 1.2 1.4 1.5 1.7 1.9 1.9
Inertial Taylor (1999) 1.2 1.4 1.5 1.8 1.9 2.0
First-difference 1.2 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.1
Optimal control 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.0
Effective nominal federal funds rate2
Extended Tealbook baseline1 0.1 0.4 1.4 2.4 3.0 3.3
Taylor (1993) 1.9 2.0 2.6 3.1 3.4 3.5
Taylor (1999) 1.3 1.6 2.3 3.1 3.4 3.5
Inertial Taylor (1999) 0.3 0.7 1.5 2.4 3.0 3.4
First-difference 0.3 0.7 1.7 2.5 2.7 2.9
Optimal control 0.3 0.7 1.6 2.4 3.0 3.3
1. In the Tealbook baseline, the federal funds rate first departs from an effective lower bound of 12½ basis points
in the second quarter of 2015. Thereafter, the federal funds rate follows the prescriptions of the inertial
Taylor (1999) rule.
2. Percent, average for the final quarter of the period.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 10 of 48

--- Page 14 ---

yields, inducing an unemployment rate above the standard optimal control simulation
beginning in 2018.
In the conundrum scenario, policy fails to tighten sufficiently because
policymakers do not anticipate the shocks. Symmetrically, if the rise in the term
premiums in the tightening-tantrum scenario had turned out to be larger and more
persistent than expected, then policy would have been less accommodative than
appropriate, the tightening in financial conditions would have been more severe, and the
increase in the unemployment rate more pronounced than the results shown in the
simulation.8
An important caveat associated with this analysis is that the term premium shocks
in these simulations are occurring in isolation and are unrelated to other factors, such as
changes in expected growth, foreign or domestic, that might constitute the underlying
cause of such fluctuations in premiums. If, for example, longer-term yields were to
remain persistently low because of economic weakness abroad that leads to increased
demand for long-term Treasuries, an appreciation of the dollar, lower net exports and
economic activity, then a complete analysis would include more shocks to represent those
factors and optimal policy would be more accommodative than shown in the conundrum
scenario.9
The final exhibit, “Outcomes under Alternative Policies,” tabulates the results for
key variables in the policy rule and optimal control simulations.
8 The tightening-tantrum scenario also implies that if policymakers could reliably anticipate term
premium developments in advance, policy would be somewhat more accommodative prior to the actual
increase in premiums than is shown in the exhibit.
9 A recent FOMC memo outlined several reasons why longer-term Treasury yields appear to have
been persistently lower than what might have been expected given economic conditions, and in particular
on the possible international sources of these developments. The memo emphasized that different
interpretations as to the fundamentals behind these low rates render different policy implications. See
“Recent Declines in Long-Term Interest Rates: Causes and Potential Policy Implications” sent to the
FOMC on March 10, 2015 by David Bowman, Stefania D’Amico, Michiel de Pooter, Paul Dozier, Benson
Durham, James Egelhof, Don Kim, Tom King, Robert Martin, Michele Modugno, Fabio Natalucci,
Marcelo Ochoa, Marius Rodriguez, Carlo Rosa, and Min Wei.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 11 of 48

--- Page 15 ---

seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Appendix
POLICY RULES USED IN “MONETARY POLICY STRATEGIES”
The table below gives the expressions for the selected policy rules used in “Monetary
Policy Strategies.” In the table, Rt denotes the effective nominal federal funds rate for quarter t,
while the right-hand-side variables include the staff's projection of trailing four-quarter core PCE
inflation for the current quarter and three quarters ahead and [math], the output gap estimate
for the current period (gapt), and the forecast of the three-quarter-ahead annual change in the
output gap [math]. The value of policymakers' longer-run inflation objective, denoted[math], is
2 percent.
Taylor (1993) rule [math]
Taylor (1999) rule [math]
Inertial Taylor (1999) rule [math]
First-difference rule [math]
The first two of the selected rules were studied by Taylor (1993, 1999), while the inertial
Taylor (1999) rule has been featured prominently in analysis by Board staff.1 The intercepts of
these rules are chosen so that they are consistent with a 2 percent longer-run inflation objective
and a longer-run real interest rate, denoted [math] of [math] percent, a value used in the FRB/US
model. The prescriptions of the first-difference rule do not depend on the level of the output gap
or the longer-run real interest rate; see Orphanides (2003).
Near-term prescriptions from the four policy rules are calculated using Tealbook
projections for inflation and the output gap. For the rules that include the lagged policy rate as a
right-hand-side variable—the inertial Taylor (1999) rule and the first-difference rule—the lines
labelled “Previous Tealbook outlook” report prescriptions derived from the previous Tealbook
projections for inflation and the output gap, while using the same lagged funds rate value as in the
prescriptions computed for the current Tealbook. When the Tealbook is published early in a
quarter, this lagged funds rate value is set equal to the actual value of the lagged funds rate in the
previous quarter, and prescriptions are shown for the current quarter. When the Tealbook is
published late in a quarter, the prescriptions are shown for the next quarter, and the lagged policy
rate, for each of these rules, including those that use the “Previous Tealbook outlook,” is set equal
to the average value for the policy rate thus far in the quarter. For the subsequent quarter, these
rules use the lagged values from their simulated, unconstrained prescriptions.
1 See, for example, Erceg and others (2012).

--- Page 16 ---

ESTIMATES OF THE EQUILIBRIUM AND ACTUAL REAL FEDERAL FUNDS RATES
An estimate of the equilibrium real federal funds rate appears as a memo item in the first
exhibit, “Policy Rules and the Staff Projection.” The concept of the short-run equilibrium real
rate underlying the estimate corresponds to the level of the real federal funds rate that is
consistent with output reaching potential in 12 quarters using an output projection from FRB/US,
the staff's large-scale econometric model of the U.S. economy. This estimate depends on a very
broad array of economic factors, some of which take the form of projected values of the model's
exogenous variables. The memo item in the exhibit reports the “Tealbook-consistent” estimate of
r*, which is generated after the paths of exogenous variables in the FRB/US model are adjusted
so that they match those in the extended Tealbook forecast. Model simulations then determine
the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the output gap conditional on the exogenous
variables in the extended baseline forecast.
The estimated actual real federal funds rate reported in the exhibit is constructed as the
difference between the federal funds rate and the trailing four-quarter change in the core PCE
price index. The federal funds rate is specified as the midpoint of the target range for the federal
funds rate on the Tealbook, Book B, publication date.
FRB/US MODEL SIMULATIONS
The exhibits of “Monetary Policy Strategies” that report results from simulations of
alternative policies are derived from dynamic simulations of the FRB/US model. Each simulated
policy rule is assumed to be in force over the whole period covered by the simulation. For the
optimal control simulations, the dotted line labeled “Previous Tealbook” is derived from the
previous Tealbook projection. When the Tealbook is published early in a quarter, all of the
simulations begin in that quarter. However, when the Tealbook is published late in a quarter, all
of the simulations begin in the subsequent quarter.
LOSS FUNCTION UNDER OPTIMAL CONTROL SIMULATIONS
The optimal control simulations posit that policymakers minimize a discounted sum of
weighted squared deviations of four-quarter headline PCE inflation [math] from the Committee's
2 percent objective, of squared deviations of the unemployment rate from the staff's estimate of
the natural rate (this difference is also known as the unemployment rate gap, [math], and of
squared changes in the federal funds rate. The loss function, shown below, embeds the
assumptions that policymakers discount the future using a quarterly discount factor [math] and
place equal weights on squared deviations of inflation, the unemployment gap, and federal funds
rate changes (that is, [math].
[math]
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release

--- Page 17 ---

References
Erceg, Christopher, Jon Faust, Michael Kiley, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David López-Salido,
Stephen Meyer, Edward Nelson, David Reifschneider, and Robert Tetlow (2012). “An
Overview of Simple Policy Rules and Their Use in Policymaking in Normal Times and
Under Current Conditions.” Memo sent to the Committee on July 18, 2012.
Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 50 (July), pp. 9831022.
Taylor, John B. (1993). “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 39 (December), pp. 195214.
Taylor, John B. (1999). “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B. Taylor,
ed., Monetary Policy Rules. University of Chicago Press, pp. 319341.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 14 of 48

--- Page 18 ---

Monetary Policy Alternatives
This Tealbook presents three policy alternatives—labeled A, B, and C—for the
Committee’s consideration. The draft statements associated with the alternatives vary in
their characterization of current conditions and the economic outlook. In addition, the
alternatives provide different forward guidance regarding the federal funds rate.
Information received during the intermeeting period suggests that household and
business spending, production, and labor demand were all weaker in the first quarter than
had been expected at the March meeting. In contrast, recent data on inflation have been a
touch higher, on balance, than expected in March. The Committee is meeting in April in
an environment of considerable uncertainty about how much of the recent softness in
economic activity will persist and whether the recent leveling-off in inflation presages a
gradual increase toward the Committee’s 2 percent objective.
A key consideration for the Committee is how to adjust the postmeeting statement
to convey the implications of recent economic data for the likely timing of policy
normalization against the backdrop of these uncertainties. The draft statement for
Alternative B indicates that the Committee has seen little, if any, further improvement in
labor market conditions. And while noting that inflation remains below the Committee’s
longer-run objective, the statement for Alternative B does not indicate any increase in the
Committee’s confidence that inflation will rise toward the 2 percent objective over the
medium term. Thus, Alternative B would communicate that the conditions for an
increase in the federal funds target range—which remain those given in the March
statement—have not yet been met. Under this alternative, the Committee would adopt a
wait-and-see approach that avoids any date-based guidance and that retains the option of
beginning policy normalization in June if the data and outlook improve sufficiently.
Under Alternative C, the Committee would indicate that economic conditions are likely
to warrant raising the federal funds rate target range in the near future; although the
language would not specify those conditions. In contrast, the suggested language in
Alternative A modifies the conditions that would warrant policy firming. This
Alternative would indicate that the conditions include both further improvement in labor
market conditions and clear evidence that inflation is moving back toward 2 percent. The
statement under Alternative A would further suggest that these conditions are unlikely to
be satisfied in the near future.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 15 of 48

--- Page 19 ---

If time-based forward guidance is removed from the statement at this meeting, the
prospects for a change in policy in the near term would be conveyed by the Committee’s
characterization of the recent data and the economic outlook. Under Alternative B, the
Committee would indicate that “economic growth slowed during the winter months,” but
that this slowing reflected “[at least] in part” transitory factors. In contrast, Alternative C
states that recent softness in the economic data reflects transitory factors “in large part,”
while Alternative A omits any reference to transitory factors. Alternatives A and B note
that a range of indicators suggest that the underutilization of labor resources “was little
changed,” while Alternative C points to some indicators as supporting the assessment that
“the underutilization of labor resources continued to diminish.” With regard to inflation,
Alternative B indicates that “inflation continued to run below the Committee’s longer-run
objective,” while Alternative A says “well below.” Under Alternative C, the Committee
would put greater emphasis on the improvements recorded in March in both headline and
core CPI inflation by stating that inflation “was no longer declining.”
With respect to the economic outlook, all three alternatives indicate, as did the
March statement, that the Committee expects a “moderate pace” of economic activity,
with labor market indicators “continuing to move” toward mandate-consistent levels. In
Alternatives B and C, the Committee would state that it sees the risks to the outlook for
economic activity and the labor market as “nearly balanced,” while under Alternative A it
would see them as “tilted to the downside.” The draft statement for Alternative B
maintains the view that inflation is expected “to rise gradually toward 2 percent over the
medium term.” Under Alternative A, the Committee would voice a concern that inflation
could run “substantially” below 2 percent “for a protracted period.” The draft statement
for Alternative C states that the Committee “has become [somewhat] more confident”
that inflation will rise gradually “to” 2 percent “over the medium term.”
With respect to the Committee’s characterization of its approach to removing
policy accommodation, under Alternatives A and B the Committee would reaffirm its
intention to take a “balanced approach.” The draft statement for Alternative A adds that
the Committee anticipates that the economy will evolve in a manner that “warrants a
gradual increase in the target federal funds rate.” Under Alternative C, the “balanced
approach” phrase would be removed in favor of language emphasizing the data
dependence of the Committee’s policy decisions in pursuit of its mandated objectives.
The new language would state that “in response to economic and financial developments,
the Committee will adjust the target federal funds rate to promote the attainment of its
objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.”
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 16 of 48

--- Page 20 ---

MARCH 2015 FOMC STATEMENT
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January
suggests that economic growth has moderated somewhat. Labor market conditions
have improved further, with strong job gains and a lower unemployment rate. A
range of labor market indicators suggests that underutilization of labor resources
continues to diminish. Household spending is rising moderately; declines in energy
prices have boosted household purchasing power. Business fixed investment is
advancing, while the recovery in the housing sector remains slow and export growth
has weakened. Inflation has declined further below the Committee’s longer-run
objective, largely reflecting declines in energy prices. Market-based measures of
inflation compensation remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market
indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its
dual mandate. The Committee continues to see the risks to the outlook for economic
activity and the labor market as nearly balanced. Inflation is anticipated to remain
near its recent low level in the near term, but the Committee expects inflation to rise
gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term as the labor market improves
further and the transitory effects of energy price declines and other factors dissipate.
The Committee continues to monitor inflation developments closely.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for
the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In determining how long to maintain this
target range, the Committee will assess progress—both realized and expected—
toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This
assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of
labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations,
and readings on financial and international developments. Consistent with its
previous statement, the Committee judges that an increase in the target range for the
federal funds rate remains unlikely at the April FOMC meeting. The Committee
anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate
when it has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident
that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term. This
change in the forward guidance does not indicate that the Committee has decided on
the timing of the initial increase in the target range.
4. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions.
5. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 17 of 48

--- Page 21 ---

employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions
may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the
Committee views as normal in the longer run.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 18 of 48

--- Page 22 ---

FOMC STATEMENT—APRIL 2015 ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January
March suggests that economic growth has moderated somewhat slowed during the
winter months. Labor market conditions have improved further, with strong The
pace of job gains moderated, and a lower the unemployment rate remained steady.
A range of labor market indicators suggests that underutilization of labor resources
continues to diminish was little changed. Growth in household spending is rising
moderately declined; declines in energy prices have boosted household purchasing
power. Business fixed investment is advancing softened, while the recovery in the
housing sector remains remained slow, and exports growth has weakened declined.
Inflation has declined further continued to run well below the Committee’s longer-
run objective, largely reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing
prices of non-energy imports. Market-based measures of inflation compensation
remain low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have
remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market
indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its
dual mandate. The Committee continues to sees the risks to the outlook for economic
activity and the labor market as nearly balanced tilted to the downside. Inflation is
anticipated to remain near its recent low level in the near term, but the Committee
expects inflation and to rise gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term as the
labor market improves further and the transitory effects of declines in energy and
import prices declines and other factors dissipate. However, the Committee
continues to monitor inflation developments closelyis concerned [ that the pace of
improvement in the labor market could remain slow and ] that inflation could
run substantially below the 2 percent objective for a protracted period.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for
the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In determining how long to maintain this
target range, the Committee will assess progress—both realized and expected—
toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This
assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of
labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations,
and readings on financial and international developments. Consistent with its
previous statement, the Committee judges that an increase in the target range for the
federal funds rate remains unlikely at the April FOMC meeting. The Committee
anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate
when it has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident
that inflation will move back to its is clearly moving up toward 2 percent objective
over the medium term. This change in the forward guidance does not indicate that the
Committee has decided on the timing of the initial increase in the target range. The
Committee is prepared to use all of its tools as necessary to return inflation to
2 percent within one to two years.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 19 of 48

--- Page 23 ---

4. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions.
5. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that the economy will
evolve in a manner that warrants a gradual increase in the target federal funds
rate and that, even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent
levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal
funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 20 of 48

--- Page 24 ---

FOMC STATEMENT—APRIL 2015 ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January
March suggests that economic growth has moderated somewhat slowed during the
winter months, [ at least ] in part reflecting transitory factors. Labor market
conditions have improved further, with strong The pace of job gains moderated,
and a lower the unemployment rate remained steady. A range of labor market
indicators suggests that underutilization of labor resources continues to diminish was
little changed. Growth in household spending is rising moderately declined;
households’ real incomes rose strongly, partly reflecting earlier declines in energy
prices have boosted household purchasing power, and consumer sentiment remains
high. Business fixed investment is advancing softened, while the recovery in the
housing sector remains remained slow, and exports growth has weakened declined.
Inflation has declined further continued to run below the Committee’s longer-run
objective, largely reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing prices
of non-energy imports. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain
low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained
stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. Although growth in output and employment
slowed during the first quarter, the Committee expects continues to expect that,
with appropriate policy accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate
pace, with labor market indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee
judges consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee continues to see the risks to
the outlook for economic activity and the labor market as nearly balanced. Inflation
is anticipated to remain near its recent low level in the near term, but the Committee
expects inflation to rise gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term as the labor
market improves further and the transitory effects of declines in energy and import
prices declines and other factors dissipate. The Committee continues to monitor
inflation developments closely.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for
the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In determining how long to maintain this
target range, the Committee will assess progress—both realized and expected—
toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This
assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including measures of
labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations,
and readings on financial and international developments. Consistent with its
previous statement, the Committee judges that an increase in the target range for the
federal funds rate remains unlikely at the April FOMC meeting. The Committee
anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate
when it has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident
that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term. This
change in the forward guidance does not indicate that the Committee has decided on
the timing of the initial increase in the target range.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 21 of 48

--- Page 25 ---

4. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions.
5. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after
employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions
may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the
Committee views as normal in the longer run.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 22 of 48

--- Page 26 ---

FOMC STATEMENT—APRIL 2015 ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January
March suggests that economic growth has moderated somewhat slowed during the
winter months, in large part reflecting transitory factors. Labor market
conditions have improved further, with strong job gains and a lower Despite a
steady unemployment rate, a range of some labor market indicators suggests suggest
that underutilization of labor resources continues continued to diminish. Household
spending is rising rose moderately; households’ real incomes rose strongly, partly
reflecting earlier declines in energy prices have boosted household purchasing
power, and consumer sentiment remains high. Business fixed investment is
advancing softened, while the recovery in the housing sector remains remained
slow, and exports growth has weakened declined. Although inflation has declined
further remained below the Committee’s longer-run objective, largely reflecting
earlier declines in energy prices and decreasing prices of non-energy imports, it
was no longer declining. Market-based measures of inflation compensation remain
low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained
stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects continues to expect that,
with appropriate policy accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate
pace, with labor market indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee
judges consistent with its dual mandate. The Committee continues to see the risks to
the outlook for economic activity and the labor market as nearly balanced. Inflation
is anticipated to remain near its recent low level in the near term, but the Committee
expects has become [ somewhat ] more confident that inflation to will rise
gradually toward to 2 percent over the medium term as the labor market improves
further and the transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices declines
and other factors dissipate. The Committee continues to monitor inflation
developments closely.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for
the federal funds rate remains appropriate. The Committee’s current assessment is
that economic conditions [ may | likely will ] soon warrant an increase in the
target range for the federal funds rate. In determining how long to maintain this
when to adjust the target range, the Committee will assess progress—both realized
and expected—toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent
inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide range of information,
including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and
inflation expectations, and readings on financial and international developments.
Consistent with its previous statement, the Committee judges that an increase in the
target range for the federal funds rate remains unlikely at the April FOMC meeting.
The Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the
federal funds rate when it has seen further improvement in the labor market and is
reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the
medium term. This change in the forward guidance does not indicate that the
Committee has decided on the timing of the initial increase in the target range.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 23 of 48

--- Page 27 ---

4. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions.
5. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent. In response to economic and financial developments, the
Committee will adjust the target federal funds rate to promote the attainment of
its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. Based on its
economic outlook, the Committee currently anticipates that, even after employment
and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some
time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views
as normal in the longer run.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 24 of 48

--- Page 28 ---

THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B
Policymakers may see the economic data released during the intermeeting period
as having mixed implications for the policy outlook. On the one hand, recent data on
spending, production, and employment have generally been disappointing and may
indicate that progress toward maximum employment has slowed or paused. On the other
hand, the recent readings on PCE and CPI inflation show that 12-month inflation (both
core and all-items) is no longer declining, and suggest that inflation may begin to move
up toward 2 percent in the near-term unless oil prices resume their earlier decline. It is
unclear whether the first quarter softness in economic activity and in the labor market
will prove to be temporary, with moderate economic growth resuming in the second
quarter, or whether it will be more persistent. It is also unclear whether the effects of the
declines in oil and commodity prices that have been holding down inflation are largely
behind us. In view of the uncertainty attending the outlook for real activity, employment,
and inflation, policymakers may consider it reasonable to maintain the current target
range for the federal funds rate and the existing forward guidance, reiterating that the
federal funds rate will be raised above its lower bound once the Committee has seen
further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will
move back to the 2 percent objective over the medium term, as in Alternative B. Doing
so would allow policymakers to assess incoming information over the coming
intermeeting period and retain the option of raising the target range for the federal funds
rate in June.
Some policymakers may view recent data as indicating a more pervasive
slowdown than can be explained by unusually severe winter weather and other
identifiable transitory factors. Indeed, recent readings on payrolls and spending may
have left policymakers doubtful that private demand will increase at a rate sufficient to
generate a gradual decline in unemployment going forward. They may also judge that
some factors holding back the pace of expansion, particularly the downward pressure on
economic activity arising from the strength of the dollar, may be felt for an extended
period. Participants might also think that readings on core and headline inflation are
likely to remain uncomfortably low if slack is not reduced further. They may, however,
take some reassurance in the fact that survey-based measures of longer-term inflation
expectations still appear well anchored and market-based measures of inflation
compensation, while low, have edged up over the intermeeting period. These
policymakers may also note that, even by the June meeting, not much of the uncertainty
about the outlook for inflation will have been resolved, as the latest inflation readings
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 25 of 48

--- Page 29 ---

available at that meeting will be those for April. For all of these reasons, policymakers
may judge that economic conditions are unlikely to warrant an increase in the target
range for the federal funds rate in the near-term. Nonetheless, participants may see a
non-negligible probability that economic growth will return to a moderate pace and that
solid labor market improvement will resume, an outcome that would improve their
confidence in the forecast that inflation will move back up to 2 percent over the medium
run. Policymakers may therefore judge it appropriate, for the time being, to stay the
course set in March and to await additional information before appreciably altering the
statement’s forward guidance.
In contrast, other policymakers might prefer to signal that the federal funds rate
target range is likely to be raised in June. These policymakers may judge that,
notwithstanding the slower growth in payrolls in March, the economy has recorded a
quite substantial cumulative improvement in labor market conditions, and that this
improvement has left little, if any, remaining resource slack. They may be concerned that
maintaining below-normal policy rates for some time after the economy’s return to
maximum employment would risk pushing the unemployment rate well below
sustainable levels and lead to an undesirably large rise in inflation over the medium run.
Even so, policymakers might note that 12-month inflation remains below the
Committee’s objective, and they may judge that longer-term inflation expectations
remain well anchored, that there are as yet few signs of wage and price pressures, and
that the Committee is able to respond strongly if inflation rises quickly. They might also
note that the increase in the foreign exchange value of the dollar over recent months
suggests that financial conditions have become, on balance, less accommodative. They
may therefore conclude that the costs of waiting to assess the incoming economic and
financial information over the next intermeeting period are likely to be small.
Some policymakers may worry that extending the period of near-zero interest
rates might spur excessive use of leverage or encourage investors to search for yield by
taking on risks that they are ill-equipped to manage. That said, they may judge that signs
of excessive risk-taking are not widespread, and that use of short-term financing
instruments and indicators of leverage have, to date, remained at moderate levels. In
addition, they may be concerned that a premature tightening of policy would pose risks to
financial stability by undermining the economic recovery, increasing loan losses, and
thereby impairing the balance sheets of financial institutions. Policymakers may
accordingly conclude that maintaining the current target range at this meeting, and
continuing to indicate that the timing of policy firming will be data dependent without
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 26 of 48

--- Page 30 ---

expressing a view about the most likely timing for the first increase in the target range for
the federal funds rate, will not increase the risks to financial stability appreciably.
On average, respondents to both the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and to the
Desk’s Survey of Market Participants place probability of about 10 percent on the first
increase in the target range for the federal funds rate occurring in June, and close to
90 percent probability on the first move occurring at the September meeting or thereafter.
In addition, the majority of respondents to both surveys expect no modification in
forward guidance at this meeting. Accordingly, overall, the statement in Alternative B is
not likely to surprise many market participants.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE C
If policymakers are confident not only that a moderate economic expansion is in
store for the period ahead but also that inflation will gradually return toward 2 percent
over the medium run as labor market conditions improve further, they might choose to
issue a statement along the lines of that proposed in Alternative C, which signals that
liftoff is likely in the near term.
Policymakers may see the slower real GDP growth recorded for the first quarter
of this year as largely or entirely the result of temporary factors. They may expect a solid
rebound in economic activity in the near-term, and judge that there is less resource slack
than the staff estimates. In addition, in light of the sizable decline in the unemployment
rate during the past year, they may see the latest monthly readings on consumer prices, as
indicating that core and headline inflation are beginning to firm instead of declining
further. In this case, participants may judge it appropriate to begin removing some of the
extraordinary policy accommodation at the June meeting. If so, they may regard it as
desirable to modify the forward guidance to indicate that “economic conditions may (or
likely will) soon warrant an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate.” Such
a change would suggest that the Committee will begin moving to a less accommodative
stance of monetary policy sooner than market participants currently expect. In addition,
policymakers may believe that it is important to reaffirm that the Committee’s decisions
regarding the first increase in the target range for the federal funds rate as well as
subsequent policy adjustments will be data dependent by indicating, as in paragraph 5 of
Alternative C, that “in response to economic and financial developments” the Committee
will adjust the target range for the federal funds rate “to promote the attainment of its
objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.”
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 27 of 48

--- Page 31 ---

Policymakers may have concluded that the slower-than-anticipated recovery in
output and employment over most of the past few years has, to a large extent, reflected a
step-down in trend productivity growth from its pre-crisis value. If so, they may judge
that the level and growth rate of potential output are lower than the staff estimates, and
that the unemployment rate is at, or at least no longer much above, its longer-run normal
level. Policymakers may consequently be reasonably confident that inflation will rise
toward 2 percent in the near future, provided that longer-term inflation expectations
continue to be stable. Moreover, they may have some concerns that inflation could
exceed 2 percent if inflation expectations became unanchored or the unemployment rate
undershoots its longer-run level, and they may see continuing to hold the real federal
funds rate below zero as making such a scenario more likely. They may also note that,
because monetary policy affects the economy with a lag, policy normalization should
begin before the Committee has fully achieved its long-run goals particularly because,
even after the first increase in the target range for the federal funds rate, monetary policy
will remain [very] accommodative for some time.
In addition, in light of the extraordinarily high level of excess reserves held by the
banking system, and amid indications that banks have been slowly easing their credit
standards for some time, participants may have become more concerned about the
possibility that a brisk acceleration in lending could put significant upward pressure on
aggregate demand and inflation. Moreover, some participants may judge that the current
very accommodative stance of policy risks allowing financial imbalances to build,
potentially giving rise to another boom-bust credit cycle. Although this scenario might
not be a feature of participants’ baseline forecast, they might judge the adverse
consequences of such an outcome to be sufficiently severe to justify a less-
accommodative stance of monetary policy to help forestall the scenario. In view of these
considerations, policymakers may want to signal their willingness to increase the federal
funds rate target range earlier than investors currently anticipate.
A decision to issue a statement along the lines of Alternative C would surprise
market participants. Respondents to the Survey of Primary Dealers and the Survey of
Market Participants place, on average, only 10 percent probability on the first target-
range increase occurring in June and thus would be surprised by the high likelihood
placed by Alternative C on an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate at the
June meeting. In response to a statement like that in Alternative C, medium- and longer-
term real interest rates would likely rise, inflation compensation and equity prices would
probably decline, while the dollar would likely appreciate. Investors might further react
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 28 of 48

--- Page 32 ---

by revising up the expected pace of policy tightening in the period after liftoff—a
reaction that could magnify the increase in longer-term interest rates in the wake of the
announcement.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A
Policymakers may view recent data as worrisome, even after accounting for the
adverse effects of severe winter weather and other transitory factors. Indeed, they may be
concerned that the marked slowdown in the growth rate of real private final demand in
the first quarter is a sign that economic growth in coming quarters will not be sufficient to
make further progress toward maximum employment. Although policymakers might
judge that the previous declines in energy prices have boosted household purchasing
power, they may have been disappointed by the degree to which this boost has translated
into actual spending, especially in light of a string of soft retail sales reports, and they
might see they impetus to spending from this source as receding. They might also cite
the recent weakness in business investment apart from the drag associated with the drop
in energy production as an indication that the underlying trend in private domestic
demand is unsatisfactory. In light of weakness in key European economies and the
substantial appreciation of the dollar over recent months, these participants may also see
substantial drag emanating from a continued decline in U.S. net exports. Based on these
judgments, some participants may want to lay out more stringent conditions than in
Alternative B for beginning to normalize the stance of monetary policy.
Some participants may judge not only that the modal outlook is unsatisfactory but
also that the downside risks to that outlook are sizable. They may have become less
confident that the underlying strength of the recovery is sufficient to support ongoing
improvement in labor market conditions. In addition, they may not want to rule out the
possibility of spillovers to the U.S. economy and financial markets triggered by a
disorderly resolution of the Greek situation. They may therefore want to indicate that the
risks to the outlook for economic activity and the labor market are “tilted to the
downside.” Furthermore, continued below-target inflation may have underscored
participants’ concerns regarding downside risks to price stability and the credibility of the
Committee’s commitment to achieving its dual mandate. Following this line of
reasoning, they may see the configuration of risks as pointing to the need for greater
policy stimulus now.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 29 of 48

--- Page 33 ---

With inflation running well below 2 percent and the inflation outlook subdued,
with progress in restoring maximum employment having slowed or stalled, and with
renewed concerns—heightened by the asymmetry induced by the zero lower bound—
regarding the risk of a renewed subpar economic recovery, some policymakers may
conclude that the Committee likely will need to provide additional policy
accommodation. Indeed, they might also see the equilibrium real interest rate as having
declined further, in which case policy easing might be needed simply to restore the
previous degree of policy accommodation. In light of these considerations, policymakers
might view it as desirable to announce that the Committee would be prepared to use all of
its tools as necessary to return inflation to 2 percent over the medium run, and to indicate
that the return of the federal funds rate to a more normal level is likely to be gradual. If
that is the case, policymakers may want to issue a statement like that in Alternative A, in
an effort to align market expectations for the path of federal funds rate with their view of
the appropriate policy path. In particular, they may favor the language in the fifth
paragraph of Alternative A that states the Committee’s expectation that “the economy
will evolve in a manner that warrants a gradual increase in the target federal funds rate.”
Participants may view such language as providing further clarity about the Committee’s
reaction function and as likely to be helpful in aligning the market’s expectation of the
future federal funds rate path with that of the Committee.
An statement like that in Alternative A would surprise market participants.
Investors would likely push further into the future their expectations of the date of the
first increase in the target range for the federal funds rate. Longer-term yields could
decline, although this effect would likely be limited if investors perceived the statement
as adding to the upside risks to inflation. Equity prices would probably rise, and the
foreign exchange value of the dollar would likely decline.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 30 of 48

--- Page 34 ---

DIRECTIVE
The directive that was issued after the March meeting appears on the next page. It
is followed by a draft of the April directive for Alternatives A, B, and C. This draft
directive is the same for all three alternative statements; it is also identical to the March
directive.
Regarding balance sheet policies, the draft directive continues to instruct the Desk
to maintain the current policy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of
agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 31 of 48

--- Page 35 ---

March 2015 Directive
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee seeks
monetary and financial conditions that will foster maximum employment and price
stability. In particular, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain such conditions. The
Committee directs the Desk to maintain its policy of rolling over maturing Treasury
securities into new issues and its policy of reinvesting principal payments on all agency
debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities. The
Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed
securities transactions. The System Open Market Account manager and the secretary
will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s
balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of
maximum employment and price stability.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 32 of 48

--- Page 36 ---

Directive for April 2015 Alternatives A, B, and C
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee seeks
monetary and financial conditions that will foster maximum employment and price
stability. In particular, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain such conditions. The
Committee directs the Desk to maintain its policy of rolling over maturing Treasury
securities into new issues and its policy of reinvesting principal payments on all agency
debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities. The
Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed
securities transactions. The System Open Market Account manager and the secretary
will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s
balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of
maximum employment and price stability.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 33 of 48

--- Page 37 ---

(This page is intentionally blank.)
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 34 of 48

--- Page 38 ---

Projections
BALANCE SHEET, INCOME, AND MONETARY BASE
The staff has developed a projection of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and
income statement that is broadly consistent with the monetary policy assumptions
incorporated in the staff’s forecast presented in Tealbook, Book A. We assume that the
federal funds rate will lift off from its effective lower bound in the third quarter of 2015
and that rollovers of maturing Treasury securities and the reinvestment of principal
received on agency securities will continue through the first quarter of 2016. These dates
are one quarter later than in the March Tealbook scenario. Thereafter, reinvestments
cease, and the SOMA portfolio shrinks through redemptions of maturing Treasury
securities and agency debt securities as well as paydowns of principal from agency MBS.
Regarding the Federal Reserve’s use of its policy normalization tools, we assume that the
level of overnight reverse repurchase agreements (ON RRPs) runs at $100 billion through
the end of 2018 and then falls to zero by the end of 2019, and that term deposits and term
RRPs are not used during the normalization period.1,2 The bullets below highlight some
key features of the projections for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and income
statement under these assumptions.
 Balance sheet. As shown in the exhibit “Total Assets and Selected Balance Sheet
Items” and in the table that follows, the size of the portfolio is normalized in the
second quarter of 2021, the same quarter as in the March Tealbook. 3 Treasury
holdings are projected to be a bit higher through the medium term, which reflects
our assumption that reinvestments cease one quarter later than in the March
Tealbook.4 However, agency MBS holdings are somewhat lower over most of the
1 Use of RRPs or term deposits would result in a shift in the composition of Federal Reserve
liabilities—a decline in reserve balances and an equal increase in RRPs or term deposits—but would not
produce an overall change in the size of the balance sheet.
2 We also assume that RRPs associated with foreign official and international accounts remain
around $135 billion throughout the projection period.
3 The size of the balance sheet is considered normalized when reserve balances reach an assumed
$100 billion steady-state level. At this time, the size of the securities portfolio is primarily determined by
the level of currency in circulation plus Federal Reserve capital and the projected steady-state level of
reserve balances.
4 The SOMA portfolio is projected to receive about $140 billion in principal repayments in the
first quarter of 2016, which are now assumed to be reinvested.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 35 of 48

--- Page 39 ---

April Tealbook March Tealbook
Total Assets
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Reserve Balances
Billions of dollars
5500
Monthly
5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Billions of dollars
3500
Monthly
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
SOMA Treasury Holdings
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
SOMA Agency MBS Holdings
Billions of dollars
3000
Monthly
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Total Assets and Selected Balance Sheet Items
Billions of dollars
2200
Monthly
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 36 of 48

--- Page 40 ---

FederalReserveBalanceSheet
End-of-YearProjections--AprilTealbook
(Billionsofdollars)
Mar31,2015 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 2025
Totalassets 4,481 4,427 3,704 2,666 2,270 2,459 2,670
Selectedassets
Loansandothercreditextensions* 3 0 0 0 0 0 0
Securitiesheldoutright 4,228 4,207 3,523 2,515 2,139 2,337 2,556
U.S.Treasurysecurities 2,460 2,461 2,116 1,393 1,230 1,601 1,965
Agencydebtsecurities 37 33 4 2 2 2 2
Agencymortgage-backedsecurities 1,732 1,713 1,403 1,120 907 734 589
Unamortizedpremiums 203 184 141 108 86 74 65
Unamortizeddiscounts -18 -19 -16 -12 -10 -8 -7
Totalotherassets 46 48 48 48 48 48 48
Totalliabilities 4,424 4,368 3,633 2,576 2,156 2,314 2,487
Selectedliabilities
FederalReservenotesincirculation 1,314 1,371 1,545 1,670 1,812 1,970 2,142
Reverserepurchaseagreements 537 258 258 158 158 158 158
DepositswithFederalReserveBanks 2,564 2,733 1,824 741 180 180 180
Reservebalancesheldbydepositoryinstitutions 2,437 2,653 1,744 661 100 100 100
U.S.Treasury,GeneralAccount 100 75 75 75 75 75 75
Otherdeposits 26 5 5 5 5 5 5
InterestonFederalReserveNotesduetoU.S. 3 0 0 0 0 0 0
Treasury
Totalcapital 58 59 71 90 114 145 183
Source:FederalReserveH.4.1statisticalreleasesandstaffcalculations.
Note:Componentsmaynotsumtototalsduetorounding.
*Loansandothercreditextensionsincludesprimary,secondary,andseasonalcredit;centralbankliquidityswaps;andnetportfolioholdingsofMaidenLaneLLC.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 37 of 48

--- Page 41 ---

April Tealbook March Tealbook
Interest Income
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Interest Expense
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Realized Capital Gains
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Remittances to Treasury
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
−20
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
−20
Deferred Asset
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Memo: Unrealized Gains/Losses
Billions of dollars
120
End of year
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Income Projections
Billions of dollars
400
End of year
300
200
100
0
−100
−200
−300
−400
−500
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 38 of 48

--- Page 42 ---

projection period because the lower interest rate path in this projection leads to
higher prepayments. Once reserve balances reach their new steady-state level,
total assets stand at $2.2 trillion, with about $2.1 trillion in total SOMA securities
holdings. Total assets and securities holdings increase thereafter, keeping pace
with growth in currency in circulation and Federal Reserve Bank capital.
 Federal Reserve remittances. The exhibit, “Income Projections,” shows the
implications of the balance sheet projection and interest rate assumptions for
Federal Reserve income.5 Remittances to the Treasury are projected to be about
$90 billion this year (down a bit from their $100 billion peak in 2014) and then to
decline further over the next few years. Annual remittances reach their trough at
a bit above $30 billion in 2019; no deferred asset is recorded.6 The Federal
Reserve’s cumulative remittances from 2009 through 2025 are about $1 trillion,
approximately $250 billion above the staff estimate of the amount that would
have been observed had there been no asset purchase programs, and roughly
$30 billion greater than in the March Tealbook projection.7
 Unrealized gains or losses. The unrealized gain or loss position of the SOMA
portfolio is influenced importantly by the level of interest rates. The staff
estimates that the portfolio was in an unrealized gain position of about
$225 billion as of the end of March.8 Reflecting the assumed rise in longer-term
interest rates over the next several years, the position is projected to shift to an
unrealized loss by the middle of 2016. The SOMA position reaches a peak
unrealized loss of about $150 billion in 2019, roughly $100 billion less than
projected in the March Tealbook, which reflects the lower 10-year Treasury yield
in this projection. At the end of that year, roughly $100 billion of the unrealized
5 We assume the interest rate paid on reserve balances remains 25 basis points as long as the
federal funds rate remains at its effective lower bound. In addition, we assume that, once firming of the
policy rate begins, the spread between the interest rate paid on reserve balances and the ON RRP rate is
25 basis points. Moreover, we assume that the effective federal funds rate will average about 15 basis
points below the rate paid on reserve balances and about 10 basis points above the ON RRP rate.
6 In the event that a Federal Reserve Bank’s earnings fall short of the amount necessary to cover
its operating costs, pay dividends, and equate surplus to capital paid-in, a deferred asset would be recorded.
7 The staff estimate is a linear interpolation from 2006 to 2025 of actual 2006 income and
projected 2025 income.
8 The Federal Reserve reports the level and the change in the quarter-end net unrealized gain/loss
position of the SOMA portfolio to the public in the “Federal Reserve Banks Combined Quarterly Financial
Reports,” available on the Board’s website at
http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_fedfinancials.htm#quarterly.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 39 of 48

--- Page 43 ---

Projectionsforthe10-YearTreasuryTermPremiumEffect
(BasisPoints)
April March
Date
Tealbook Tealbook
QuarterlyAverages
2015:Q2 -109 -108
Q3 -104 -103
Q4 -100 -98
2016:Q1 -95 -94
Q2 -90 -89
Q3 -86 -85
Q4 -81 -81
2017:Q4 -66 -66
2018:Q4 -55 -54
2019:Q4 -45 -45
2020:Q4 -38 -38
2021:Q4 -32 -32
2022:Q4 -28 -28
2023:Q4 -23 -23
2024:Q4 -18 -18
2025:Q4 -13 -13
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 40 of 48

--- Page 44 ---

losses can be attributed to the portfolio of Treasury securities and $50 billion to
the portfolio of MBS. The unrealized loss position then narrows through 2025, as
securities acquired under the large-scale asset purchase programs mature or pay
down and new securities are added to the portfolio at then-current market rates.
 Term premium effects. As shown in the table “Projections for the 10-Year
Treasury Term Premium Effect,” the effect of the Federal Reserve’s elevated
stock of longer-term securities on the term premium embedded in the 10-year
Treasury yield in the second quarter of 2015 is estimated to be negative 109 basis
points, essentially unchanged from the projection in the March Tealbook. Over
the next couple of years, the term premium effect diminishes at a pace of about
5 basis points per quarter, reflecting the projected shrinking of the portfolio.
 Monetary base. As shown in the final table, “Projections for the Monetary Base,”
once liftoff occurs in the third quarter of 2015, the monetary base first grows less
rapidly and then shrinks through the second quarter of 2021, primarily because
redemptions of securities generate corresponding reductions in reserve balances.
Starting around mid-2021, after reserve balances are assumed to have stabilized at
$100 billion, the monetary base begins to expand in line with the increase in
currency in circulation.9
9 The projection for the monetary base depends critically on the FOMC’s choice of tools during
normalization. In this projection, a steady $100 billion take-up in an ON RRP facility is assumed and,
therefore, the level of the monetary base is lower than it would otherwise be until 2019 (when the facility is
assumed to be phased out). The projected growth rate of the monetary base, however, is generally
unaffected. If the FOMC employs additional reserve-draining tools during normalization or ON RRP
takeup is larger than assumed, the projected level of reserve balances and the monetary base could decline
quite markedly.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 41 of 48

--- Page 45 ---

ProjectionsfortheMonetaryBase
(Percentchange,annualrate;notseasonallyadjusted)
April March
Date
Tealbook Tealbook
Quarterly
2015:Q2 32.6 13.3
Q3 3.3 0.2
Q4 -0.3 0.4
2016:Q1 0.2 -4.3
Q2 -5.0 -13.9
Q3 -10.6 -11.0
Q4 -9.6 -9.1
Annual
2017 -10.4 -10.3
2018 -15.2 -15.6
2019 -13.8 -14.4
2020 -13.5 -14.9
2021 -4.6 -5.5
2022 3.5 4.2
2023 3.6 4.3
2024 3.6 4.3
2025 3.6 4.3
Note: Foryears,Q4toQ4;forquarters,calculatedfromcorrespondingaveragelevels.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 42 of 48

--- Page 46 ---

MONEY
M2 growth is expected to moderate a bit in the second quarter of 2015; thereafter,
M2 is projected to contract notably through mid-2016 and then to move up slowly over
the remainder of the forecast period as the projected increase in the target range for the
federal funds rate and the associated rise in the opportunity cost of holding money
restrains money demand. The increase in the opportunity cost is expected to hold M2
growth below that of nominal GDP in 2016 and, to a lesser extent, in 2017. There are
significant uncertainties surrounding the M2 forecast over the period of policy
normalization. For example, it is possible that banks may respond to increases in short-
term rates somewhat differently than in the past, both because the target federal funds
rate has been close to zero for an extended period and because of important changes in
bank regulation. (See the accompanying box, “The Transmission of Monetary Policy to
Deposit Rates.”)
M2 Monetary Aggregate Projections
(Percent change, annual rate; seasonally adjusted)*
Quarterly
2015: Q1 7.6
Q2 4.5
Q3 -0.1
Q4 -3.1
2016: Q1 -2.8
Q2 -0.7
Q3 0.6
Q4 1.3
2017: Q1 1.5
Q2 1.7
Q3 1.8
Q4 2.0
Annual
2015 2.2
2016 -0.4
2017 1.8
Note: This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates
in the Tealbook forecast. Actual data through April 13, 2015;
projections thereafter.
* Quarterly growth rates are computed from quarter averages. Annual
growth rates are calculated using the change from fourth quarter of
previous year to fourth quarter of year indicated.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 43 of 48

--- Page 47 ---

The Transmission of Monetary Policy to Deposit Rates
The timing and degree of the pass‐through of changes in the federal funds rate to other
interest rates are important parts of the monetary transmission mechanism. Here we
consider the effects of tighter monetary policy on commercial banks’ deposit rates and
discuss the possibility that the pass‐through from policy‐rate changes to deposit rates may
differ substantially in the next tightening cycle from that observed in previous episodes.
There are two principal reasons why this might be the case. The first reason is that the next
tightening cycle will follow an extended period in which the federal funds rate was close to
zero. The second reason is that the regulatory framework within which banks operate has
changed.
In past episodes of monetary policy tightening, the average rate paid on deposits has
generally been sticky, exhibiting a mildly convex relationship with the target federal funds
rate (left panel).1 In particular, during each of the three most recent periods of policy
tightening, the average deposit rate adjusted upward more slowly than the target federal
funds rate and tended to accelerate later in the tightening cycle.2 Specifically, the typical
pattern was one in which, during the first 100‐basis‐point increase in the tightening cycle, the
deposit rate rose by at most 20 basis points, but during the last 100‐basis‐point increase, it
rose by at least 50 basis points. In addition, as shown by the panel to the right, the spread
between the target federal funds rate and the average deposit rate typically widened by
almost 200 basis points in the first two years after the onset of policy tightening. Based on
these historical patterns, the staff estimates that, in the wake of the first 100‐basis‐point
increase in the target federal funds rate, the average deposit rate would increase about
25 basis points.
In the next tightening cycle, however, the pass‐through from changes in the target federal
funds rate to deposit rates could differ from that seen in previous tightening periods for the
1 Our analysis is based on quarterly Call Report data. Because the Call Report does not distinguish
between the interest expense that banks incur on retail versus wholesale deposits, we use interest
expense on total interest‐bearing deposits to measure the average interest paid on such deposits.
2 The three most recent monetary tightening episodes are 1993:Q4 to 1995:Q1, 1999:Q1 to 2000:Q2,
and 2004:Q1 to 2006:Q3.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 44 of 48

--- Page 48 ---

two key reasons noted above. The first reason reflects the repercussions of near‐zero target
federal funds rates. Throughout recent years, the target range for the federal funds rate has
remained at 0 to ¼ percent. This situation has resulted in a compression of the spread
between the target federal funds rate and deposit rates, as banks generally do not set their
deposit rates below zero. This consideration suggests that, all else equal, the spread might
widen more rapidly during the initial stages of the coming tightening cycle than has typically
been observed in earlier tightening episodes.
The second reason for expecting a different pass‐through relationship from that observed
historically is that commercial banks are now required to meet new liquidity regulations and
stricter capital regulations. Under the Basel III‐based liquidity requirements, banks have a
strong incentive to maintain more liquid balance sheets both by holding a greater share of
high‐quality liquid assets (HQLA) in their portfolios, including reserve balances, and by relying
on more stable sources of funding. At the same time, banks generally seek to economize on
HQLA because, all else equal, a higher amount of such assets in their portfolios reduces both
their net interest margins and their regulatory leverage ratios. In this environment, banks
have a stronger incentive than in the past to fund themselves with retail deposits rather than
wholesale deposits because the new liquidity regulations treat retail deposits as a relatively
stable source of funding in periods of financial stress, while wholesale deposits are treated as
a significantly less stable source of funding, especially in the case of the so‐called non‐
operational deposits provided by financial entities.
As a consequence of the new regulatory landscape and banks’ response to it, we expect that
banks will tend to compete more aggressively for retail deposits than in the past, a situation
that could make rates on these deposits somewhat more sensitive to changes in the target
federal funds rate than in previous tightening cycles.3 At the same time, banks have an
incentive to reduce their issuance of some types of wholesale deposits. Indeed, a few large
banks reportedly are already doing so, with some of the deposit funds having shifted to
smaller banks and nonbanks.
Overall, taking into account both the fact that the policy rate has been at its effective lower
bound and the presence of the new bank regulations described above, the average deposit
rate could rise more slowly than usual at the onset of policy normalization. However, after
interest rates have moved further above zero and the regulatory effects become more
prominent, changes in the regulatory environment could lead the spread to settle down at a
level that is narrower than that typically observed in the past, and movements in the average
deposit rate may become more closely linked to changes in the target federal funds rate. Of
course, the timing and degree of the pass‐through are uncertain, as they depend on the
quantitative effects of these two factors on the average deposit rate.4
3 Retail and wholesale deposits currently account for about 60 percent and 20 percent,
respectively, of banks’ liabilities.
4 In addition, other factors may be expected to affect the pass‐through of changes in the target
federal funds rate to deposit rates, including the presence of the Federal Reserve’s IOER and ON RRP
policy tools, as well as other regulatory changes such as the upcoming money market mutual fund
reforms, the change to the FDIC deposit insurance assessment base, and the repeal of Regulation Q.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 45 of 48

--- Page 49 ---

(This page is intentionally blank.)
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Page 46 of 48

--- Page 50 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
Abbreviations
ABS asset-backed securities
BEA Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce
BHC bank holding company
CDS credit default swaps
C&I commercial and industrial
CLO collateralized loan obligation
CMBS commercial mortgage-backed securities
CPI consumer price index
CRE commercial real estate
Desk Open Market Desk
ECB European Central Bank
EME emerging market economy
FDIC Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
FOMC Federal Open Market Committee; also, the Committee
GCF general collateral finance
GDI gross domestic income
GDP gross domestic product
LIBOR London interbank offered rate
MBS mortgage-backed securities
NIPA national income and product accounts
OIS overnight index swap
ON RRP overnight reverse repurchase agreement
PCE personal consumption expenditures
repo repurchase agreement
RMBS residential mortgage-backed securities
RRP reverse repurchase agreement
SCOOS Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms
Page 47 of 48

--- Page 51 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) April 23, 2015
SEP Summary of Economic Projections
SFA Supplemental Financing Account
SLOOS Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices
SOMA System Open Market Account
TBA to be announced (for example, TBA market)
TGA U.S. Treasury’s General Account
TIPS Treasury inflation-protected securities
TPE Term premium effects
Page 48 of 48

# Tables

## Page_13_Table_1


| 2015   |    | 2016   | 2017   | 2018   |
|--------|----|--------|--------|--------|
| H1     | H2 |        |        |        |


## Page_46_Table_1


| M2 Monetary Aggregate Projections
(Percent change, annual rate; seasonally adjusted)*                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Quarterly
2015: Q1 7.6
Q2 4.5
Q3 -0.1
Q4 -3.1
2016: Q1 -2.8
Q2 -0.7
Q3 0.6
Q4 1.3
2017: Q1 1.5
Q2 1.7
Q3 1.8
Q4 2.0
Annual
2015 2.2
2016 -0.4
2017 1.8                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Note: This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates
in the Tealbook forecast. Actual data through April 13, 2015;
projections thereafter.
* Quarterly growth rates are computed from quarter averages. Annual
growth rates are calculated using the change from fourth quarter of
previous year to fourth quarter of year indicated. |