# 20151216_tealbook.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:46:17*
*Pages: 65, Tables: 2*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that
material was received on a confidential basis. Redacted material is indicated by
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content. All redacted
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of
Information Act.
Content last modified 01/08/2021.

--- Page 2 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR)
Report to the FOMC
on Economic Conditions
and Monetary Policy
Book B
Monetary Policy:
Strategies and Alternatives
December 10, 2015
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
by the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

--- Page 3 ---

Authorized for Public Release
(This page is intentionally blank.)

--- Page 4 ---

Monetary Policy Strategies
The top panel of the first exhibit, “Policy Rules and the Staff Projection,”
provides near-term prescriptions for the federal funds rate from four policy rules: the
Taylor (1993) rule, the Taylor (1999) rule, an inertial version of the Taylor (1999) rule,
and a first-difference rule.1 These prescriptions take as given the staff’s baseline
projections for real activity and inflation in the near term, shown in the middle panels.
All of the Taylor-type rules prescribe an immediate increase in the federal funds rate.
The Taylor (1993) and Taylor (1999) rules call for sizable adjustments in the policy rate
to values near 2½ percent over the near term. By contrast, the inertial Taylor (1999) rule
prescribes a level of the federal funds rate of only ½ percent in the first quarter of 2016
because this rule places a considerable weight on keeping the federal funds rate close to
its previous value. The first-difference rule, which also places considerable weight on the
lagged federal funds rate, calls for the policy rate to edge above the current target range
next quarter. The prescriptions of the Taylor type rules are generally close to those
reported in the October Tealbook while those of the first-difference rule are somewhat
less accommodative, reflecting a faster closing of the output gap in the Tealbook
projection.
The bottom panel of the first exhibit reports the Tealbook-consistent estimate of a
notion of the equilibrium real federal funds rate, r*, generated using the FRB/US model.
This measure is an estimate of the real federal funds rate that, if maintained over a 12-
quarter period, makes the output gap equal to zero in the final quarter of that period. The
current estimate of r*, at 1.24 percent, is 50 basis points higher than the corresponding
estimate in the October Tealbook. The increase reflects the fact that the staff projects
higher resource utilization than in the previous Tealbook, largely due to an upward
revision in federal government spending, as discussed in Tealbook A. The panel also
reports the average of the real federal funds rate in the Tealbook baseline projection for
the same 12-quarter period used to compute r*.2 This average is 0.36 percent,
1 The appendix to this section provides details on each of the four rules.
2 While r* and the average projected real federal funds rate are calculated over the same
12-quarter period, they need not be associated with the same macroeconomic outcomes even when their
values are identical. The reason is that, in the r* simulations, the real federal funds rate is held constant
over the entire 12-quarter period whereas, in the Tealbook baseline, the real federal funds rate can vary
over time. Distinct paths of real short-term rates can, in turn, generate different paths for inflation and
economic activity, even if they have the same 12-quarter average.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 1 of 62

--- Page 5 ---

Policy Rules and the Staff Projection
Near-Term Prescriptions of Selected Policy Rules1
(Percent)
2016:Q1 2016:Q2
Taylor (1993) rule 2.41 2.37
Previous Tealbook 2.53 2.50
Taylor (1999) rule 2.41 2.51
Previous Tealbook 2.48 2.57
Inertial Taylor (1999) rule 0.51 0.81
Previous Tealbook outlook 0.52 0.83
First-difference rule 0.37 0.54
Previous Tealbook outlook 0.25 0.34
Key Elements of the Staff Projection
GDP Gap PCE Prices Excluding Food and Energy
Percent Four-quarter change Percent
3.0
Current Tealbook
Previous Tealbook 2
2.5
1
2.0
0 1.5
1.0
-1
0.5
-2
0.0
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Real Federal Funds Rate Estimates 2
(Percent)
Current Previous
Tealbook Tealbook
Tealbook-consistent FRB/US r* 1.24 0.74
Current real federal funds rate −1.16 −1.17
Average projected real federal funds rate 0.36 0.21
1. For rules that have a lagged policy rate as a right-hand-side variable, the lines denoted "Previous Tealbook outlook" report rule prescriptions based
on the previous Tealbook’s staff outlook, but jumping off from the average value for the policy rate thus far in the current quarter.
2. The "Tealbook-consistent FRB/US r* " is the level of the real federal funds rate that, if maintained over a 12-quarter period in the FRB/US model, sets
the output gap equal to zero in the final quarter of that period. The "current real federal funds rate" is the difference between the federal funds rate and
the trailing four-quarter change in core PCE. The "average projected real federal funds rate" is the 12-quarter average of the current real federal funds
rate and its projected values under the Tealbook baseline over the next 11 quarters.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
3.0
2
2.5
1
2.0
0 1.5
1.0
-1
0.5
-2
0.0
Page 2 of 62

--- Page 6 ---

0.88 percentage point below the estimate of r*. The panel further reports a measure of
the current real federal funds rate constructed as the difference between the mid-point of
the prevailing target range for the federal funds rate and the trailing four-quarter change
in the core PCE price index. This measure, at –1.16 percent, is almost unchanged from
the October Tealbook.
The second exhibit, “Policy Rule Simulations,” reports dynamic simulations of
the FRB/US model under the Taylor (1993) rule, the Taylor (1999) rule, and a first-
difference rule.3 These simulations reflect the endogenous responses of inflation and the
output gap when the federal funds rate follows the paths implied by the different policy
rules, subject to an effective lower bound of 12½ basis points for the federal funds rate.4
The results for each rule presented in these and subsequent simulations depend
importantly on the assumptions that policymakers will adhere to the rule in the future and
that market participants as well as price and wage setters fully understand the policy rule
that will be pursued and its implications for real activity and inflation.
The second exhibit also displays the implications of following the baseline
monetary policy assumptions in the current staff forecast.5 As Tealbook A discusses, the
staff assumes that the first increase in the federal funds rate will occur at the December
FOMC meeting. After departing from its effective lower bound, the federal funds rate is
assumed to follow the prescriptions of the inertial version of the Taylor (1999) rule. The
federal funds rate increases about 30 basis points per quarter for the first three years after
liftoff, reaching about 3½ percent by the end of 2018. The pace of tightening
subsequently slows, and the federal funds rate peaks at around 4¼ percent in 2020—
consistent with the high projected level of resource utilization around that time—before
eventually returning to its longer-run normal level of 3¼ percent later in the decade.
The Taylor (1993) and Taylor (1999) rules call for a sharp tightening of policy
starting next quarter and produce paths for the real federal funds rate that lie significantly
3 Simulations pertaining to the inertial Taylor (1999) rule have been dropped from the exhibit
because policy prescriptions and macroeconomic outcomes are, at present, nearly indistinguishable from
those under the staff’s baseline. For reference, the tables “Outcomes under Alternative Policies” and
“Outcomes under Alternative Policies, Quarterly” continue to report results for the inertial Taylor (1999).
4 Because of these endogenous responses, prescriptions from the dynamic simulations can differ
from those shown in the top panel of the first exhibit.
5 The dynamic simulations discussed here and below incorporate the assumptions about
underlying economic conditions that are used in the staff’s baseline forecast, including the macroeconomic
effects of the Committee’s asset holdings from the large-scale asset purchase programs.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 3 of 62

--- Page 7 ---

Policy Rule Simulations
Nominal Federal Funds Rate Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
6 6.0
Taylor (1993) rule
Staff’s estimate of the natural rate
Taylor (1999) rule
First-difference rule
5
Tealbook baseline
4
5.5
3
2
5.0
1
0
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
4.5
Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent
3
4.0
2 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
1
PCE Inflation
Four-quarter average Percent
3.0
0
-1
2.5
-2
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
2.0
Real 10-year Treasury Yield
Percent
3 1.5
1.0
2
0.5
1
0.0
0
-0.5
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Note: The policy rule simulations in this exhibit are based on rules that respond to core inflation. This choice of rule
specification was made in light of the tendency for current and near-term core inflation rates to outperform headline
inflation rates as predictors of the medium-term behavior of headline inflation.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
6 6.0
5
4
5.5
3
2
5.0
1
0
4.5
3
4.0
2
1
3.0
0
-1
2.5
-2
2.0
3 1.5
1.0
2
0.5
1
0.0
0
-0.5
Page 4 of 62

--- Page 8 ---

above the Tealbook baseline path over the next few years. As a result, these rules lead to
less pronounced undershooting of the natural rate of unemployment than the baseline
policy through 2018. The Taylor (1999) rule prescribes somewhat higher policy rates
than the Taylor (1993) rule over the period shown because it places more weight on the
output gap. As a consequence, the Taylor (1999) rule also generates a higher trajectory
of the unemployment rate and a lower trajectory of inflation than the Taylor (1993) rule.
In contrast to the Taylor-type rules, the first-difference rule prescribes a pace of
increases in the federal funds rate that is similar to the Tealbook baseline through 2018.
At that point, the federal funds rate levels off under the first-difference rule whereas it
keeps rising for a time under the Tealbook baseline. This divergence occurs because the
first-difference rule, which responds to the expected change in the output gap rather than
to its level, reacts to the slower pace of economic growth projected late in the decade.
The lower path of the federal funds rate in the medium run under the first-difference rule,
in conjunction with expectations of higher price and wage inflation in the future, leads to
lower long-term real rates and thus to higher levels of resource utilization and inflation in
the short run. The first-difference rule generates outcomes for the unemployment rate
over the forecast period that are markedly below the staff’s estimate of the natural rate
and the unemployment rate paths generated under the other policy rules. Relative to the
other simple policy rules, inflation runs a bit closer to the Committee’s 2 percent longer-
run inflation objective over the next few years before overshooting the target by a greater
margin and for a longer time later on.
The third exhibit, “Optimal Control Policy under Commitment,” compares
optimal control simulations for this Tealbook’s outlook with those reported in October.
Policymakers are assumed to place equal weights on keeping headline PCE inflation
close to the Committee’s 2 percent goal, on keeping the unemployment rate close to the
staff’s estimate of the natural rate of unemployment, and on minimizing changes in the
federal funds rate. The concept of optimal control that is employed here corresponds to a
commitment policy under which the plans that policymakers make today are assumed to
constrain future policy choices.6
6 The results for optimal control policy under discretion (in which policymakers cannot credibly
commit to carrying out a plan involving policy choices that would be suboptimal at the time that these
choices have to be implemented) are similar.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 5 of 62

--- Page 9 ---

Optimal Control Policy under Commitment
Nominal Federal Funds Rate Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
6 6.0
Optimal control (current Tealbook)
Staff’s estimate of the natural rate
Optimal control (previous Tealbook)
Tealbook baseline
5
4
5.5
3
2
5.0
1
0
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
4.5
Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent
3
4.0
2 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
1
PCE Inflation
Four-quarter average Percent
3.0
0
-1
2.5
-2
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
2.0
Real 10-year Treasury Yield
Percent
3 1.5
1.0
2
0.5
1
0.0
0
-0.5
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
6 6.0
5
4
5.5
3
2
5.0
1
0
4.5
3
4.0
2
1
3.0
0
-1
2.5
-2
2.0
3 1.5
1.0
2
0.5
1
0.0
0
-0.5
Page 6 of 62

--- Page 10 ---

In the Tealbook baseline projection, unemployment falls well below the staff’s
estimate of the natural rate over the next several years. Under the preferences embedded
in optimal control, policymakers judge this undershooting of the natural rate to be costly,
leading them to tighten policy more than in the Tealbook baseline. Accordingly, the path
for the real federal funds rate is almost 1 percentage point higher, on average, than the
Tealbook baseline path over the period shown. The trajectory for the real 10-year
Treasury yield is also higher. The tighter policy under optimal control results in a path of
the unemployment rate that runs substantially closer to the staff’s estimate of the natural
rate than the Tealbook baseline projection. Headline PCE inflation is also slightly lower
than in the baseline over the simulation period, consistent with lower levels of resource
utilization.7
OPTIMAL CONTROL IN THE PRESENCE OF TERM-PREMIUM SHOCKS
Longer-term yields, which are at the center of the monetary policy transmission
mechanism, depend not only on current and expected future short-term rates but also on
term premiums. These premiums can vary for many reasons that are often not well
understood. The special exhibit, “Optimal Control in the Presence of Term-Premium
Shocks,” examines the implications for policy of two scenarios in which term premiums
deviate from their baseline paths around the time of the first increase in the federal funds
rate. The first scenario explores the risk that financial markets could overreact, resulting
in a greater tightening of financial conditions than intended—a “tightening tantrum.”
The other scenario considers the risk that term premiums could decline for a time relative
to their expected levels after the onset of tightening, as was the case during the
“conundrum” episode of 2004-2005.8
In the “tightening tantrum” scenario, the term premiums on the FRB/US model’s
5-year, 10-year, and 30-year Treasury rates are assumed to jump 100 basis points in the
first quarter of 2016 and then return to their baseline values over the course of about year,
as shown by the blue dashed line in the middle-left panel of the exhibit. This calibration
7 In the simulations shown in this section of the June and July Tealbooks, the optimal control path
for the federal funds rate was very similar to the Tealbook baseline path. Since then, the optimal control
paths have been higher than the corresponding Tealbook path, with the average difference between the two
paths rising with each Tealbook.
8 The box “Financial Market Responses to Episodes of Tightening” in the September Tealbook B
provides a discussion of term premiums during the 2004–2005 “conundrum” and 2013 “taper tantrum”
episodes.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 7 of 62

--- Page 11 ---

Optimal Control in the Presence of Term-Premium Shocks
Nominal Federal Funds Rate Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
8 6.0
Standard
Staff’s estimate of the natural rate
Tightening tantrum
Conundrum 7
Tealbook baseline
6
5 5.5
4
3
2
5.0
1
0
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
4.5
10-year Treasury Term Premium
Percent
2
1 4.0
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
0 PCE Inflation
Four-quarter average Percent
3.0
-1
2.5
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Note: The Tealbook baseline and standard optimal control
embed identical term premium assumptions.
2.0
Real 10-year Treasury Yield
Percent
3 1.5
1.0
2
0.5
1
0.0
0
-0.5
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
8 6.0
7
6
5 5.5
4
3
2
5.0
1
0
4.5
2
1 4.0
0
3.0
-1
2.5
2.0
3 1.5
1.0
2
0.5
1
0.0
0
-0.5
Page 8 of 62

--- Page 12 ---

of the shock is largely illustrative; however, a shock of this magnitude and duration is
near the upper edge of the range of the estimated cumulative increase in 10-year Treasury
term premiums during the “taper tantrum” episode over the late spring and summer of
2013.9
As shown in the bottom-left panel, the temporary increase in term premiums in
the tightening-tantrum scenario results in a sharp spike in the real 10-year Treasury yield
in early 2016. Optimal control does not offset much of the effects of the spike in term
premiums on longer-term real rates because the contractionary shock helps raise
unemployment closer to the staff’s estimate of the natural rate in the near term.10 As in
the standard optimal control, this scenario calls for tightening policy gradually starting
next quarter. The federal funds rate is, on average, about 25 basis points lower from
2016 to 2020 than in the standard optimal control. This lower path for the federal funds
rate results in real 10-year Treasury yields that are slightly below those of the standard
optimal control in mid-2016 through 2019.
The initial spike in longer-term real interest rates implies that the unemployment
rate is 0.1 percentage point higher and consequently closer to the staff’s estimate of the
natural rate than in the standard optimal control simulations, on average, through the
beginning of 2018. Inflation is little changed from its path in the standard optimal control
simulation because of the low sensitivity of inflation to slack in the model.
In the conundrum scenario, term premiums fall below their baseline path for four
quarters and revert back to baseline over the subsequent two years.11 The fall in term
premiums, which is larger and more persistent than initially expected by policymakers,
leads to a 10-year nominal Treasury rate that rises more slowly than in the standard
optimal control simulation, despite a steeper trajectory of the federal funds rate. Because
policymakers do not foresee the full sequence of shocks resulting in persistently low
longer-term rates, they tighten policy less than would be appropriate if they had fully
9 The simulation starts in the first quarter of 2016, at which time policymakers and the public
observe the jump in term premiums and understand that these premiums will subsequently revert back to
baseline.
10 Departure from the effective lower bound in the presence of a 100-basis-point spike in term
premiums is robust to the choice of the interest rate smoothing parameter in the loss function. Even with a
smoothing parameter near zero, optimal control departs from the effective lower bound immediately.
11 In the conundrum scenario, a sequence of four unexpected shocks lowers the 5-year, 10-year,
and 30-year term premiums by around 1 percentage point below the baseline path by the end of 2016.
Term premiums then gradually return to their baseline values.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 9 of 62

--- Page 13 ---

anticipated the fall in term premiums. The trough in the unemployment rate is
¼ percentage point lower than that under the standard optimal control. Thereafter,
policymakers set out a higher path for the federal funds rate in order to make up for their
previous errors, pushing up real 10-year Treasury yields and inducing an unemployment
rate above the standard optimal control path beginning in late 2020.
An important caveat associated with this analysis is that the term premium
movements in these simulations are exogenous events, occurring in isolation, and
unrelated to other factors such as changes in expected domestic and foreign economic
growth that might drive such fluctuations. If, for example, longer-term yields were to
remain persistently low because of economic weakness abroad that leads to increased
demand for long-term Treasuries, an appreciation of the dollar, lower net exports and
economic activity, then a complete analysis would require the inclusion of more shocks
to represent those factors.
The final two exhibits, “Outcomes under Alternative Policies” and “Outcomes
under Alternative Policies, Quarterly,” tabulate the simulation results for key variables
under the policy rules described earlier.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 10 of 62

--- Page 14 ---

Outcomes under Alternative Policies
(Percent change, annual rate, from end of preceding period except as noted)
2015
Measure and policy 2016 2017 2018 2019
H1 H2
Real GDP
Extended Tealbook baseline¹ 2.3 1.9 2.5 2.0 1.9 1.6
Taylor (1993) 2.3 1.9 2.2 2.0 2.0 1.8
Taylor (1999) 2.3 1.9 2.1 1.8 1.9 1.8
Inertial Taylor (1999) 2.3 1.9 2.5 2.0 1.9 1.6
First-difference 2.3 1.9 2.6 2.3 2.1 1.8
Optimal control 2.3 1.9 2.2 1.6 1.6 1.7
Unemployment Rate²
Extended Tealbook baseline¹ 5.4 5.0 4.7 4.6 4.5 4.5
Taylor (1993) 5.4 5.0 4.9 4.7 4.6 4.5
Taylor (1999) 5.4 5.0 4.9 4.8 4.7 4.7
Inertial Taylor (1999) 5.4 5.0 4.7 4.6 4.4 4.5
First-difference 5.4 5.0 4.7 4.4 4.2 4.1
Optimal control 5.4 5.0 4.9 4.9 4.9 5.0
Total PCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline¹ 0.1 0.7 1.2 1.8 2.0 2.0
Taylor (1993) 0.1 0.7 1.2 1.9 2.0 2.1
Taylor (1999) 0.1 0.7 1.2 1.8 2.0 2.0
Inertial Taylor (1999) 0.1 0.7 1.2 1.8 2.0 2.0
First-difference 0.1 0.7 1.3 2.0 2.2 2.2
Optimal control 0.1 0.7 1.1 1.7 1.9 1.9
CorePCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline¹ 1.4 1.3 1.4 1.7 1.9 2.0
Taylor (1993) 1.4 1.3 1.4 1.7 2.0 2.1
Taylor (1999) 1.4 1.3 1.4 1.7 1.9 2.0
Inertial Taylor (1999) 1.4 1.3 1.4 1.7 1.9 2.0
First-difference 1.4 1.3 1.5 1.9 2.1 2.2
Optimal control 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.8 1.9
Nominal federal funds rate³
Extended Tealbook baseline¹ 0.1 0.2 1.5 2.6 3.5 4.1
Taylor (1993) 0.1 0.2 2.8 3.4 4.0 4.1
Taylor (1999) 0.1 0.2 2.9 3.6 4.3 4.4
Inertial Taylor (1999) 0.1 0.2 1.5 2.6 3.5 4.1
First-difference 0.1 0.2 1.5 2.7 3.4 3.5
Optimal control 0.1 0.2 2.2 3.8 4.7 5.1
1. In the Tealbook baseline, the federal funds rate frst departs from an effective lower bound of 12½ basis points in
December of 2015. Thereafter,the federal funds rate follows the prescriptions of the inertial Taylor (1999) rule.
2. Percent, av erage for the fnal quarter of the period.
3. Effective rate in percent, average for the fnal quarter of the period.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 11 of 62

--- Page 15 ---

Outcomes under Alternative Policies, Quarterly
(Four-quarter percent change, except as noted)
2016 2017
Measure and policy
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Real GDP
Extended Tealbook baseline¹ 2.4 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.4 2.3 2.2 2.0
Taylor (1993) 2.4 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.1 2.1 2.0 2.0
Taylor (1999) 2.4 2.0 2.0 2.1 2.0 1.9 1.9 1.8
Inertial Taylor (1999) 2.4 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.4 2.3 2.2 2.0
First-difference 2.4 2.2 2.3 2.6 2.6 2.5 2.4 2.3
Optimal control 2.4 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.0 1.8 1.7 1.6
Unemployment Rate²
Extended Tealbook baseline¹ 4.9 4.8 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.6
Taylor (1993) 4.9 4.9 4.9 4.9 4.8 4.8 4.8 4.7
Taylor (1999) 4.9 4.9 5.0 4.9 4.9 4.9 4.9 4.8
Inertial Taylor (1999) 4.9 4.8 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.6
First-difference 4.9 4.8 4.8 4.7 4.6 4.5 4.5 4.4
Optimal control 4.9 4.9 4.9 4.9 4.9 4.9 4.9 4.9
Total PCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline¹ 0.9 0.7 0.8 1.2 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.8
Taylor (1993) 0.9 0.7 0.8 1.2 1.7 1.8 1.8 1.9
Taylor (1999) 0.9 0.7 0.8 1.2 1.6 1.7 1.7 1.8
Inertial Taylor (1999) 0.9 0.7 0.8 1.2 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.8
First-difference 0.9 0.8 0.9 1.3 1.8 1.9 1.9 2.0
Optimal control 0.9 0.7 0.8 1.1 1.5 1.6 1.6 1.7
CorePCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline¹ 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.7
Taylor (1993) 1.4 1.3 1.4 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.7
Taylor (1999) 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.7
Inertial Taylor (1999) 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.7
First-difference 1.5 1.4 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9
Optimal control 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.4 1.4 1.5 1.6
Nominal federal funds rate³
Extended Tealbook baseline¹ 0.5 0.8 1.1 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.3 2.6
Taylor (1993) 2.5 2.4 2.6 2.8 2.9 3.1 3.2 3.4
Taylor (1999) 2.5 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
Inertial Taylor (1999) 0.5 0.8 1.1 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.3 2.6
First-difference 0.5 0.8 1.2 1.5 1.8 2.1 2.4 2.7
Optimal control 0.7 1.2 1.7 2.2 2.6 3.1 3.4 3.8
1. In the Tealbook baseline, the federal funds rate frst departs from an effective lower bound of 12½ basis points in December of
2015. Thereafter,the federal funds rate follows the prescriptions of the inertial Taylor (1999) rule.
2. Percent, average for the quarter.
3. Effective rate in percent, average for the quarter.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 12 of 62

--- Page 16 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Appendix
POLICY RULES USED IN “MONETARY POLICY STRATEGIES”
The table below gives the expressions for the selected policy rules used in “Monetary
Policy Strategies.” In the table, Rt denotes the effective nominal federal funds rate for quarter t,
while the right-hand-side variables include the staff's projection of trailing four-quarter core PCE
inflation for the current quarter and three quarters ahead [math], the output gap estimate
for the current period [math], and the forecast of the three-quarter-ahead annual change in the
output gap [math]. The value of policymakers' longer-run inflation objective, denoted [math] is
2 percent.
Taylor (1993) rule [math]
Taylor (1999) rule [math]
Inertial Taylor (1999) rule [math]
First-difference rule [math]
The first two of the selected rules were studied by Taylor (1993, 1999), while the inertial
version of the Taylor (1999) rule has been featured prominently in analysis by Board staff.1 The
intercepts of these rules are chosen so that they are consistent with a 2 percent longer-run
inflation objective and a longer-run real interest rate, denoted [math], of 1 1/4 percent, a value used in
the FRB/US model. The prescriptions of the first-difference rule do not depend on the level of
the output gap or the longer-run real interest rate; see Orphanides (2003).
Near-term prescriptions from the four policy rules are calculated using Tealbook
projections for inflation and the output gap. For the rules that include the lagged policy rate as a
right-hand-side variable—the inertial Taylor (1999) rule and the first-difference rule—the lines
labeled “Previous Tealbook outlook” report prescriptions derived from the previous Tealbook
projections for inflation and the output gap, while using the same lagged funds rate value as in the
prescriptions computed for the current Tealbook. When the Tealbook is published early in a
quarter, this lagged funds rate value is set equal to the actual value of the lagged funds rate in the
previous quarter, and prescriptions are shown for the current quarter. When the Tealbook is
published late in a quarter, the prescriptions are shown for the next quarter, and the lagged policy
rate, for each of these rules, including those that use the “Previous Tealbook outlook,” is set equal
to the average value for the policy rate thus far in the quarter. For the subsequent quarter, these
rules use the lagged values from their simulated, unconstrained prescriptions.
1 See, for example, Erceg and others (2012).
Page 13 of 62

--- Page 17 ---

REAL FEDERAL FUNDS RATE ESTIMATES
The bottom panel of the exhibit, “Policy Rules and the Staff Projection,” provides an
estimate of one notion of the equilibrium real federal funds rate, r*. This measure is an estimate
of the real federal funds rate that, if maintained over a 12-quarter period (beginning in the current
quarter), makes the output gap equal to zero in the final quarter of that period using the output
projection from FRB/US, the staff’s large-scale econometric model of the U.S. economy. This
“Tealbook-consistent FRB/US r*” depends on broad array of economic factors, some of which
take the form of projected values of the model’s exogenous variables. It is generated after the
paths of exogenous variables in the FRB/US model are adjusted so that they match those in the
extended Tealbook forecast. Model simulations then determine the value of the real federal funds
rate that closes the output gap conditional on the exogenous variables in the extended baseline
forecast.
The “current real federal funds rate” reported in the panel is constructed as the difference
between the midpoint of the prevailing target range for the federal funds rate and the trailing four-
quarter change in the core PCE price index.
The “average projected real federal funds rate” reported in the panel is constructed as the
12-quarter average of the current real federal funds rate described above and its projections over
the next 11 quarters under the Tealbook baseline. This calculation is comparable to the one used
to generate r*. However, while r* and the average projected real federal funds rate are calculated
over the same 12-quarter period, they need not be associated with the same macroeconomic
outcomes even when their values are identical. The reason is that, in the r* simulations, the real
federal funds rate is held constant over the entire 12-quarter period to close the output gap at the
end of this timeframe whereas, in the Tealbook baseline, the real federal funds rate can vary over
time. Distinct paths of real short-term rates can, in turn, generate different paths for inflation and
economic activity.
FRB/US MODEL SIMULATIONS
The exhibits of “Monetary Policy Strategies” that report results from simulations of
alternative policies are derived from dynamic simulations of the FRB/US model. Each simulated
policy rule is assumed to be in force over the whole period covered by the simulation; this period
extends several decades beyond the time horizon shown in the exhibits. The simulations are
conducted under the assumption that market participants as well as price and wage setters have
perfect foresight, and are predicated on the staff’s extended Tealbook projection, which includes
the macroeconomic effects of the Committee’s large-scale asset purchase programs. When the
Tealbook is published early in a quarter, all of the simulations begin in that quarter. However,
when the Tealbook is published late in a quarter, all of the simulations begin in the subsequent
quarter.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 14 of 62

--- Page 18 ---

Authorized for Public Release
COMPUTATION OF THE OPTIMAL CONTROL POLICY UNDER COMMITMENT
The optimal control simulations posit that policymakers minimize a discounted sum of
weighted squared deviations of four-quarter headline PCE inflation [math] from the Committee's
2 percent objective, of squared deviations of the unemployment rate from the staff's estimate of
the natural rate (this difference is also known as the unemployment rate gap, [math]), and of
squared changes in the federal funds rate. The resulting loss function, shown below, embeds the
assumptions that policymakers discount the future using a quarterly discount factor [math]
and place equal weights on squared deviations of inflation, the unemployment gap, and federal
funds rate changes (that is, [math]).
[math]
The optimal control policy is the path for the federal funds rate that minimizes the above
loss function in the FRB/US model, subject to the effective lower bound constraint on nominal
interest rates, under the assumption of perfect foresight, and conditional on the staff's extended
Tealbook projection. Policy tools other than the federal funds rate are taken as given and
subsumed within the Tealbook baseline. The path chosen by policymakers today is assumed to
be credible, meaning that decision makers in the model see this path as being a binding
commitment on the future Committees; the optimal control policy takes as given the lagged value
of the federal funds rate but is otherwise unconstrained by policy decisions made prior to the
simulation period. The discounted losses are calculated over a period that ends sufficiently far
into the future that extending that period farther would not affect the policy prescriptions shown
in the exhibits.
References
Erceg, Christopher, Jon Faust, Michael Kiley, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David Lopez-Salido,
Stephen Meyer, Edward Nelson, David Reifschneider, and Robert Tetlow (2012). “An
Overview of Simple Policy Rules and Their Use in Policymaking in Normal Times and
Under Current Conditions.” Memo sent to the Committee on July 18, 2012.
Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 50 (July), pp. 983-1022.
Taylor, John B. (1993). “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 39 (December), pp. 195-214.
Taylor, John B. (1999). “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B. Taylor,
ed., Monetary Policy Rules. University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-341.

--- Page 19 ---

(This page is intentionally blank.)
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 16 of 62

--- Page 20 ---

Monetary Policy Alternatives
This month’s meeting presents the Committee with three key policy decisions:
first, whether to raise the target range for the federal funds rate;1 second, what guidance
to give the public regarding the most likely future path for the federal funds rate; and
third, what to say about conditions that would result in a different path for the federal
funds rate.
With regard to the first decision, the Committee set out, in March, two criteria for
increasing the target range, namely “further improvement” in labor market conditions
(later amended to “some further improvement”) and “reasonable confidence” that
inflation would return, over the medium term, to the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run
goal. Nonfarm payroll gains have averaged about 200,000 per month over the nine
months since February—the latest month for which data were available when the
Committee set out the criteria—and the two labor market reports received since the
October meeting show that the lull in employment gains in late summer has given way to
renewed strength. The unemployment rate declined ½ percentage point since February,
to 5.0 percent, and long-term unemployment has fallen about ½ percentage point.2 More
recently, while net exports have continued to be a drag on GDP growth, manufacturing
sector output has firmed and real GDP has been expanding at a moderate pace with
notable improvement in domestic final sales, suggesting labor market conditions will
likely continue to strengthen. On the inflation front, core and headline inflation,
measured on a 12-month basis, have remained at subdued levels, and the recent oil price
declines will likely add, for a time, to the downward pressure that is temporarily holding
down headline inflation. Meanwhile, market-based measures of longer-term inflation
compensation remain low and some measures of longer-term survey expectations edged
down.
The draft statements presented below—labeled Alternative A, Alternative B, and
Alternative C—offer different assessments of realized and expected progress toward the
Committee’s dual mandate objectives and its two criteria for liftoff, along with
1 A decision to raise the target range for the federal funds rate would be accompanied by decisions
to increase the interest rates paid on excess reserves and overnight reverse repos, as well as the primary
credit rate.
2 Both the October and November employment reports were regarded as positive surprises by
financial markets, with strength perceived in many labor market indicators.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 17 of 62

--- Page 21 ---

corresponding policy choices. On inflation, Alternatives B and C acknowledge that it has
continued to run below the Committee’s objective, but then state that inflation is
“expected to rise to 2 percent over the medium term,” and that the Committee is
“reasonably confident” that this will occur as “the transitory effects of declines in energy
and import prices dissipate and the labor market strengthens further.” Alternative B also
states that market-based measures of inflation compensation “remain low” and that
“some” survey-based measures have “edged down.” Alternative C is more sanguine in its
assessment of longer-term inflation expectations, stating that market-based measures
have “stabilized” and that survey-based measures have “generally remained stable.”
Alternative B retains the cautionary note from the October statement’s second paragraph
that says the Committee “continues to monitor inflation developments closely,” whereas
Alternative C drops this language. Alternative A, by contrast, emphasizes that “inflation,
core inflation, and gains in labor compensation all [remain] subdued,” and highlights that
the Committee “will closely monitor measures of actual and expected inflation.”
In contrast, the three alternatives describe developments in the labor market (and
real activity) identically: There has been “further improvement” in labor market
indicators that “confirms” that underutilization of labor resources has diminished
“appreciably” since early this year.
Alternatives B and C state that both of the criteria for raising the federal funds
rate have been met and therefore announce an increase in the target range. Alternative A
recognizes the improvement in the labor market, but emphasizes that inflation, core
inflation, and gains in labor compensation all remain subdued and so maintains the
current target range.
With regard to the second decision, namely what forward guidance the Committee
might choose to provide about its current view of the modal path for the federal funds
rate, it is useful to review market expectations and policymakers’ role in their evolution
over time. On the eve of the October FOMC meeting, market participants placed less-
than-even odds on liftoff occurring before the end of this year. However, the postmeeting
statement for October, and the minutes for that meeting, emphasized that an increase in
the target range for the federal funds rate at the December meeting was a distinct
possibility, provided that incoming data turned out to be consistent with the Committee’s
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 18 of 62

--- Page 22 ---

outlook.3 In combination, FOMC communications and the uniformly strong labor market
reports for October and November boosted the perceived probability of liftoff in
December to around 90 percent.4 All told, surveys and market conditions suggest that
money market rates will be about in the target range immediately after a liftoff decision is
announced; see the accompanying box “Expectations For Money Market Rates Following
Liftoff”.
Market participants have long expected that normalization of the stance of
monetary policy will proceed more gradually this time than during the 1994 and 2004
tightening cycles, and more gradually than was anticipated at the onset of those episodes.
Recent policy communications appear to have reinforced those expectations. Currently,
federal funds rate futures suggest that market participants anticipate approximately two
25 basis point increases in the federal funds rate per year in 2016 and 2017, while the
Survey of Primary Dealers and the Survey of Market Participants point to three or four
such increases per year. In contrast, the December Tealbook assumption is for
approximately five increases over each of the two years. The accompanying box, “The
Federal Funds Rate Path: Market Expectations and Risk Scenarios” surveys the available
information on this subject.
Returning to the statements, Alternatives B and C both note that “the stance of
monetary policy remains accommodative” after liftoff, with Alternative B suggesting that
this policy stance is intended to support further improvement in the labor market and a
return of inflation to 2 percent, while Alternative C is silent on this issue. In addition,
Alternatives B and C shift the emphasis of policy communication from “how long to
maintain” the target range, as in the October statement, to “the timing and size of future
adjustments” of the target range. While this new language would be read, initially, as
3 As of the October meeting, the Committee expected economic activity to expand at a moderate
pace, labor market indicators to continue to improve, and inflation to rise gradually toward 2 percent over
the medium term as the transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices dissipate.
4 Market assessments of the probability of liftoff occurring December rose from about 30 percent
just before the October FOMC, to about 55 percent after the postmeeting statement; subsequent
communications from FOMC participants raised the probability a bit further. The probability rose from
about 60 percent just prior to the employment situation report for October to about 70 percent afterward;
the employment situation report for November had only small additional effects. Federal funds futures
now suggest the probability of a December liftoff is about 80 to 95 percent. Respondents to the Desk’s
Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants estimate, on average, that the probability is
around 90 percent, up from 37 percent in the October survey. The “Financial Developments” section of
Tealbook A provides more details.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 19 of 62

--- Page 23 ---

Expectations For Money Market Rates Following Liftoff
Term money market rates have moved up notably in recent weeks, reflecting market
expectations for an increase in policy rates at the December FOMC meeting. As
shown in the figure below, the 3‐month Treasury bill yield and the 3‐month LIBOR rate
have increased since the end of October and are currently 25 basis points and 17 basis
points, respectively, above their monthly averages prior to the October FOMC
meeting. These rates, and other term money market rates, can be used to calculate
implied forward interest rates that market prices imply will prevail following the
December FOMC meeting.1 Implied forward rates can supplement measures of
expectations derived from surveys or from interest rate derivatives, the latter of
which are regularly presented in Tealbook A to project the path of the federal funds
rate.
The implied forward rates reported in the table below point to an increase in money
market rates immediately following the December FOMC meeting. We calculate
market expectations for money market rates for the week immediately following the
December FOMC meeting conditional on liftoff, using a liftoff probability of 90
percent from the Desk’s December Survey of Primary Dealers and ignoring term
premiums. The implied forward rates, presented in the top panel, range from 25 basis
points to 47 basis points, about 20 basis points above their current levels. These
results suggest that markets seem to anticipate that, in the event of liftoff, money
market rates will roughly be in the assumed target range for the federal funds rate of
25 to 50 basis points.2
Market prices suggest that the OIS rate, the Treasury GC repo rate, and Treasury bill
yields will remain within or slightly above the 25 to 50 basis point range in early 2016,
as shown in the bottom panel of the table. Eurodollar, LIBOR, as well as AA financial
and non‐financial commercial paper rates are expected to be at similar levels in early
2016, ranging from 41 basis points to 59 basis points.
The implied forward rates presented are based on specific assumptions. Alternative
assumptions would imply different, and potentially much different, expected money
market rates. First, market participants may demand a positive term premium for
holding longer‐dated money market instruments, which would suggest that the
implied rates reported here are too high. Second, using a lower (or higher) probability
of liftoff in December would lead to higher (or lower) implied post‐liftoff rates. In
addition, term pricing may reflect market participants’ views of rate distortions that
are associated with reporting dates, and some term contracts extend beyond the
January FOMC meeting to which some market participants may assign a positive
1 A forward rate is the interest rate that is implied from two spot rates of differing maturities for
the period of time between the two maturities. For example, a 1‐week spot rate and a 2‐week spot
rate can be used to calculate a 1‐week rate that would prevail one week from now.
2 Treasury bill yields are subject to year‐end pressures and other pricing dynamics, which might
lead to their levels being a bit below the anticipated target range for the federal funds rate.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 20 of 62

--- Page 24 ---

probability of an increase in the target range. Nonetheless, these market‐implied
expectations are broadly consistent with expectations for money market rates from
the Desk’s December Survey of Primary Dealers. The median expectations from the
survey for the effective federal funds rate, the Treasury GCF repo rate, and the 3‐
month Treasury bill yield immediately following liftoff are 34, 40, and 25 basis points,
respectively, a noticeable upward shift from their current levels.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 21 of 62

--- Page 25 ---

The Federal Funds Rate Path: Market Expectations and Risk Scenarios
Financial market quotes indicate that investors currently place high odds on a rate increase at the
December FOMC meeting, higher than was the case immediately before the 1994 tightening
move and only modestly lower than the near‐certain odds seen ahead of the 2004 interest rate
increase (table 1).
By comparison, the expected pace of tightening after liftoff, measured from money market
futures rates, remains significantly below both the expected and the actual pace of tightening in
the two previous episodes (table 1).1 Moreover, the expected pace has declined slightly over the
past year, in contrast to the 1994 tightening, when the expected pace remained about unchanged
over the preceding 12 months, as well as the 2004 tightening, when the expected pace increased
sharply over the preceding three months in response to rapid improvements in the labor market
(figure 2). Meanwhile, uncertainty about the expected policy path changed little over the past
year, and is well below the levels seen during the previous tightening episodes (figure 3).
Overall, money market quotes indicate a strong conviction that the increase in the target rate
after the liftoff will be gradual.
According to data collected by the CFTC, non‐commercial net long positions in interest rate
futures declined in recent months, suggesting that speculative traders now have little exposure
to increases in short‐term interest rates (figure 4). By contrast, before the taper tantrum in the
summer of 2013, speculative investors had accumulated a large amount of net long positions in
interest rate futures, which were quickly unwound in subsequent months, amplifying the initial
interest rate increase.
1 The expected pace of tightening after the initial rate hike is measured as the difference between the
futures‐implied expected policy rates on two dates—the date where the expected policy path crosses the value
corresponding to first hike and the date one‐year thereafter. For the current episode, we assume that that the
federal funds rate will trade in the middle of the new target range of 25 to 50 basis points after liftoff.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 22 of 62

--- Page 26 ---

The experience from the taper tantrum suggests that, even when asset prices indicate a subdued
level of uncertainty surrounding the expected policy path, futures rates and spot interest rates
can still jump higher if incoming information leads investors to substantially revise their views
about the future course of monetary policy. Below we discuss two possible scenarios in which
such a sharp increase could occur in response to policy tightening.
First, market participants appear to have placed for some time now very low odds on the
possibility of a pace of federal funds rate increases similar to or above the one prevailing during
2004–05. While over the most recent period economic activity has expanded at a moderate pace,
a sharp upward revision in the expected policy rate path might occur if economic data comes in
notably above market expectations in coming months. That said, investors did not appear to
revise their expectations about the pace of tightening significantly in response to data surprises
such as those associated with nonfarm payroll releases. Indeed, the expected pace of tightening
has been nearly flat over the past year and remained much more stable than that seen ahead of
the 1994 and 2004 tightenings.
Second, survey respondents appear to see a somewhat faster pace of tightening than that
implied by futures rates. For example, the median dealer in the latest Desk survey sees the target
rate at about 2 percent at the end of 2017. This is roughly in line with the median projections from
the September SEP that are consistent with the target range for the federal funds rate being
raised about 4 to 5 times a year by 25 basis points each. Although both the SEP and primary
dealer projections indicate a notably slower pace of tightening than what actually occurred
during the 1994 and 2004 episodes, both projections currently lie well above the futures‐based
policy path. A convergence of the futures‐based path towards the survey‐based one would result
in significant increases in money market futures rates and the market‐based policy rate path.
An examination of the historical behavior of the gap between market‐ and survey‐based paths
suggests that its current negative level is somewhat unusual: although the gap had at times
turned negative, those instances occurred mostly when interest rates were declining amid a
darkening economic outlook. The gap was positive ahead of the 1994 and 2004 tightenings, with
survey‐based forecasts somewhat below market‐based paths, but it moved in opposite directions
following the initial rate increases (figure 5).
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 23 of 62

--- Page 27 ---

Several explanations have been proposed to explain the current negative gap, including: (1) The
lower futures rates might be a reflection of more pessimistic views among traders about the
future economic outlook than survey respondents; (2) Concerns about downside tail risks would
have reduced mean expectation measures, such as those derived from future rates, but would
leave little imprint on modal expectation measures, such as survey forecasts; (3) Some investors
are said to have repeatedly suffered losses in the past from positions aimed at profiting in rising
rate scenarios and are currently wary of establishing similar positions despite their conviction that
liftoff is imminent; (4) Investors might have increasingly viewed interest rate futures and
Treasury securities as good hedges against economic downturns and so stand willing to accept
relatively low expected returns on these instruments in light of their “insurance value” in some
adverse scenarios, and (5) The perception of a persistent policy divergence between the U.S. and
other advanced economies, as many foreign central banks have continued to ease to stimulate
their economies while the FOMC moves closer to tightening, might have led to increased investor
demand from overseas for long positions in U.S. money market futures, reducing their implied
rates.
The evolution of the market‐based expected policy path during the process of policy
normalization depends critically on which combination of these factors are at work. If (1) and (2)
are the main reasons behind the negative gap and the onset of policy tightening is seen as a
positive signal that leads investors to scale back significantly their assessment of the downside
risks to the economy, the futures‐based policy path could be revised upward significantly.
Revisions in the expected policy path could be even more significant if policy tightening triggers a
large amount of positions being established that are predicated upon additional rate increases, as
in the case of (3). In contrast, if risk premium‐based explanations, such as (4) and (5), are the
major drivers of the negative gap, the gap may not change significantly after liftoff, as covariance
patterns that determine the hedging properties of money market futures or the degree of policy
divergence across countries are unlikely to be altered significantly by a gradual process of policy
tightening.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 24 of 62

--- Page 28 ---

pointing to further increases in the target range, it would also allow for future reductions
if they become appropriate.
By contrast, Alternative A would not only reaffirm that the current target range
remains appropriate and that the liftoff criteria remain unchanged, it would also signal
concerns about the future course of inflation. In particular, Alternative A includes a
sentence indicating that the Committee “is prepared to provide additional accommodation
if incoming information does not soon indicate that inflation is moving up toward 2
percent.” Thus, unlike the October statement, Alternative A would suggest that a
decision against lifting off from the effective lower bound at this meeting would be more
than a minor adjustment in the timing of liftoff. Alternative A would therefore likely
result in a substantial pushing out of the date of liftoff expected by market participants.
Alternatives B and C state that, in determining “the timing and size” of future
“adjustments” to the target range, the Committee will assess realized and expected
economic conditions relative to its mandated objectives. Alternative B provides guidance
indicating that the Committee expects economic conditions to evolve in a manner that
will warrant “only gradual” increases in the federal funds rate; Alternative C differs by
omitting the word “only.” Both also state that the level of the federal funds rate will
probably remain, “for some time,” below levels likely to prevail in the longer run.
Turning to the Committee’s third decision, the conditions that would result in a
different path for the funds rate than the modal one, Alternatives B and C state that the
“actual path of the federal funds rate” would be informed by how the incoming data
affect the economic outlook. In this context, Alternative B signals some concern
regarding the inflation outlook by including, in paragraph 4, a sentence—one that does
not appear in Alternative C—that states that “In light of the current shortfall of inflation
from 2 percent, the Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected progress
toward its inflation goal.” All three Alternatives drop the “balanced approach” language
that for quite some time has been used to characterize how the Committee might have
responded to changes in the economic outlook once normalization begins.
Finally, regarding communication of the Committee’s policy for SOMA portfolio
reinvestment, the three Alternatives span the range of qualitative guidance discussed
during the September 2015 meeting. In particular, Alternative A simply says that the
Committee is continuing its existing reinvestment policy, while Alternative B indicates
that the Federal Reserve anticipates continuing to reinvest until normalization of the
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 25 of 62

--- Page 29 ---

federal funds rate “is well under way,” and Alternative C has the Federal Reserve
continuing to reinvest “at least during the early stages” of normalization.5
The next pages contain the October postmeeting statement, the three draft
statements, and summaries of the arguments for each alternative. These elements are
followed by the draft directive for Alternative A, then by a draft implementation note
(which includes the directive for Alternatives B and C), and finally by a draft of a desk
statement regarding overnight reverse repurchase operations. If the Committee were to
adopt Alternative B or C, the implementation note would be released with the
Committee’s postmeeting statement, and the Desk statement would be released shortly
thereafter.
5 The median respondent in the Survey of Primary Dealers anticipated that reinvestment would
end 12 months after liftoff, for both Treasury securities and MBS, up from 9 months reported in the
October survey.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 26 of 62

--- Page 30 ---

sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
(This page is intentionally blank.)
Page 27 of 62

--- Page 31 ---

OCTOBER 2015 FOMC STATEMENT
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September
suggests that economic activity has been expanding at a moderate pace. Household
spending and business fixed investment have been increasing at solid rates in recent
months, and the housing sector has improved further; however, net exports have been
soft. The pace of job gains slowed and the unemployment rate held steady.
Nonetheless, labor market indicators, on balance, show that underutilization of labor
resources has diminished since early this year. Inflation has continued to run below
the Committee's longer-run objective, partly reflecting declines in energy prices and
in prices of non-energy imports. Market-based measures of inflation compensation
moved slightly lower; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations
have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market
indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its
dual mandate. The Committee continues to see the risks to the outlook for economic
activity and the labor market as nearly balanced but is monitoring global economic
and financial developments. Inflation is anticipated to remain near its recent low
level in the near term but the Committee expects inflation to rise gradually toward 2
percent over the medium term as the labor market improves further and the transitory
effects of declines in energy and import prices dissipate. The Committee continues to
monitor inflation developments closely.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for
the federal funds rate remains appropriate. In determining whether it will be
appropriate to raise the target range at its next meeting, the Committee will assess
progress—both realized and expected—toward its objectives of maximum
employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide
range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of
inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and
international developments. The Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate to
raise the target range for the federal funds rate when it has seen some further
improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move
back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term.
4. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee's holdings of longer-term securities
at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions.
5. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after
employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 28 of 62

--- Page 32 ---

may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the
Committee views as normal in the longer run.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 29 of 62

--- Page 33 ---

ALTERNATIVE A FOR DECEMBER 2015
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September
October suggests that economic activity has been expanding at a moderate pace.
Household spending and business fixed investment have been increasing at solid rates
in recent months, and the housing sector has improved further; however, net exports
have been soft. The pace of job gains slowed and the unemployment rate held steady.
Nonetheless, A range of recent labor market indicators, on balance, including
ongoing job gains and declining unemployment, shows further improvement and
confirms that underutilization of labor resources has diminished appreciably since
early this year. In contrast, both overall and core inflation has have continued to
run below the Committee’s longer-run objective, only partly reflecting declines in
energy prices and in prices of non-energy imports. Market-based measures of
inflation compensation moved slightly lower remain low; some survey-based
measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable edged down.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee expects that, with appropriate policy
accommodation, economic activity will expand at a moderate pace, with labor market
indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee judges consistent with its
dual mandate. The Committee continues to see the risks to the outlook for economic
activity and the labor market as nearly balanced but is monitoring global economic
and financial developments. Inflation is anticipated to remain near its recent low
level in the near term but the Committee expects inflation to rise gradually toward 2
percent over the medium term as the labor market improves further and the transitory
effects of declines in energy and import prices eventually dissipate. The Committee
continues to will closely monitor measures of actual and expected inflation
developments closely.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability
With inflation, core inflation, and gains in labor compensation all subdued, and
with market-based measures of inflation compensation and survey-based
measures of longer-term inflation expectations both low, the Committee today
reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds
rate remains appropriate. In determining whether it will be appropriate to raise the
how long to maintain this target range at its next meeting, the Committee will assess
progress—both realized and expected—toward its objectives of maximum
employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide
range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of
inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and
international developments. The Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate to
raise the target range for the federal funds rate when it has seen some further
improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move
back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term. The Committee is prepared
to provide additional accommodation if incoming information does not soon
indicate that inflation is moving up toward 2 percent.
4. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 30 of 62

--- Page 34 ---

mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative financial conditions.
5. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after
employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions
may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the
Committee views as normal in the longer run.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 31 of 62

--- Page 35 ---

ALTERNATIVE B FOR DECEMBER 2015
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September
October suggests that economic activity has been expanding at a moderate pace.
Household spending and business fixed investment have been increasing at solid rates
in recent months, and the housing sector has improved further; however, net exports
have been soft. The pace of job gains slowed and the unemployment rate held steady.
Nonetheless, A range of recent labor market indicators, on balance, including
ongoing job gains and declining unemployment, shows further improvement and
confirms that underutilization of labor resources has diminished appreciably since
early this year. Inflation has continued to run below the Committee’s 2 percent
longer-run objective, partly reflecting declines in energy prices and in prices of non-
energy imports. Market-based measures of inflation compensation moved slightly
lower remain low; some survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations
have remained stable edged down.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee currently expects that, with
appropriate policy accommodation gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary
policy, economic activity will continue to expand at a moderate pace, with and labor
market indicators continuing to move toward levels the Committee judges consistent
with its dual mandate will continue to strengthen. Overall, taking into account
domestic and international developments, the Committee continues to sees the
risks to the outlook for both economic activity and the labor market as nearly
balanced but is monitoring global economic and financial developments. Inflation is
anticipated to remain near its recent low level in the near term but the Committee
expects inflation expected to rise gradually toward to 2 percent over the medium
term as the labor market improves further and the transitory effects of declines in
energy and import prices dissipate and the labor market strengthens further. The
Committee continues to monitor inflation developments closely.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for
the federal funds rate remains appropriate. The Committee judges that there has
been considerable improvement in labor market conditions this year, and it is
reasonably confident that inflation will rise, over the medium term, to its 2
percent objective. Given the economic outlook, and recognizing the time it takes
for policy actions to affect future economic outcomes, the Committee decided to
raise the target range for the federal funds rate to ¼ to ½ percent. The stance of
monetary policy remains accommodative after this increase, thereby supporting
further improvement in labor market conditions and a return to 2 percent
inflation.
4. In determining whether it will be appropriate to raise the timing and size of future
adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate at its next meeting, the
Committee will assess progress–both realized and expected economic conditions–
toward relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.
This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including
measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 32 of 62

--- Page 36 ---

expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. In light of
the current shortfall of inflation from 2 percent, the Committee will carefully
monitor actual and expected progress toward its inflation goal. The Committee
anticipates expects that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal
funds rate when it has seen some further improvement in the labor market and is
reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the
medium term economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only
gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to
remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer
run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the
economic outlook as informed by incoming data.
5. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction, and it anticipates doing so until normalization of the level of the federal
funds rate is well under way. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of
longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative
financial conditions.
6. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after
employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions
may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the
Committee views as normal in the longer run.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 33 of 62

--- Page 37 ---

ALTERNATIVE C FOR DECEMBER 2015
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September
October suggests that economic activity has been expanding at a moderate pace.
Household spending and business fixed investment have been increasing at solid rates
in recent months, and the housing sector has improved further; however, net exports
have been soft. The pace of job gains slowed and the unemployment rate held steady.
Nonetheless, A range of recent labor market indicators, on balance, including
ongoing job gains and declining unemployment, shows further improvement and
confirms that underutilization of labor resources has diminished appreciably since
early this year. Inflation has continued to run below the Committee’s 2 percent
longer-run objective, partly reflecting declines in energy prices and in prices of non-
energy imports. Market-based measures of inflation compensation moved slightly
lower stabilized; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have
generally remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee currently expects that, with
appropriate policy accommodation adjustments in the stance of monetary policy,
economic activity will continue to expand at a moderate pace, with and labor market
indicators continuing to move toward will continue to strengthen levels the
Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate. Overall, taking into account
domestic and international developments, the Committee continues to sees the
risks to the outlook for both economic activity and the labor market as nearly
balanced but is monitoring global economic and financial developments. Inflation is
anticipated to remain near its recent low level in the near term but the Committee
expects inflation expected to rise gradually toward to 2 percent over the medium
term as the labor market improves further and the transitory effects of declines in
energy and import prices dissipate and the labor market strengthens further. The
Committee continues to monitor inflation developments closely.
3. To support continued progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for
the federal funds rate remains appropriate. The Committee judges that there has
been considerable improvement in labor market conditions this year, and is
reasonably confident that inflation will rise, over the medium term, to its
2 percent objective. Given the economic outlook, and recognizing the time it
takes for policy actions to affect future economic outcomes, the Committee
decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to ¼ to ½ percent.
Even after this increase, the stance of monetary policy remains accommodative.
4. In determining whether it will be appropriate to raise the timing and size of future
adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate at its next meeting, the
Committee will assess progress–both realized and expected economic conditions–
toward relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.
This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including
measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation
expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. The
Committee anticipates expects that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 34 of 62

--- Page 38 ---

the federal funds rate when it has seen some further improvement in the labor market
and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective
over the medium term economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will
warrant gradual increases in the target for the federal funds rate; the federal
funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to
prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will
depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data.
5. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction, and anticipates doing so at least during the early stages of normalization
of the federal funds rate. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of
longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative
financial conditions.
6. When the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a
balanced approach consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employment and
inflation of 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates that, even after
employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions
may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the
Committee views as normal in the longer run.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 35 of 62

--- Page 39 ---

THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B
Policymakers may see the two labor market reports received since the October
FOMC and, in particular, the breadth of labor market improvements reported therein, as
supporting the view that “further improvement” has been realized in labor market
conditions. Other labor market data, such as new claims for unemployment insurance,
may reinforce that assessment. Policymakers might also regard recent information about
consumer spending and the housing sector, and developments in fiscal policy, as
suggesting that the ongoing expansion in the domestic economy is strong enough to
sustain further labor market gains. Moreover, with the unemployment rate at 5.0 percent,
policymakers may anticipate that further strengthening of the labor market might
generate some welcome upward pressure on inflation. Policymakers may observe that
while all-items inflation generally has continued to run well below 2 percent, core
measures, such as CPI inflation excluding food and energy prices, and trimmed-mean
inflation, have come in closer to 2 percent and about as expected, and show signs of
turning up. They might also take comfort from analyses indicating that low levels of
market-based measures of long-term inflation compensation can largely be attributed to
liquidity and inflation-risk premiums, and from the observation that these measures have
edged up, on net, in recent weeks. They might further note that although some survey-
based measures have declined recently, these movements might be attributable to recent
low levels of energy prices and headline inflation, and therefore probably do not indicate
a deterioration in longer-term inflation expectations themselves. For these and other
reasons, policymakers might be “reasonably confident” that headline inflation will move
back to the Committee’s 2 percent objective over the medium term, once the downward
pressure on domestic consumer prices from the pass-through of declines in global
commodity prices and appreciation of the dollar dissipate, and as the labor market
strengthens further. Thus policymakers may regard the criteria for policy firming
introduced in the Committee’s March statement as having been satisfied and therefore
support Alternative B, which announces a 25 basis point increase in the target range for
the federal funds rate to ¼ to ½ percent.
At the same time, policymakers may see room for some further improvement in
the labor market along margins such as labor force participation or the number of persons
employed part time for economic reasons, and it may judge that a further increase in
labor utilization could help speed the return of inflation to the 2 percent objective.
Moreover, policymakers may expect the economic forces that have long been restraining
economic growth to recede only slowly. Accordingly, they may conclude that gradual
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 36 of 62

--- Page 40 ---

post-liftoff adjustments of the federal funds rate would be appropriate, at least for a time,
to support further strengthening of labor market conditions and to mitigate the risks of
returning to the effective lower bound. They might also judge that the message of
gradualism in Alternative B is properly tempered by its emphasis that it is the expected
“evolution of economic conditions” that “will warrant only gradual increases in the
federal funds rate,” and that “the actual path” will depend on how incoming data inform
the Committee’s economic outlook.
The data received over the past few months, combined with participants’
communications about their interpretations of those data, have succeeded in pulling
forward market expectations of the time of liftoff: in contrast to the situation in October,
respondents to the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and its Survey of Market
Participants now place odds of about 90 percent on a rate hike at this meeting. Moreover,
the expected future path for the target range is in line with “only gradual increases in the
federal funds rate.” In light of the data and market participants’ response to those data,
policymakers might regard the December meeting as a propitious time for the first
increase in the federal funds rate in nine years. Market reaction to a statement along the
lines of Alternative B is likely to be muted. However, the indication in paragraph 3 that
the Committee is seeking further improvement in labor market conditions, the hint at
downside risks for inflation in paragraph 2, and the sentence in paragraph 4 indicating
that “In light of the current shortfall of inflation from 2 percent, the Committee will
carefully monitor actual and expected progress toward its inflation goal,” might be
construed as more accommodative than expected. Insofar as this is the case, medium-
and longer-term real interest rates, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar, would
decline, and equity prices would rise. Whether inflation compensation would rise or fall
would depend on perceptions of the efficacy of monetary policy: the signal of downside
risk to inflation could push inflation compensation down, all else equal, but noting in the
statement an awareness of the issue, together with the positive sentiment communicated
by the liftoff decision itself, may push in the opposite direction. Of course, the SEP and
the Chair’s postmeeting press conference will also affect market reactions.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE C
Some policymakers may concur with proponents of Alternative B that the criteria
for liftoff of the federal funds rate from the effective lower bound have been met, but
might not see the same downside risks to inflation, and may judge that with the
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 37 of 62

--- Page 41 ---

unemployment rate at 5.0 percent, slack in the labor market has essentially been
absorbed.
On inflation, these policymakers might be encouraged by the recent stability in
market-based measures of longer-term inflation compensation and be unconcerned by the
recent modest declines in certain survey measures of inflation expectations on the
grounds that the latter can be largely explained by recent declines in energy prices and
headline inflation, and are therefore not a harbinger of an unanchoring of inflation
expectations. They might judge that the other prominent sources of downward pressure
on inflation—the recent appreciation of the dollar and the decline in nonoil import
prices—are likely restraining core as well as headline inflation, but only temporarily.
They might instead worry that allowing the unemployment rate to undershoot its longer-
run normal level for an extended period as a conscious act of policy risks eliciting an
upward drift of inflation expectations, possibly along the lines of the alternative scenario
“Faster Growth with Higher Inflation.” For these reasons, among others, these
policymakers might prefer Alternative C’s omission of the reference to “the current
shortfall of inflation from 2 percent” that appears in paragraph 4 of Alternative B.
Regarding the labor market, the breadth of the improvement in recent job market
reports might lead these policymakers to conclude that there is little in the way of
“hidden slack.” Accordingly, they might argue that the Committee should not signal, as
does the language of Alternative B, that the still-accommodative stance of monetary
policy, after liftoff, is designed to support “further improvement in labor market
conditions and a return to 2 percent inflation.”
In addition, some policymakers may note that, for about a year now, most of the
simple policy rules and optimal control simulations in the “Monetary Policy Strategies”
section of Tealbook B have called for policy tightening to begin. They might agree that
there were good risk-management reasons to delay liftoff, relative to the prescriptions of
these risk-neutral, perfect-foresight simulations. But given the recent re-emergence of
strength in the labor market, these policymakers might choose, contrary to Alternative B,
to restrict references to “gradualism” to paragraph 4 and thus for paragraph 2 prefer the
language of Alternative C which says that the Committee expects adjustments in the
future stance of monetary policy without suggesting that these adjustments will be
gradual. These policymakers might emphasize that, because it is the interest- and
consumer-confidence-sensitive sectors of the economy, such as motor vehicle sales, that
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 38 of 62

--- Page 42 ---

have shown the most noteworthy improvement of late, it may be that the current stance of
policy is more accommodative than commonly believed.
These policymakers might further argue that the language of Alternative B could
create the impression that “gradualism” is a promise rather than a conditional
expectation, and it might therefore foster expectations of a prolonged, unconditionally
shallow path for the federal funds rate, creating incipient excess demand, and thus
running the risk that inflation will persistently overshoot 2 percent. Alternatively, some
policymakers may see the emphasis on a gradually rising path for the federal funds rate
that is a central feature of Alternative B as likely to induce further “reaching for yield,”
which could leave leveraged investors unduly exposed to adverse economic or financial
market events.
On average, respondents to the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and its Survey
of Market Participants expect that the federal funds rate is likely to climb only very
slowly—notably more slowly, for example, than the staff assumed in constructing the
Tealbook forecast. On the whole, the differences between Alternative C and Alternative
B are not large. Nevertheless, two features of Alternative C—less emphasis on
gradualism and less concern for the future path of inflation, relative to Alternative B—
might be regarded as more restrictive than financial market participants expect. Hence, if
the Committee were to adopt Alternative C, medium- and longer-term real interest rates
would likely rise, equity prices and inflation compensation would likely decline, and the
dollar would appreciate. To the extent, however, that market participants were to
conclude that the Committee’s guidance is a reflection of a more optimistic outlook than
markets perceive, equity prices and inflation compensation could rise.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A
Both core and headline inflation have run below 2 percent for several years, and
renewed declines in oil and other commodity prices, along with downward pressure on
non-commodity import prices stemming from the appreciation of the dollar, suggest that
headline inflation will linger at very low levels well into 2016. Some policymakers may
see substantial risk that inflation will not rise to 2 percent over the medium term. They
also might note that staff and FOMC participants have systematically overpredicted
inflation in recent years.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 39 of 62

--- Page 43 ---

These policymakers might express concern about measures of long-term inflation
expectations, noting that some survey-based measures have declined below their previous
ranges, and that market-based measures have been at low levels for so long that
attributing the low readings to liquidity and risk premiums strains credulity. They might
point to the global disinflationary pressures that seem prevalent at the moment. These
observations may lead some participants to conclude that there is little reason to be
“reasonably confident” that inflation will return to 2 percent, even given the current
stance of policy, and therefore that the criteria for liftoff of the federal funds rate from the
effective lower bound have not been met. Moreover, these policymakers might argue
that the chronic failure to get inflation moving up has put at risk the credibility of the
FOMC’s commitment to achieving 2 percent inflation and suggests that the Committee’s
meeting-by-meeting approach to policy is not working. They might therefore prefer
Alternative A, which states that the “Committee is prepared to provide additional
accommodation if incoming information does not soon indicate that inflation is moving
up toward 2 percent.”
These policymakers might be heartened by hints that growth in labor
compensation might be picking up, but argue that it is, at best, far too early to lean on
these observations as justification for liftoff. They might note that the best evidence
available says that inflation is not very responsive to aggregate demand conditions,
suggesting that it would take a substantial period of high levels of labor utilization to
raise inflation from its current very low level to 2 percent. They might buttress this claim
by arguing that the social costs of overemployment are less than the social costs of
underemployment which, all else equal, would call for “running the economy a little
hot,” and thus for deferral of liftoff.
Turning to risks and their management, while acknowledging that the more dire
scenarios for the global outlook seem less likely than in September, some policymakers
might still see sizable downside risks from foreign sources. More generally,
policymakers might see the case for deferring liftoff as strengthened by the risk of a
potentially costly return of the federal funds rate to the effective lower bound, if liftoff
were to turn out to have been premature. And they might reinforce this argument by
noting the possibility that the neutral rate of interest might be persistently lower than once
imagined; to the extent that this is so, it would mean that the current stance of monetary
policy is tighter than one might have thought.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 40 of 62

--- Page 44 ---

Just one respondent to the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers expects liftoff to
occur next year, and no respondent anticipates that the Committee would indicate the
possibility of greater accommodation. In response to a statement along the lines of
Alternative A, investors would likely push out their expectations about the most probable
date of the first increase in the target range for the federal funds rate well into next year;
they might also revise down their expectations of how quickly the Committee would raise
the target range thereafter. Longer-term real yields would decline, and equity prices and
inflation compensation could rise. However if investors were to see a statement such as
Alternative A as reflecting a downbeat assessment of economic conditions, equity prices
and inflation compensation might increase less than otherwise, or even fall.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 41 of 62

--- Page 45 ---

DIRECTIVE AND IMPLEMENTATION NOTE
The directive adopted at the October FOMC meeting appears on the next page;
the same directive would be issued in December if the Committee adopts Alternative A,
which maintains the current target range for the federal funds rate. The directive for
Alternatives B and C, which raise the target range, is included in an implementation note
that would be released with the FOMC’s policy statement; that note, which appears after
the directive for Alternative A, would communicate operational decisions taken to
implement the policy stance announced by the Committee.1 The current draft of the
implementation note differs in one important respect from the version shown in the
October Tealbook: the current draft adds the per-counterparty limit for ON RRPs to the
list of ON RRP parameters that the Committee would specify in the directive.
The Desk would release, separately, a statement regarding overnight reverse
repurchase agreements. A draft of the Desk statement appears after the draft
implementation note.
On the following pages, struck-out text indicates language deleted from the
current (October) directive; bold red underlined text indicates language added to the
current directive; blue underlined text indicates text that will be links to websites.
1 The implementation note was first proposed to the Committee in June (see the memo sent to the
Committee on June 10, 2015, titled “Proposal for Communicating Details Regarding the Implementation of
Monetary Policy at Liftoff and After” by Deborah Leonard and Gretchen Weinbach).
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 42 of 62

--- Page 46 ---

OCTOBER 2015 DIRECTIVE
(ALSO THE DIRECTIVE FOR DECEMBER 2015 ALTERNATIVE A)
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee seeks
monetary and financial conditions that will foster maximum employment and price
stability. In particular, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain such conditions. The
Committee directs the Desk to maintain its policy of rolling over maturing Treasury
securities into new issues and its policy of reinvesting principal payments on all agency
debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities. The
Committee also directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed
securities transactions. The System Open Market Account manager and the secretary
will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s
balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of
maximum employment and price stability.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 43 of 62

--- Page 47 ---

IMPLEMENTATION NOTE FOR DECEMBER 2015 ALTERNATIVES B AND C
Release Date: December 16, 2015
Decisions Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation
The Federal Reserve has made the following decisions to implement the monetary policy
stance announced by the Federal Open Market Committee in its statement on December
16, 2015:
 The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted [ unanimously ] to raise
the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances to 0.50 percent,
effective December 17, 2015.
 As part of its policy decision, the Federal Open Market Committee voted to authorize
and direct the Open Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until
instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Open Market Account in
accordance with the following domestic policy directive:1
“Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee seeks
monetary and financial conditions that will foster maximum employment and price
stability. In particular, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. Effective December 17,
2015, the Committee directs the Desk to undertake open market operations as
necessary to maintain such conditions the federal funds rate in a target range of
¼ to ½ percent, including: (1) overnight reverse repurchase operations (and
reverse repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when
necessary to accommodate weekend, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at
an offering rate of 0.25 percent, in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury
securities held outright in the System Open Market Account that are available
for such operations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day; and
(2) term reverse repurchase operations to the extent approved in the resolution
on term RRP operations approved by the Committee at its March 17–18, 2015,
meeting.
“The Committee directs the Desk to maintain its policy of continue rolling over
maturing Treasury securities into new issues and its policy of to continue reinvesting
principal payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in
agency mortgage-backed securities. The Committee also directs the Desk to engage
in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the
Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities transactions.” The System
Open Market Account manager and the secretary will keep the Committee informed
of ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect the
attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and
price stability.
More information regarding open market operations may be found on the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York’s website.
1 This directive supersedes the resolution on ON RRP test operations approved by the
Committee at its December 16–17, 2014 meeting.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 44 of 62

--- Page 48 ---

 In a related action, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted
[ unanimously ] to approve a ¼ percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to
1.00 percent, effective December 17, 2015. In taking this action, the Board approved
requests submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of . . .
This information will be updated as appropriate to reflect decisions of the Federal Open
Market Committee or the Board of Governors regarding details of the Federal Reserve’s
operational tools and approach used to implement monetary policy.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 45 of 62

--- Page 49 ---

DESK STATEMENT FOR DECEMBER 2015 ALTERNATIVES B OR C
Release Date: December 16, 2015
Statement Regarding Overnight Reverse Repurchase Agreements
During its meeting on December 15-16, 2015, the Federal Open Market Committee
(FOMC) directed the Open Market Trading Desk (the Desk) at the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York (New York Fed), effective December 17, 2015, to undertake open market
operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of ¼ to ½
percent, including overnight reverse repurchase operations (ON RRPs) at an offering rate
of 0.25 percent and in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury securities held
outright in the System Open Market Account (SOMA) that are available for such
operations and by a per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day.
To determine the value of Treasury securities available for ON RRP operations, several
factors need to be taken into account, as not all Treasury securities held outright in the
SOMA will be available for use in such operations. First, some of the Treasury securities
held outright in the SOMA are needed to conduct reverse repurchase agreements with
foreign official and international accounts.1 Second, some Treasury securities are needed
to support the securities lending operations conducted by the Desk. Additionally, buffers
are needed to provide for possible changes in demand for these activities and for possible
changes in the market value of the SOMA’s holdings of Treasury securities.
Taking these factors into account, the Desk anticipates that around $2 trillion of Treasury
securities will be available for ON RRP operations to fulfill the FOMC’s domestic policy
directive.2 In the highly unlikely event that the value of bids received in an ON RRP
operation exceeds the amount of available securities, the Desk will allocate awards using
a single-price auction based on the stop-out rate at which the overall size limit is reached,
with all bids below this rate awarded in full at the stop-out rate and all bids at this rate
awarded on a pro rata basis at the stop-out rate.
These ON RRP operations will be open to all eligible RRP counterparties, will settle
same-day, and will have an overnight tenor unless a longer term is warranted to
accommodate weekend, holiday, and other similar trading conventions. Each eligible
counterparty is permitted to submit one proposition for each ON RRP operation, in a size
not to exceed $30 billion and at a rate not to exceed the specified offering rate. The
operations will take place from 12:45 p.m. to 1:15 p.m. (Eastern Time). Any changes to
these terms will be announced with at least one business day’s prior notice on the New
York Fed’s website.
The results of these operations will be posted on the New York Fed’s website. The
outstanding amounts of RRPs are reported on the Federal Reserve's H.4.1 statistical
release as a factor absorbing reserves in Table 1 and as a liability item in Tables 5 and 6.
1 The outstanding amounts of RRPs with foreign official and international accounts are
reported on the Federal Reserve’s H.4.1 statistical release as a factor absorbing reserves in Table
1 and as a liability item in Tables 5 and 6.
2 This amount will be reduced by any term RRP operations outstanding on the day of each
ON RRP operation.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 46 of 62

--- Page 50 ---

Projections
BALANCE SHEET AND INCOME
The staff has developed a projection of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and
income statement that is broadly consistent with the monetary policy assumptions
incorporated in the staff’s forecast presented in Tealbook A. We assume that the
Committee will decide to commence policy normalization at its December meeting and
that reinvestments of maturing Treasury securities and principal received on agency debt
and agency MBS will continue through the second quarter of 2016. Once reinvestments
cease, the SOMA portfolio shrinks through redemptions of maturing Treasury and agency
debt securities as well as paydowns of principal from agency MBS. Regarding the
Federal Reserve’s use of its policy normalization tools, we assume that the level of
overnight reverse repurchase agreements (ON RRPs) runs at $100 billion through the end
of 2018 before falling to zero by the end of 2019, and that term deposits and term RRPs
are not used during the normalization period.1,2 The bullets below highlight some key
features of the projections for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and income statement
under these assumptions.
 Balance sheet. As shown in the exhibit “Total Assets and Selected Balance Sheet
Items” and in the table that follows, the size of the portfolio is normalized in the
third quarter of 2021, about a quarter later than in the October Tealbook.3 Once
1 Use of term RRPs or term deposits would result in a shift in the composition of Federal Reserve
liabilities—a decline in reserve balances and an equal increase in term RRPs or term deposits—but would
not produce a change in the overall size of the balance sheet.
2 We also assume that RRPs associated with foreign official and international accounts remain
around (their October 30, 2015 level of) $201 billion throughout the projection period.
3 The size of the balance sheet is assumed to be normalized when the securities portfolio reverts to
the level consistent with its longer-run trend, which is determined largely by currency in circulation and a
projected steady-state level of reserve balances. The projected timing of the normalization of the size of the
balance sheet depends importantly on the level of reserve balances that is assumed to be necessary to
conduct monetary policy; currently, we assume that level of reserve balances to be $100 billion. However,
ongoing regulatory and structural changes could lead to a higher demand for reserve balances in the new
steady state. In turn, a higher steady-state level for reserve balances would, all else equal, imply an earlier
normalization of the size of the balance sheet. For instance, with a $500 billion steady-state level of
reserve balances, the balance sheet would likely normalize in mid-2020. Alternatively, a lower assumed
steady-state level of reserve balances, such as $10 billion, would induce a delay in the normalization of the
balance sheet until the final quarter of 2021.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 47 of 62

--- Page 51 ---

December Tealbook October Tealbook
Total Assets
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Reserve Balances
Billions of dollars
5500
Monthly
5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Billions of dollars
3500
Monthly
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
SOMA Treasury Holdings
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
SOMA Agency MBS Holdings
Billions of dollars
3000
Monthly
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Total Assets and Selected Balance Sheet Items
Billions of dollars
2200
Monthly
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 48 of 62

--- Page 52 ---

Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- December Tealbook
(Billions of dollars)
Oct 31, 2015 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 2025
Total assets 4,490 4,458 3,928 2,872 2,364 2,539 2,734
Selected assets
Loans and other credit extensions* 2 0 0 0 0 0 0
Securities held outright 4,240 4,224 3,730 2,704 2,218 2,404 2,607
U.S. Treasury securities 2,462 2,462 2,198 1,442 1,179 1,555 1,921
Agency debt securities 34 33 4 2 2 2 2
Agency mortgage-backed securities 1,744 1,730 1,528 1,260 1,037 847 684
Unamortized premiums 192 188 150 116 93 80 71
Unamortized discounts -17 -17 -14 -11 -9 -7 -6
Total other assets 53 55 55 55 55 55 55
Total liabilities 4,432 4,399 3,884 2,819 2,300 2,460 2,637
Selected liabilities
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 1,350 1,370 1,545 1,702 1,839 2,000 2,176
Reverse repurchase agreements 426 301 301 201 201 201 201
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 2,649 2,723 2,034 911 255 255 255
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 2,596 2,568 1,879 756 100 100 100
U.S. Treasury, General Account 23 150 150 150 150 150 150
Other deposits 30 5 5 5 5 5 5
Interest on Federal Reserve Notes due to U.S. 2 0 0 0 0 0 0
Treasury
Total capital** 59 59 44 53 64 79 97
Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
*Loans and other credit extensions includes primary, secondary, and seasonal credit; central bank liquidity swaps; and net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC.
**Total capital includes capital paid-in and capital surplus accounts.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 49 of 62

--- Page 53 ---

December Tealbook October Tealbook
Interest Income
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Interest Expense
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Realized Capital Gains
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Remittances to Treasury
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
−20
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
−20
Deferred Asset
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Memo: Unrealized Gains/Losses
Billions of dollars
120
End of year
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Income Projections
Billions of dollars
400
End of year
300
200
100
0
−100
−200
−300
−400
−500
−600
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 50 of 62

--- Page 54 ---

reserve balances reach their steady-state level, total assets stand at $2.3 trillion,
with about $2.2 trillion in total SOMA securities holdings. Total assets and
SOMA holdings increase thereafter, keeping pace with the rise in both currency in
circulation and Federal Reserve Bank capital.
 Federal Reserve remittances. The exhibit “Income Projections” shows the
implications of the balance sheet projection and interest rate assumptions for
Federal Reserve income.4 Remittances to the Treasury are projected to be about
$100 billion this year and the next, close to the $100 billion level recorded in
2014. Subsequently, annual remittances fall to their trough of roughly $30 billion
in 2019, with no recorded deferred asset.5 The Federal Reserve’s cumulative
remittances from 2009 through 2025 are about $1.1 trillion. Relative to the
October Tealbook, projected remittances for 2016 have been revised up nearly
$25 billion, and cumulative remittances over the projection period are roughly
$100 billion higher, reflecting the effects of the Fixing America’s Surface
Transportation Act, which was signed on December 4, 2015. This Act
permanently reduces the Federal Reserve’s capital surplus account from its
current level of $29 billion to a maximum of $10 billion and cuts dividends of
large depository institutions from 6 percent to the lesser of 6 percent and the
prevailing rate on the Treasury 10-year rate.6
 Unrealized gains or losses. The unrealized gain or loss position of the SOMA
portfolio depends importantly on the level of interest rates. The staff estimates
that the portfolio was in an unrealized gain position of about $125 billion as of the
end of November.7 Because of the assumed rise in longer-term interest rates over
4 As firming of the policy rate begins, the spread between the interest rate paid on reserve balances
and the ON RRP rate is 25 basis points. Moreover, we assume that the effective federal funds rate will
average about 15 basis points below the interest rate paid on reserve balances and about 10 basis points
above the ON RRP rate.
5 In the event that a Federal Reserve Bank’s earnings fall short of the amount necessary to cover
its operating costs and pay dividends, a deferred asset for interest on Federal Reserve notes would be
recorded.
6 The Federal Reserve pays dividends on member depository institutions’ capital paid-in. Large
depository institutions are defined as those with total assets over $10 billion. These institutions account for
roughly $27 billion of the total $29 billion of total capital paid-in.
7 The Federal Reserve reports the level and the change in the quarter-end net unrealized gain/loss
position of the SOMA portfolio to the public in the “Federal Reserve Banks Combined Quarterly Financial
Reports,” available on the Board’s website at
http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_fedfinancials.htm#quarterly.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 51 of 62

--- Page 55 ---

Projections for the 10-Year Treasury Term Premium Effect
(Basis Points)
December October
Date
Tealbook Tealbook
Quarterly Averages
2015:Q4 -109 -108
2016:Q1 -105 -103
Q2 -100 -99
Q3 -95 -94
Q4 -91 -90
2017:Q4 -75 -74
2018:Q4 -62 -62
2019:Q4 -52 -52
2020:Q4 -43 -44
2021:Q4 -37 -37
2022:Q4 -31 -32
2023:Q4 -25 -26
2024:Q4 -20 -20
2025:Q4 -14 -15
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 52 of 62

--- Page 56 ---

the next several years, the position is projected to shift to an unrealized loss by
mid-2016 and then to record a peak unrealized loss of about $235 billion at the
end of 2018, about $10 billion larger than in the October Tealbook. At that time,
almost $110 billion of the unrealized losses can be attributed to the portfolio of
Treasury securities and a little less than $130 billion to the portfolio of agency
MBS. The unrealized loss position then narrows through 2025, as the value of
securities acquired under the large-scale asset purchase programs returns to par
when these securities approach maturity and then mature, and new securities are
added to the portfolio at par.
 Projected uncertainty and income risks. To help quantify the degree of
uncertainty surrounding the path of the balance sheet and the interest rate risk
embedded in the SOMA portfolio, the accompanying box, “Confidence Interval
Projections of the Balance Sheet,” reports confidence intervals for the Federal
Reserve’s balance sheet and income projections based on paths of macroeconomic
variables generated by stochastic simulations of the staff’s FRB/US model.
 Term premium effects. As shown in the table “Projections for the 10-Year
Treasury Term Premium Effect,” the Federal Reserve’s elevated stock of longer-
term securities is estimated to hold down the term premium embedded in the
10-year Treasury yield in the fourth quarter of 2015 by 109 basis points. Over the
next couple of years, the estimated term premium effect diminishes at a pace of
about 5 basis points per quarter, reflecting in part the projected shrinking of the
portfolio; this projection is roughly unchanged from the October Tealbook.
 SOMA Characteristics. The exhibit “Projections for the Characteristics of
SOMA Holdings” shows that under the staff baseline balance sheet assumptions,
approximately $1.4 trillion in SOMA Treasury holdings will mature between
2016 and 2020, with the amounts maturing varying considerably from month to
month; this pattern differs notably from projected MBS paydowns. During the
first half of 2016, the maturing $143 billion in SOMA’s Treasury securities
holdings are reinvested in notes and bonds.8 As a result, the weighted-average
8 The Desk replaces maturing securities holdings with newly issued debt at Treasury
auctions. Consistent with longstanding practice, these rollovers are carried out at Treasury auctions by
placing bids for the SOMA with par amount equal to the value of holdings maturing on the issue date of a
new security. Moreover, across the various maturities, these bids are placed proportionately to the issue
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 53 of 62

--- Page 57 ---

Projections for the Characteristics of SOMA Holdings
Projected Receipts of Principal on SOMA Securities
Billions of Dollars
Projected MBS paydowns
Treasury maturities
80
60
40
20
0
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
SOMA Weighted−Average Treasury Duration
Years
10
Monthly
Reinvestment Ends Normalization Achieved 9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022 2024
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 54 of 62

--- Page 58 ---

duration of SOMA Treasury holdings through mid-2016 remains near its current
level of nearly 7 years. 9 Thereafter, reflecting the end of reinvestment as well as
the composition of the aging portfolio, the weighted-average duration declines
through 2017, but then it rebounds until 2021, when the size of the balance sheet
is normalized. After the normalization, Treasury duration is projected to resume
its decline as the Desk starts purchasing securities again to expand the size of the
portfolio in order to keep pace with currency growth. This projection is based on
the key assumption that the Federal Reserve will initially rebuild a sizable
Treasury bill portfolio until those holdings are equal to approximately 30 percent
of the portfolio, similar to the pre-crisis composition of the portfolio (currently
there are no Treasury bill holdings). Thereafter, purchases are assumed to be
spread across the Treasury maturity spectrum.
amounts of the new securities. Bids at Treasury auctions are placed at noncompetitive tenders and are
treated as add-ons to announced auction sizes.
9 Duration is the weighted average of the times until bonds’ fixed cash flows are received. The
July 2015 Tealbook B box “History and Projections for the Characteristics of SOMA Treasury Holdings”
provides more information on the duration of the SOMA Treasury portfolio.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 55 of 62

--- Page 59 ---

snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 56 of 62

--- Page 60 ---

Confidence Interval Projections of the Balance Sheet
The elevated size of the Federal Reserve’s portfolio and the duration mismatch
between its assets and liabilities have long prompted discussions regarding possible
financial losses when interest rates rise. To help quantify the Fed’s interest rate risk,
this box analyzes a range of potential macroeconomic outcomes and their
implications for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and income. 1 We use the paths
of macroeconomic variables generated by stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model
around the December Tealbook baseline and a staff MBS prepayment model to
project confidence intervals for the evolution of SOMA holdings, reserve balances,
and income.2 Key inputs are the paths for the federal funds rate and the 10year
Treasury yield, shown in the upper two panels of the exhibit titled “Interest Rates and
Selected Assets and Liabilities of the Balance Sheet.”3
The size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet as well as the
associated income can shift with macroeconomic outcomes. In particular, because
agency MBS have an embedded prepayment option, the stock of MBS held in the
SOMA depends importantly on interest rates and economic conditions. Moreover,
changes in agency MBS holdings can, in turn, bring about different paths for SOMA
Treasury holdings once the size of the balance sheet is normalized.4 The middle left
panel of the first exhibit shows that the set of simulated paths for SOMA holdings
before the normalization of the size of the balance sheet mostly lies below the
baseline path. Most of this skew reflects the asymmetric effects of different interest
rate paths on MBS prepayments. Specifically, interest rates rising above the baseline
path would slow refinancing activity only slightly more, thereby producing a relatively
muted effect on the path of prepayments for agency MBS. Alternatively, rates below
the baseline path will likely hasten prepayments, thus reducing the amount of agency
MBS holdings. As shown in the lower right panel, SOMA agency MBS holdings are
projected to range from $485 billion to $820 billion in 2025.
Variation in the path for interest rates will also influence two other measures reported
to the public: remittances to the Treasury and the unrealized gain or loss on the Fed’s
1 Academic research also addresses this issue; for example, one method is to use a probabilistic
approach to study the interest rate risk of the SOMA portfolio. See Jens H.E. Christensen, Jose A.
Lopez, and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2015), “A ProbabilityBased Stress Test of Federal Reserve Assets
and Income,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 73 (April), pp. 26–43.
2 We assume that the Federal Reserve does not respond with unconventional policy tools to
future economic conditions, i.e., no further asset purchases will be conducted in response to
adverse shocks. We also assume that liftoff occurs in December 2015 and that reinvestment ends six
months after liftoff.
3 These interest rate paths are the same as those used in constructing the panels shown in
December Tealbook A, p. 72. The solid line is the staff’s baseline projection. The dark and lighter
grey areas represent the 70 and 90 interpercentile ranges, respectively.
4
In addition, because currency largely determines the longerrun size of the balance sheet, the
assumption that currency expands at a rate equal to that of projected nominal GDP growth implies
that different simulated paths for nominal GDP result in different balance sheet projections.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
‐
‐
‐
Page 57 of 62

--- Page 61 ---

snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 58 of 62

--- Page 62 ---

securities holdings. Remittances largely reflect the net interest income of the Federal
Reserve. As shown in the upper two panels of the exhibit labeled “Income
Projections,” in the years prior to the normalization of the size of the balance sheet,
interest income displays substantially less dispersion than interest expense under a
range of macroeconomic scenarios. Consequently, the confidence intervals associated
with Federal Reserve remittances (the middle right panel) primarily reflect the
sensitivity of interest expense to changes in shortterm interest rates. Conversely,
after the size of the balance sheet is normalized, interest income exhibits more
variability than interest expense. Specifically, the higher dispersion of interest income
reflects the purchases of new securities with yields that track market interest rates at
the time of purchase, whereas the assumption of relatively low reserve balances
restrains total interest expense. As exhibited in the lower left panel, only about
15 percent of the simulations are associated with interest rates high enough to induce
a deferred asset.
As shown in the lower right panel, the portfolio is projected to shift to an unrealized
loss position by the middle of 2016 and record a peak unrealized loss of about
$235 billion at the end of 2018. However, as shown by the lower edge of the
90 percent confidence interval, the unrealized loss in some scenarios could reach
$570 billion or more. Although the baseline path implies that the unrealized loss
position subsequently narrows through 2025, some simulations result in an unrealized
loss position larger than $400 billion in 2025. Under the assumption that no securities
are being sold from the portfolio in any of the scenarios, no realized losses are
incurred and unrealized losses fall to zero as the securities mature.5
5 The Committee does not anticipate selling agency mortgagebacked securities as part of the
normalization process. Instead, the FOMC intends to reduce the Federal Reserve’s securities
holdings in a gradual and predictable manner primarily by ceasing to reinvest repayments of
principal on securities held in the SOMA. Nevertheless, the quarterend market value of the SOMA
portfolio is published in the Federal Reserve Banks Combined Quarterly Financial Reports, available
at http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_fedfinancials.htm#quarterly and could garner
some public attention. Weekly remittances are reported in the H.4.1 statistical release.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
‐
‐
‐
Page 59 of 62

--- Page 63 ---

(This page is intentionally blank.)
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Page 60 of 62

--- Page 64 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
Abbreviations
ABS asset-backed securities
BEA Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce
BHC bank holding company
CDS credit default swaps
CFTC Commodity Futures Trading Commission
C&I commercial and industrial
CLO collateralized loan obligation
CMBS commercial mortgage-backed securities
CPI consumer price index
CRE commercial real estate
Desk Open Market Desk
ECB European Central Bank
EDO Estimated, dynamic, optimization-based model
EME emerging market economy
FDIC Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
FOMC Federal Open Market Committee; also, the Committee
GCF general collateral finance
GDI gross domestic income
GDP gross domestic product
GSIBs globally systemically important banking organizations
HQLA high-quality liquid assets
ISM Institute for Supply Management
LIBOR London interbank offered rate
MBS mortgage-backed securities
MMFs money market funds
NIPA national income and product accounts
OIS overnight index swap
Page 61 of 62

--- Page 65 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 10, 2015
ON RRP overnight reverse repurchase agreement
PCE personal consumption expenditures
repo repurchase agreement
RMBS residential mortgage-backed securities
RRP reverse repurchase agreement
SCOOS Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms
SEP Summary of Economic Projections
SFA Supplemental Financing Account
SLOOS Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices
SOMA System Open Market Account
TBA to be announced (for example, TBA market)
TGA U.S. Treasury’s General Account
TIPS Treasury inflation-protected securities
TPE Term premium effects
Page 62 of 62

# Tables

## Page_14_Table_1


| 2015   |    | 2016   | 2017   | 2018   |
|--------|----|--------|--------|--------|
| H1     | H2 |        |        |        |


## Page_15_Table_1


| 2016   |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|--------|----|----|----|----|----|----|
| Q1     | Q2 | Q3 | Q4 | Q1 | Q2 | Q3 |