# 20141029_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:37:29*
*Pages: 12, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
October 28–29, 2014
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on
Tuesday, October 28, 2014, at 1:00 p.m. and continued Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability
on Wednesday, October 29, 2014, at 9:00 a.m. Policy and Research, Board of Governors
PRESENT: Stephen A. Meyer and William R. Nelson, Deputy
Janet L. Yellen, Chair Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Governors
Lael Brainard
Stanley Fischer Andrew Figura, David Reifschneider, and Stacey
Richard W. Fisher Tevlin, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of
Narayana Kocherlakota Board Members, Board of Governors
Loretta J. Mester
Charles I. Plosser Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office
Jerome H. Powell of Board Members, Board of Governors
Daniel K. Tarullo
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Jeffrey M. Board Members, Board of Governors
Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and John C. Williams,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Christopher J. Erceg, Senior Associate Director,
Committee Division of International Finance, Board of
Governors
James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren,
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers,
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
William B. English, Secretary and Economist Eric M. Engen and David E. Lebow, Associate Direc-
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary tors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Governors; Fabio M. Natalucci,1 Associate Direc-
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel tor, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gover-
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel nors
Steven B. Kamin, Economist
David W. Wilcox, Economist Joseph W. Gruber, Deputy Associate Director,
Division of International Finance, Board of
James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Evan F. Governors; John J. Stevens,2 Deputy Associate
Koenig, Thomas Laubach, Samuel Schulhofer- Director, Division of Research and Statistics,
Wohl, and William Wascher, Associate Economists Board of Governors
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Steven A. Sharpe, Assistant Director, Division of Re-
search and Statistics, Board of Governors
Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open
Market Account _____________________________
1 Attended the joint session of the Federal Open Market
Robert deV. Frierson,1 Secretary of the Board, Office
Committee and the Board of Governors.
of the Secretary, Board of Governors
2 Attended the portion of the meeting following the joint
session of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board
of Governors.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Patrick E. McCabe,1 Adviser, Division of Research and Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
Statistics, Board of Governors; Robert J. Tetlow,3 eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of In a joint session of the Federal Open Market Commit-
Governors tee (FOMC) and the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, the deputy manager of the System
Penelope A. Beattie,1 Assistant to the Secretary, Office Open Market Account (SOMA) reported on develop-
of the Secretary, Board of Governors ments in domestic and foreign financial markets as well
as System open market operations conducted during the
Christopher J. Gust, Section Chief, Division of period since the Committee met on September 16–17,
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 2014. In addition, the deputy manager summarized the
outcomes of recent test operations of the Term Deposit
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Facility, described the results from the overnight reverse
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors repurchase agreement (ON RRP) operational exercise,
and reviewed the implications of recent foreign central
Katie Ross,1 Manager, Office of the Secretary, Board of bank policy actions for the international portion of the
Governors SOMA portfolio. The SOMA manager then discussed
the Open Market Desk’s plans for modestly expanding
Canlin Li, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary the list of counterparties eligible to participate in ON
Affairs, Board of Governors RRP operations based on substantially the same criteria
established in the past for such counterparties. The
Randall A. Williams, Records Project Manager, manager also described ongoing staff work on improv-
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors ing data collections regarding bank funding markets and
possibly using those data to provide more robust
Helen E. Holcomb, First Vice President, Federal measures of bank funding rates. Finally, the manager
Reserve Bank of Dallas reported on potential arrangements that would allow de-
pository institutions to pledge funds held in a segregated
David Altig, Jeff Fuhrer, James J. McAndrews, and account at the Federal Reserve as collateral in borrowing
Glenn D. Rudebusch, Executive Vice Presidents, transactions with private creditors and would provide an
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, New additional supplementary tool during policy normaliza-
York, and San Francisco, respectively tion; the manager noted possible next steps that the staff
could potentially undertake to investigate the issues re-
Troy Davig, Michael Dotsey, Joshua L. Frost,1 Spencer lated to such arrangements.
Krane, and Christopher J. Waller, Senior Vice
Next, the staff outlined two proposals that the Commit-
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,
tee could consider for further testing of RRP operations.
Philadelphia, New York, Chicago, and St. Louis,
In the first proposal, the Desk would vary by modest
respectively
amounts the interest rate on ON RRP operations ac-
cording to a preannounced schedule. Varying the spread
Todd E. Clark and Douglas Tillett, Vice Presidents,
between the ON RRP rate and the interest on excess re-
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and Chicago,
serves rate could provide the Committee with infor-
respectively
mation about the effect of that spread on money markets
and the demand for ON RRP. In addition, changes in
Andreas L. Hornstein, Senior Advisor, Federal Reserve
the ON RRP rate would provide further information
Bank of Richmond
about the effectiveness of an ON RRP facility in provid-
ing a floor for money market rates during policy normal-
_____________________________
ization. In the second proposal, the Desk would con-
1 Attended the joint session of the Federal Open Market duct a series of preannounced term RRP operations that
Committee and the Board of Governors. would extend across the end of the year. In their discus-
3 Attended the discussion of longer-run goals and monetary
sion of term RRP testing, participants noted that the
policy strategy.
testing could provide information about the potential ef-
fectiveness of another of the Committee’s supplemen-

--- Page 3 ---

____________________________M__in__ut_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ O__c_to_b_e_r_ 2_8_–_2_9_, _2_0_1_4_______________________P_a_g_e_ _3
tary policy tools and would help address expected down- ten basis points; (iv) be awarded to all submit-
ward pressures on short-term rates at year-end. But it ters: (A) at the highest submitted rate if the
was also noted that by conducting the term RRPs, the sum of the bids received is less than or equal
Committee would be losing information on how market to the preannounced size of the operation, or
participants might adjust and make investment arrange- (B) at the stopout rate, determined by evalu-
ments prior to year-end with only the $300 billion in ON ating bids in ascending order by submitted
RRP available. One participant commented that the rate up to the point at which the total quantity
downward pressure on rates at year-end might be more of bids equals the preannounced size of the
directly addressed by raising the overall size limit on the operation, with all bids below this rate
ON RRP exercise. However, it was emphasized that in- awarded in full at the stopout rate and all bids
creasing the cap on ON RRP operations at year-end at the stopout rate awarded on a pro rata basis,
could raise the risks for financial markets that had led if the sum of the counterparty offers received
the FOMC to impose the cap; these concerns were seen is greater than the preannounced size of the
as less pronounced with a temporary program of term operation. Such operations may be for for-
RRP operations. It was also noted that the proposed ward settlement. The System Open Market
term RRP operations were only a test and that the Com- Account manager will inform the FOMC in
mittee had not yet decided the conditions under which advance of the terms of the planned opera-
such operations would be used in the future. tions. The Chair must approve the terms of,
timing of the announcement of, and timing of
Following the discussion of the testing of RRP opera-
the operations. These operations shall be
tions, the Committee unanimously approved the follow-
conducted in addition to the authorized over-
ing resolution on the ON RRP exercise:
night reverse repurchase agreements, which
“The Federal Open Market Committee remain subject to a separate overall size limit
(FOMC) modifies the authorization concern- of $300 billion per day.”
ing overnight reverse repurchase operations
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
adopted at the September 17, 2014, FOMC
domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.
meeting as follows:
There were no intervention operations in foreign curren-
(i) The offering rate of the operations may cies for the System’s account over the intermeeting pe-
vary from zero to ten basis points. riod.
This modification shall be effective beginning The Board meeting concluded at the end of the discus-
with the operation conducted on Novem- sion of developments in financial markets and the Fed-
ber 3, 2014, and conclude with the operation eral Reserve’s balance sheet.
conducted on December 12, 2014.”
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
By unanimous vote, the Committee approved the fol- The information reviewed for the October 28–29 meet-
lowing resolution on term RRP operations: ing indicated that economic activity expanded at a mod-
erate pace in the third quarter and that labor market con-
“During the period of December 1, 2014, to
ditions improved over the intermeeting period. Con-
December 30, 2014, the Federal Open Market
sumer price inflation continued to run below the
Committee (FOMC) authorizes the Federal
FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent. Market-
Reserve Bank of New York to conduct a se-
based measures of inflation compensation declined
ries of term reverse repurchase operations in-
somewhat, while survey-based measures of longer-term
volving U.S. Government securities. Such
inflation expectations remained stable.
operations shall: (i) mature no later than Jan-
uary 5, 2015; (ii) be subject to an overall size Total nonfarm payroll employment rose in September
limit of $300 billion outstanding at any one and the gains for July and August were revised up, leav-
time; (iii) be subject to a maximum bid rate of ing the average increase in the third quarter similar to
 Following the conclusion of the meeting, the Desk released
a statement outlining the planned ON RRP and term RRP ex-
ercises.

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
that for the first half of the year. In September, the un- tember but remained above the level of shipments, indi-
employment rate declined to 5.9 percent, and the share cating that shipments may increase further in subsequent
of workers employed part time for economic reasons de- months. Other forward-looking indicators, such as na-
creased a little. The labor force participation rate edged tional and regional surveys of business conditions, were
down, and the employment-to-population ratio re- generally consistent with moderate gains in business
mained essentially unchanged. Other indicators gener- equipment spending in the near term. Nominal business
ally suggested a continued improvement in labor market spending for new nonresidential construction decreased
conditions. Although the rate of gross private-sector in August, and vacancy rates for nonresidential buildings
hiring declined, the rate of job openings moved up, remained elevated. Meanwhile, inventories in most in-
measures of firms’ hiring plans increased, initial claims dustries were about in line with sales; in the energy sec-
for unemployment insurance remained low, and some tor, inventories appeared somewhat lean despite sub-
measures of household expectations for labor market stantial stockbuilding since earlier in the year.
conditions improved.
Total real government purchases appeared to have risen
Industrial production increased briskly in September af- modestly in the third quarter. Federal government pur-
ter having been little changed, on net, over the first two chases likely increased, as nominal defense spending was
months of the quarter, and the rate of capacity utilization higher in the third quarter than in the second quarter. In
in the manufacturing sector moved up. Readings on addition, real state and local government purchases
new orders from the national and regional manufactur- probably rose somewhat, as the payrolls of these gov-
ing surveys were generally consistent with moderate ernments expanded and their nominal construction ex-
near-term increases in factory output, but automakers’ penditures increased during the third quarter.
production schedules for the fourth quarter pointed to
The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed slightly in
some slowing in the pace of motor vehicle assemblies.
August. Following large increases in July, both exports
Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) ap- and imports grew only modestly, with gains concen-
peared to have increased at a modest pace in the third trated in capital goods excluding automotive products.
quarter. The components of the nominal retail sales data
Total U.S. consumer price inflation, as measured by the
used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis to construct
PCE price index, was about 1½ percent over the
its estimates of PCE were, in total, little changed in Sep-
12 months ending in August. Over the 12 months end-
tember following solid gains in July and August. In ad-
ing in September, both the consumer price index (CPI)
dition, sales of light motor vehicles fell back in Septem-
and the CPI excluding food and energy prices rose about
ber following a steep increase in August. Recent data on
1¾ percent. Consumer energy prices declined further in
factors that tend to support household spending were
September, largely reflecting continued declines in retail
mixed. Real disposable income continued to increase in
gasoline prices, and survey data suggested gasoline prices
August, and consumer sentiment as measured by the
fell further over the first few weeks of October. Con-
Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of
sumer food prices rose solidly in recent months. Near-
Consumers improved in September and early October.
term inflation expectations from the Michigan survey
In contrast, household net worth likely decreased be-
declined in September and early October, while longer-
cause of a decline in equity prices.
term inflation expectations in the survey were little
Housing market conditions seemed to be improving changed.
only slowly. Starts and permits of single-family homes
Foreign economies appeared to have continued to ex-
were little changed, on net, in recent months. New
pand at a moderate rate in the third quarter, although
home sales were flat in September after moving up in
with considerable divergence across countries. In Japan,
August, and sales of existing single-family homes moved
consumption staged a mild rebound after contracting in
essentially sideways over the past several months.
the previous quarter in response to a tax increase, while
Real spending on business equipment and intellectual indicators for the euro area pointed to only continued
property products appeared to have risen at a moderate sluggish growth. Third-quarter growth in real gross do-
pace in the third quarter. Nominal shipments of nonde- mestic product (GDP) remained healthy in the United
fense capital goods excluding aircraft were little changed, Kingdom, and indicators for Canada also were positive.
on net, in August and September after a solid increase in Among emerging market economies, GDP growth re-
July. New orders for these capital goods declined in Sep- mained strong in the third quarter in China and Korea
and indicators for Mexico were favorable as well. The

--- Page 5 ---

____________________________M__in__ut_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ O__c_to_b_e_r_ 2_8_–_2_9_, _2_0_1_4_______________________P_a_g_e_ _5
Brazilian economy appeared to be stabilizing. Foreign the summer. The decline in inflation compensation re-
inflation remained generally subdued and in some re- portedly reflected in part concerns about global growth
gions quite low, especially in the euro area, where head- and the risk of building disinflationary pressures, the
line inflation was well below 1 percent. lower-than-expected August CPI report, the decline in
oil prices, and the appreciation of the U.S. dollar. Yields
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
on agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) declined
Concerns about the global economic outlook apparently
roughly in line with comparable Treasury yields, while
helped to prompt a sharp pullback from risky assets in
spreads on both investment- and speculative-grade cor-
the United States, but prices of those assets subsequently
porate bonds widened modestly relative to Treasury se-
reversed much of their declines by the end of the inter-
curities.
meeting period. In addition, a number of technical fac-
tors reportedly contributed to volatile interest rate The S&P 500 index decreased about 1 percent, on net,
moves in mid-October. Worries about a possible spread over the intermeeting period. Option-implied volatility
of Ebola also appeared to weigh on market sentiment for the S&P 500 index over the next month increased
somewhat at times. On net, yields on longer-term Treas- moderately, on balance, ending the period below its
ury securities fell notably, U.S. equity prices edged down, long-run historical average, though during the mid-
corporate bond spreads widened modestly, and the dol- October volatility spike, it briefly touched high levels last
lar appreciated moderately against most other curren- seen in 2011. About half of the firms in the S&P 500
cies. index reported earnings for the third quarter, with the
reports generally viewed as positive. Overall, third-
Federal Reserve communications were reportedly
quarter earnings estimates continued to imply modest
viewed as slightly more accommodative than antici-
growth in earnings per share compared with the previ-
pated, on balance. The expected path of the federal
ous quarter.
funds rate implied by market quotes shifted down nota-
bly, on net, over the period. Market-based measures Despite some volatility related to quarter-end, condi-
suggested that the expected date of the first increase in tions in unsecured funding markets were little changed,
the federal funds rate was pushed out from the third on net, over the intermeeting period. In secured funding
quarter of 2015 to late 2015. However, the results from markets, some money market rates fell in the days lead-
the Desk’s October Survey of Primary Dealers indicated ing up to quarter-end, reportedly reflecting in part the
that the dealers’ projected path of the federal funds rate announcement of the $300 billion overall size limit on
was little changed from the September survey, with deal- the ON RRP exercise following the September FOMC
ers continuing to see the middle of next year as the most meeting. After quarter-end, however, short-term rates
likely time of liftoff. generally moved back toward their preannouncement
levels.
The Treasury market experienced significant volatility
on October 15, with 5- and 10-year Treasury yields drop- Credit flows to nonfinancial business picked up in Sep-
ping as much as 30 basis points in about an hour before tember and early October. Gross issuance of invest-
retracing much of those moves by the end of the day. ment- and speculative-grade bonds rebounded from sea-
Amid very high trading volumes, Treasury market liquid- sonal lows over the summer, notwithstanding the slow-
ity, as measured by bid–asked spreads, worsened signifi- down during the mid-October market volatility spike.
cantly, and measures of the implied volatility of longer- Commercial and industrial loans on banks’ books con-
term rates jumped on the day but subsequently fell back. tinued to expand at a robust pace in the third quarter,
While the release of the somewhat weaker-than- consistent with the strong demand from large and
expected data for September U.S. retail sales was seen as middle-market firms reported in the October Senior
the trigger for these sharp movements, market partici- Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Prac-
pants indicated that a number of technical factors related tices (SLOOS). In the leveraged loan market, institu-
to investor positioning and trading strategies likely am- tional issuance slowed some in September, though in-
plified the swing in interest rates. vestors’ interest in the asset class remained strong.
Over the intermeeting period as a whole, longer-term Financing conditions in the commercial real estate
nominal Treasury yields declined about 30 basis points. (CRE) market continued to ease. According to the Oc-
Market-based measures of inflation compensation tober SLOOS, banks eased CRE lending standards, on
moved lower as well, extending the declines seen since net, and reported stronger demand for such loans.
Growth of CRE loans on the balance sheets of large

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
banks slowed in the third quarter, while growth at small the U.S. financial system appeared resilient to shocks of
banks remained moderate. Issuance of commercial the magnitude seen recently due to the relatively strong
mortgage-backed securities stayed robust in September. capital and liquidity profiles of large domestic banking
firms, subdued aggregate leverage in the nonfinancial
Over the intermeeting period, mortgage rates to quali-
sector, and relatively restrained use of short-term whole-
fied borrowers declined about 25 basis points. The de-
sale funding across the financial sector. However, the
cline in rates coincided with an appreciable increase in
staff report also pointed to asset valuation pressures that
the volume of refinancing activity. Mortgage lending
were broadening, as well as a loosening of underwriting
conditions were little changed on net.
standards in the speculative corporate debt and CRE
Conditions in most consumer credit markets remained markets; it noted the need to closely monitor these de-
accommodative during the third quarter. Auto loans velopments going forward.
continued to be widely available, and respondents to the
Staff Economic Outlook
October SLOOS indicated that demand for auto loans
The information on economic activity received since the
had strengthened further in the third quarter. In addi-
staff prepared its forecast for the September FOMC
tion, demand for credit card loans increased, and a few
meeting was close to expectations, and therefore, the
large banks reported having eased lending policies on
staff’s projection for real GDP growth over the remain-
such loans.
der of the year was little revised. However, in response
As in the United States, participants in foreign financial to a further rise in the foreign exchange value of the dol-
markets became more concerned, on balance, about lar, a deterioration in global growth prospects, and a de-
prospects for global economic growth. On net over the cline in equity prices, the staff revised down its projec-
period, equity indexes were down in most advanced and tion for real GDP growth a little over the medium term.
emerging market economies, and measures of implied Even with the slower expansion of economic activity in
volatility rose. Benchmark sovereign yields fell sharply, this projection, real GDP was still expected to rise faster
with German yields reaching record lows. Expected pol- than potential output in 2015 and 2016, supported by
icy rate paths moved down in most advanced econo- accommodative monetary policy and a further easing of
mies, and market-based measures of inflation compen- the restraint on spending from changes in fiscal policy;
sation continued to decline. The Riksbank unexpectedly in 2017, real GDP growth was projected to step down
cut its main policy rate to zero in response to the low toward the rate of potential output growth. As a result,
level of Swedish inflation. Spreads on peripheral Euro- resource slack was anticipated to decline steadily, albeit
pean sovereign bonds increased, modestly for most at a slightly slower rate than in the previous projection,
countries but more substantially for Greek bonds, re- and the unemployment rate was expected to gradually
flecting, in part, market concerns that Greece might exit improve and to be at the staff’s estimate of its longer-
its International Monetary Fund program prematurely. run natural rate in 2017.
Spreads on emerging market bonds generally edged
The staff’s forecast for inflation this quarter and early
higher. In addition, the broad nominal dollar index
next year was reduced in response to further declines in
ended the period moderately higher.
crude oil prices, but the forecast for inflation over the
The European Central Bank released the results of the medium term was only a touch lower. Consumer price
2014 comprehensive assessment, which included both inflation was projected to be lower in the second half of
an asset quality review and a forward-looking stress test. this year than in the first half and to remain below the
Under the stress test, which recognizes capital raising Committee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent over the
and balance sheet adjustments through September 2014, next few years. With resource slack projected to dimin-
13 banks were identified as needing to strengthen their ish slowly and changes in commodity and import prices
capital positions and 8 will be required to raise net new anticipated to be subdued, inflation was projected to rise
capital. The results were broadly in line with expecta- gradually and to reach the Committee’s objective in the
tions, and the market reaction to the release was limited. longer run.
The staff’s periodic report on potential risks to financial The staff continued to view the uncertainty around its
stability noted that recent developments in financial projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment
markets highlighted the potential for shocks to trigger rate, and inflation as similar to the average over the past
increases in market volatility and declines in asset prices 20 years. The risks to the forecast for real GDP growth
that could undermine financial stability. Nevertheless,

--- Page 7 ---

____________________________M__in__ut_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ O__c_to_b_e_r_ 2_8_–_2_9_, _2_0_1_4_______________________P_a_g_e_ _7
and inflation were seen as tilted to the downside, reflect- factors that were expected to support continued growth
ing recent financial developments and concerns about in consumer spending, participants cited solid gains in
the foreign economic outlook, as well as the staff’s as- payroll employment, low interest rates, rising consumer
sessment that neither monetary policy nor fiscal policy confidence, and the decline in levels of household debt
appeared well positioned to help the economy withstand relative to income.
adverse shocks. At the same time, the staff continued to
The recovery in the housing sector remained slow de-
view the risks around its outlook for the unemployment
spite low interest rates and some recent improvement in
rate as roughly balanced.
the availability of mortgage credit. Contacts in some
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the parts of the country reported continued weakness in
Economic Outlook single-family construction, while in other regions activity
In their discussion of the economic situation and the reportedly was picking up gradually following a sluggish
outlook, most meeting participants viewed the infor- summer. A few participants pointed to continued strong
mation received over the intermeeting period as suggest- growth in multifamily construction, although the limited
ing that economic activity continued to expand at a mod- pipeline of new projects in one District suggested that
erate pace. Labor market conditions improved some- activity could slow in 2015.
what further, with solid job gains and a lower unemploy-
Reports from business contacts in many parts of the
ment rate; on balance, participants judged that the un-
country pointed to an improvement in business condi-
derutilization of labor resources was gradually diminish-
tions, with indexes of the manufacturing sector posting
ing. Participants generally expected that, over the me-
broad-based gains in recent months in a number of Dis-
dium term, real economic activity would increase at a
tricts. A couple of participants reported expectations of
pace sufficient to lead to a further gradual decline in the
a robust holiday sales season based on accumulating in-
unemployment rate toward levels consistent with the
ventories of consumer goods or an increase in e-com-
Committee’s objective of maximum employment. Infla-
merce traffic and related transportation activity. Con-
tion was continuing to run below the Committee’s
tacts in several regions reported ready availability of
longer-run objective. Market-based measures of infla-
credit, strong loan growth, or a steady increase in com-
tion compensation declined somewhat, while survey-
mercial construction activity. While the fall in energy
based measures of longer-term inflation expectations re-
prices was generally regarded as a positive development
mained stable. Participants anticipated that inflation
for many businesses, it was noted that a sustained drop
would be held down over the near term by the decline in
in prices would have effects on oil drilling and related
energy prices and other factors, but would move toward
investment activity. In the agricultural sector, the robust
the Committee’s 2 percent goal in coming years, alt-
fall harvest had driven down crop prices; food pro-
hough a few expressed concern that inflation might per-
cessing and farm equipment businesses were slowing as
sist below the Committee’s objective for quite some
a result of lower farm income and a drop in exports.
time. Most viewed the risks to the outlook for economic
activity and the labor market as nearly balanced. How- In discussing economic developments abroad, partici-
ever, a number of participants noted that economic pants pointed to a somewhat weaker economic outlook
growth over the medium term might be slower than they and increased downside risks in Europe, China, and Ja-
currently expected if the foreign economic or financial pan, as well as to the strengthening of the dollar over the
situation deteriorated significantly. period. It was observed that if foreign economic or fi-
nancial conditions deteriorated further, U.S. economic
Household spending advanced at a moderate pace over
growth over the medium term might be slower than cur-
the intermeeting period, and reports from contacts in
rently expected. However, many participants saw the ef-
several parts of the country indicated that recent retail or
fects of recent developments on the domestic economy
auto sales had been robust. However, one participant
as likely to be quite limited. These participants suggested
pointed to mixed retail sales reports that likely reflected
variously that the share of external trade in the U.S.
a continuation of restrained discretionary spending on
economy is relatively small, that the effects of changes
the part of low- and middle-income households. Many
in the value of the dollar on net exports are modest, that
participants judged that the recent significant decline in
shifts in the structure of U.S. trade and production over
energy prices would provide a boost to consumer spend-
time may have reduced the effects on U.S. trade of de-
ing over the near term, with several of them noting that
velopments like those seen of late, or that the slowdown
the drop in gasoline prices would benefit lower-income
in external demand would likely prove to be less severe
households in particular. Among the other favorable

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
than initially feared. Several participants judged that the makers might still want to take them into account be-
decline in the prices of energy and other commodities as cause such a change could reflect increased concerns on
well as lower long-term interest rates would likely pro- the part of investors about adverse outcomes in which
vide an offset to the higher dollar and weaker foreign low inflation was accompanied by weak economic activ-
growth, or that the domestic recovery remained on a ity. A couple of participants noted that it was likely too
firm footing. early to draw conclusions regarding these developments,
especially in light of the recent market volatility. How-
Indicators of labor market conditions continued to im-
ever, many participants observed that the Committee
prove over the intermeeting period, with a further reduc-
should remain attentive to evidence of a possible down-
tion in the unemployment rate, declines in longer-
ward shift in longer-term inflation expectations; some of
duration unemployment, strong growth in payroll em-
them noted that if such an outcome occurred, it would
ployment, and a low level of initial claims for unemploy-
be even more worrisome if growth faltered.
ment insurance. Business contacts reported employ-
ment gains in several parts of the country, with relatively In their discussion of financial market developments and
few pointing to emerging wage pressures, although one financial stability issues, participants judged that the
participant indicated that larger wage gains had been ac- movements in the prices of stocks, bonds, commodities,
cruing to some individuals who switched jobs. Labor and the U.S. dollar over the intermeeting period ap-
market conditions indexes constructed from a broad set peared to have been driven primarily by concerns about
of indicators suggested that the underutilization of labor prospects for foreign economic growth. Many partici-
had continued to diminish, although a number of partic- pants commented on the turbulence in financial markets
ipants noted that underutilization of labor market re- that occurred in mid-October. Some participants
sources remained. A couple of participants judged that pointed out that, despite the market volatility, financial
the large number of individuals working part time for conditions remained highly accommodative and that
economic reasons and the continued drift down in the further pockets of turbulence were likely to arise as the
labor force participation rate suggested that the unem- start of policy normalization approached. That said,
ployment rate was understating the degree of labor mar- more work to better understand the recent market dy-
ket underutilization. namics was seen as desirable. In addition, a couple of
participants noted the potential usefulness of collecting
Most participants anticipated that inflation was likely to
additional data on wholesale funding markets in order to
edge lower in the near term, reflecting the decline in oil
better understand how changes in interest rates could in-
and other commodity prices and lower import prices.
fluence those markets.
These participants continued to expect inflation to move
back to the Committee’s 2 percent target over the me- In their discussion of communications regarding the
dium term as resource slack diminished in an environ- path of the federal funds rate over the medium term,
ment of well-anchored inflation expectations, although meeting participants agreed that the timing of the first
a few of them thought the return to 2 percent might be increase in the federal funds rate and the appropriate
quite gradual. Survey-based measures of inflation expec- path of the policy rate thereafter would depend on in-
tations remained well anchored, but market-based coming economic data and their implications for the
measures of inflation compensation over the next five outlook. Most participants judged that it would be help-
years as well as over the five-year period beginning five ful to include new language in the Committee’s forward
years ahead had declined over the intermeeting period. guidance to clarify how the Committee’s decision about
Various explanations were offered for the decline in the when to begin the policy normalization process will de-
market-based measures, and participants expressed dif- pend on incoming information about the economy.
ferent views about how to interpret these recent move- Some participants preferred to eliminate language in the
ments. The explanations included a decline in inflation statement indicating that the current target range for the
risk premiums, possibly reflecting a lower perceived federal funds rate would likely be maintained for a “con-
probability of higher inflation outcomes; and special fac- siderable time” after the end of the asset purchase pro-
tors, including liquidity risk premiums, that might be in- gram. These participants were concerned that such a
fluencing the pricing of Treasury Inflation-Protected Se- characterization could be misinterpreted as suggesting
curities and inflation derivatives. One participant noted that the Committee’s decisions would not depend on the
that even if the declines reflected lower inflation risk pre- incoming data. However, other participants thought
miums and not a reduction in expected inflation, policy- that the “considerable time” phrase was useful in com-

--- Page 9 ---

____________________________M__in__ut_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ O__c_to_b_e_r_ 2_8_–_2_9_, _2_0_1_4_______________________P_a_g_e_ _9
municating the Committee’s policy intentions or that ad- moderate pace, with labor market indicators and infla-
ditional wording could be used to emphasize the data- tion moving toward levels the Committee judges con-
dependence of the Committee’s decision process. A sistent with its dual mandate.
couple of them noted that the removal of the “consider-
In their discussion of language for the post-meeting
able time” phrase might be seen as signaling a significant
statement, a number of members judged that, while
shift in the stance of policy, potentially resulting in an
some underutilization in the labor market remained, it
unintended tightening of financial conditions. A couple
appeared to be gradually diminishing. In addition, mem-
of others thought that the current forward guidance
bers considered the advantages and disadvantages of
might be read as suggesting an earlier date of liftoff than
adding language to the statement to acknowledge recent
was likely to prove appropriate, given the outlook for in-
developments in financial markets. On the one hand,
flation and the downside risks to the economy associated
including a reference would show that the Committee
with the effective lower bound on interest rates. With
was monitoring financial developments while also
regard to the pace of interest rate increases after the start
providing an opportunity to note that financial condi-
of policy normalization, a number of participants
tions remained highly supportive of growth. On the
thought that it could soon be helpful to clarify the Com-
other hand, including a reference risked the possibility
mittee’s likely approach. It was noted that communica-
of suggesting greater concern on the part of the Com-
tion about post-liftoff policy would pose challenges
mittee than was actually the case, perhaps leading to the
given the inherent uncertainty of the economic and fi-
misimpression that monetary policy was likely to re-
nancial outlook and the Committee’s desire to retain
spond to increases in volatility. In the end, the Commit-
flexibility to adjust policy in response to the incoming
tee decided not to include such a reference. Finally, a
data. Most participants supported retaining the language
couple of members suggested including language in the
in the statement indicating that the Committee antici-
statement indicating that recent foreign economic devel-
pates that economic conditions may warrant keeping the
opments had increased uncertainty or had boosted
target range for the federal funds rate below longer-run
downside risks to the U.S. economic outlook, but partic-
normal levels even after employment and inflation are
ipants generally judged that such wording would suggest
near mandate-consistent levels. However, a couple of
greater pessimism about the economic outlook than they
participants thought that the language should be
thought appropriate.
amended in light of the prescriptions suggested by many
monetary policy rules and the risks associated with keep- In their discussion of the asset purchase program, mem-
ing interest rates below their longer-run values for an ex- bers generally agreed that the condition articulated by
tended period of time. the Committee when it began the program in September
2012 had been achieved—that is, there had been a sub-
Committee Policy Action
stantial improvement in the outlook for the labor mar-
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
ket—and that there was sufficient underlying strength in
ahead, members judged that information received since
the broader economy to support ongoing progress to-
the FOMC met in September indicated that economic
ward maximum employment in a context of price stabil-
activity was expanding at a moderate pace. Labor mar-
ity. Accordingly, all members but one supported con-
ket conditions had improved somewhat further, with
cluding the Committee’s asset purchase program at the
solid job gains and a lower unemployment rate; on bal-
end of October and maintaining its existing policy of re-
ance, a range of indicators suggested that underutiliza-
investing principal payments from its holdings of agency
tion of labor resources was gradually diminishing.
debt and agency MBS in agency MBS and of rolling over
Household spending was rising moderately and business
maturing Treasury securities at auction. By keeping the
fixed investment was advancing, while the recovery in
Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities at sizable
the housing sector remained slow. Inflation had contin-
levels, this policy was expected to help maintain accom-
ued to run below the Committee’s longer-run objective.
modative financial conditions.
Market-based measures of inflation compensation had
declined somewhat, but survey-based measures of In addition, the Committee agreed to maintain the target
longer-term inflation expectations had remained stable. range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and to
The Committee expected that, with appropriate policy reaffirm the indication in the statement that the Com-
accommodation, economic activity would expand at a mittee’s decision about how long to maintain the current
target range for the federal funds rate would depend on
its assessment of actual and expected progress toward its

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent in- securities into new issues and its policy of
flation. All but one member agreed that the Committee reinvesting principal payments on all agency
should reiterate the expectation that it likely would be debt and agency mortgage-backed securities
appropriate to maintain the current target range for the in agency mortgage-backed securities. The
federal funds rate for a considerable time following the Committee also directs the Desk to engage in
end of the asset purchase program in October, especially dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
if projected inflation continued to run below the Com- necessary to facilitate settlement of the
mittee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and provided that Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed
longer-term inflation expectations remained well an- securities transactions. The System Open
chored. The one member thought that the Committee Market Account manager and the secretary
should instead strengthen the forward guidance in order will keep the Committee informed of ongoing
to underscore the Committee’s commitment to its 2 per- developments regarding the System’s balance
cent inflation objective. The Committee agreed to in- sheet that could affect the attainment over
clude additional wording in the statement in order to time of the Committee’s objectives of
emphasize that the Committee’s decision on the timing maximum employment and price stability.”
of the first increase in the federal funds rate would be
The vote encompassed approval of the statement below
data dependent. In particular, the statement would say
to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
that, if incoming information indicated faster progress
toward the Committee’s employment and inflation ob- “Information received since the Federal Open
jectives than the Committee now expects, then increases Market Committee met in September suggests
in the target range for the federal funds rate would likely that economic activity is expanding at a
occur sooner than currently anticipated. It would also moderate pace. Labor market conditions
note that, if progress proves slower than expected, then improved somewhat further, with solid job
increases in the target range would likely occur later than gains and a lower unemployment rate. On
currently anticipated. The Committee also agreed to re- balance, a range of labor market indicators
iterate its expectation that, even after employment and suggests that underutilization of labor
inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic resources is gradually diminishing.
conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the tar- Household spending is rising moderately and
get federal funds rate below levels the Committee views business fixed investment is advancing, while
as normal in the longer run. the recovery in the housing sector remains
slow. Inflation has continued to run below
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
the Committee’s longer-run objective.
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
Market-based measures of inflation
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to
compensation have declined somewhat;
execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with
survey-based measures of longer-term
the following domestic policy directive:
inflation expectations have remained stable.
“Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
Federal Open Market Committee seeks
Committee seeks to foster maximum
monetary and financial conditions that will
employment and price stability. The
foster maximum employment and price
Committee expects that, with appropriate
stability. In particular, the Committee seeks
policy accommodation, economic activity will
conditions in reserve markets consistent with
expand at a moderate pace, with labor market
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to
indicators and inflation moving toward levels
¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk
the Committee judges consistent with its dual
to undertake open market operations as
mandate. The Committee sees the risks to the
necessary to maintain such conditions. The
outlook for economic activity and the labor
Desk is directed to conclude the current
market as nearly balanced. Although inflation
program of purchases of longer-term
in the near term will likely be held down by
Treasury securities and agency mortgage-
lower energy prices and other factors, the
backed securities by the end of October. The
Committee judges that the likelihood of
Committee directs the Desk to maintain its
policy of rolling over maturing Treasury

--- Page 11 ---

____________________________M__in__ut_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ O__c_to_b_e_r_ 2_8_–_2_9_, _2_0_1_4______________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
inflation running persistently below 2 percent federal funds rate are likely to occur sooner
has diminished somewhat since early this year. than currently anticipated. Conversely, if
progress proves slower than expected, then
The Committee judges that there has been a
increases in the target range are likely to occur
substantial improvement in the outlook for
later than currently anticipated.
the labor market since the inception of its
current asset purchase program. Moreover, When the Committee decides to begin to
the Committee continues to see sufficient remove policy accommodation, it will take a
underlying strength in the broader economy balanced approach consistent with its longer-
to support ongoing progress toward run goals of maximum employment and
maximum employment in a context of price inflation of 2 percent. The Committee
stability. Accordingly, the Committee decided currently anticipates that, even after
to conclude its asset purchase program this employment and inflation are near mandate-
month. The Committee is maintaining its consistent levels, economic conditions may,
existing policy of reinvesting principal for some time, warrant keeping the target
payments from its holdings of agency debt federal funds rate below levels the Committee
and agency mortgage-backed securities in views as normal in the longer run.”
agency mortgage-backed securities and of
Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C.
rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
Dudley, Lael Brainard, Stanley Fischer, Richard W.
auction. This policy, by keeping the
Fisher, Loretta J. Mester, Charles I. Plosser, Jerome H.
Committee’s holdings of longer-term
Powell, and Daniel K. Tarullo.
securities at sizable levels, should help
maintain accommodative financial conditions. Voting against this action: Narayana Kocherlakota.
To support continued progress toward Mr. Kocherlakota dissented because he believed that, in
maximum employment and price stability, the light of continued sluggishness in the inflation outlook
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the and the recent slide in market-based measures of longer-
current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the term inflation expectations, the Committee should com-
federal funds rate remains appropriate. In mit to maintaining the current target range for the fed-
determining how long to maintain this target eral funds rate at least until projected inflation one to
range, the Committee will assess progress— two years ahead has returned to 2 percent and should
both realized and expected—toward its continue the asset purchase program at its current pace.
objectives of maximum employment and Mr. Kocherlakota noted that when the Committee first
2 percent inflation. This assessment will take reduced its asset purchases in December 2013, it said in
into account a wide range of information, the post-meeting statement that it would be monitoring
including measures of labor market inflation developments carefully for evidence that infla-
conditions, indicators of inflation pressures tion was moving back toward its objective over the me-
and inflation expectations, and readings on dium term; Mr. Kocherlakota indicated he saw no such
financial developments. The Committee evidence.
anticipates, based on its current assessment,
Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy
that it likely will be appropriate to maintain
In the discussion at the January 2014 FOMC meeting
the 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal
regarding the annual reaffirmation of the Statement on
funds rate for a considerable time following
Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy,
the end of its asset purchase program this
participants noted that, while they were generally
month, especially if projected inflation
satisfied with the statement, it would be appropriate to
continues to run below the Committee’s
consider whether any changes might be warranted
2 percent longer-run goal, and provided that
before the statement was reaffirmed in 2015. The
longer-term inflation expectations remain well
Committee subsequently referred the matter to the
anchored. However, if incoming information
subcommittee on communications, which identified
indicates faster progress toward the
possible issues for consideration by the full Committee.
Committee’s employment and inflation
The subcommittee then asked the staff to prepare a
objectives than the Committee now expects,
memorandum to the Committee exploring those issues.
then increases in the target range for the

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
At this meeting, a staff presentation discussed three is- goals. A few of them offered suggestions for communi-
sues related to the existing statement that might warrant cating more specifically how financial stability, and per-
elaboration or clarification: whether inflation persis- haps other asymmetric risks to the outlook, are taken
tently below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run ob- into account in the setting of monetary policy. However,
jective and inflation similarly persistently above that ob- several other participants noted that reaching an agree-
jective would be regarded as equally undesirable, ment in the near term on clarifying the linkages between
whether additional information should be provided monetary policy and financial stability could prove chal-
about the “balanced approach” that the Committee lenging, in part because the issues involved are complex
takes in promoting its two objectives under circum- and need further study. Regarding broader communica-
stances in which these objectives are judged not to be tions issues, a number of participants suggested that the
complementary, and how financial stability is linked to subcommittee could again investigate the feasibility and
the Committee’s mandated goals of maximum employ- desirability of constructing a consensus forecast, build-
ment and price stability. Following the staff presenta- ing on the lessons of the experiments carried out in 2012,
tion, participants discussed a range of topics related to and several thought that further enhancements to the
these three issues and to monetary policy communica- Summary of Economic Projections might also be worth
tions more broadly. Participants generally thought that considering. No decisions were made at this meeting,
it was worthwhile to periodically consider possible and participants generally agreed that it would be useful
changes to the statement, regardless of whether any were to discuss these issues further at upcoming meetings.
ultimately implemented. Most participants agreed that
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
the existing consensus statement was working well as a
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, December 16–
communications tool and judged that the threshold for
17, 2014. The meeting adjourned at 12:45 p.m. on
making changes to the document should be a high one.
October 29, 2014.
On the specific issues, there was widespread agreement
that inflation moderately above the Committee’s 2 per- Notation Vote
cent goal and inflation the same amount below that level By notation vote completed on October 7, 2014, the
were equally costly—and many participants thought that Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
that view was largely shared by the public. One partici- Committee meeting held on September 16–17, 2014.
pant suggested that the Committee should clarify the
time horizon within which it seeks to achieve its inflation
objective. Participants believed that the language refer-
ring to the Committee’s balanced approach in promot-
ing its objectives was appropriately broad and encom-
_____________________________
passed the views of participants. A number of partici-
William B. English
pants noted that financial stability is a necessary condi-
Secretary
tion for the achievement of the Committee’s longer-run

# Tables

## Page_3_Table_1


| “The Federal Open Market Committee             |
|------------------------------------------------|
| (FOMC) modifies the authorization concern-     |
| ing overnight reverse repurchase operations    |
| adopted at the September 17, 2014, FOMC        |
| meeting as follows:                            |
| (i) The offering rate of the operations may    |
| vary from zero to ten basis points.            |
| This modification shall be effective beginning |
| with the operation conducted on Novem-         |
| ber 3, 2014, and conclude with the operation   |
| conducted on December 12, 2014.”               |