# 20140917_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:37:55*
*Pages: 26, Tables: 8*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
September 16–17, 2014
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Michael S. Gibson,2 Director, Division of Banking
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on
Tuesday, September 16, 2014, at 11:00 a.m. and Matthew J. Eichner,1 Deputy Director, Division of
continued on Wednesday, September 17, 2014, at Research and Statistics, Board of Governors;
9:00 a.m. Stephen A. Meyer and William R. Nelson, Deputy
Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
PRESENT: Governors; Mark E. Van Der Weide,3 Deputy
Janet L. Yellen, Chair Director, Division of Banking Supervision and
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Regulation, Board of Governors
Lael Brainard
Stanley Fischer Andreas Lehnert, Deputy Director, Office of Financial
Richard W. Fisher Stability Policy and Research, Board of Governors
Narayana Kocherlakota
Loretta J. Mester Andrew Figura, David Reifschneider, and Stacey Tevlin,
Charles I. Plosser Special Advisers to the Board, Office of Board
Jerome H. Powell Members, Board of Governors
Daniel K. Tarullo
Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of
Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Jeffrey M. Board Members, Board of Governors
Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and John C. Williams,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Committee Board Members, Board of Governors
James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Christopher J. Erceg, Senior Associate Director,
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Division of International Finance, Board of
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively Governors
William B. English, Secretary and Economist Michael T. Kiley4 and Jeremy B. Rudd,4 Senior Advisers,
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Governors; Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Adviser,
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Steven B. Kamin, Economist
David W. Wilcox, Economist Eric M. Engen and Michael G. Palumbo, Associate
Directors, Division of Research and Statistics,
James A. Clouse, Evan F. Koenig, Thomas Laubach, Board of Governors; Fabio M. Natalucci, Associate
Michael P. Leahy, Mark E. Schweitzer, and William Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Wascher, Associate Economists Governors
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account ________________
1 Attended the joint session of the Federal Open Market
Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors.
Account 2 Attended Wednesday’s session only.
3 Attended Tuesday’s session only.
4 Attended the portion of the meeting following the joint
Robert deV. Frierson,1 Secretary of the Board, Office of
session of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board
the Secretary, Board of Governors
of Governors.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Marnie Gillis DeBoer, Deputy Associate Director, Reserve System, the manager of the System Open Mar-
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; ket Account (SOMA) reported on developments in do-
Joshua Gallin, Deputy Associate Director, Division mestic and foreign financial markets and reviewed the
of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors effects of recent foreign central bank policy actions on
yields on the international portion of the SOMA portfo-
Edward Nelson, Assistant Director, Division of Mone- lio. The deputy manager reported on the System open
tary Affairs, Board of Governors market operations conducted during the period since the
Committee met on July 29–30, 2014, summarized plans
Patrick E. McCabe,1 Adviser, Division of Research and for additional test operations of the Term Deposit Facil-
Statistics, Board of Governors ity, and described the results from the fixed-rate over-
night reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) opera-
Penelope A. Beattie,1 Assistant to the Secretary, Office tional exercise.
of the Secretary, Board of Governors
The deputy manager also outlined a proposal for
changes to the ongoing ON RRP exercise to test possi-
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary
ble design features that could allow an ON RRP facility
Affairs, Board of Governors
to serve as an effective supplementary tool during policy
normalization while also mitigating the potential for un-
Katie Ross,1 Manager, Office of the Secretary, Board of
intended effects in financial markets. Participants dis-
Governors
cussed the proposed changes in the ON RRP exercise,
including raising the counterparty-specific limit from
Valerie Hinojosa, Records Project Manager, Division of
$10 billion to $30 billion, limiting the overall size of each
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
operation to $300 billion, and introducing an auction
process that would be used to determine the interest rate
Marie Gooding, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
on such operations and allocate take-up if the sum of
Bank of Atlanta
bids exceeded the overall limit. Testing these design fea-
tures was generally seen as furthering the Committee’s
David Altig, Alberto G. Musalem, and Daniel G. Sulli-
understanding of how an ON RRP facility might be
van, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
structured to best balance its objectives of supporting
Banks of Atlanta, New York, and Chicago, respec-
monetary control and of limiting the Federal Reserve’s
tively
role in financial intermediation as well as reducing po-
tential financial stability risks the facility might pose dur-
Troy Davig, Michael Dotsey, Geoffrey Tootell,
ing periods of stress. Participants also discussed other
Christopher J. Waller, and John A. Weinberg, Senior
tests that could be incorporated in the exercise at a later
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas
date, including a daily time-varying cap along with the
City, Philadelphia, Boston, St. Louis, and
overall limit on the size of ON RRP operations, small
Richmond, respectively
variations in the offered rate on ON RRP operations,
and moderate increases and decreases in the overall size
Sylvain Leduc, Jonathan P. McCarthy, and Douglas
limit. A number of participants expressed concern that
Tillett, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
these tests could be misunderstood as providing a signal
San Francisco, New York, and Chicago, respectively
of the Committee’s intentions regarding the parameters
of the ON RRP program that will be implemented when
Kei-Mu Yi, Special Policy Advisor to the President,
normalization begins; they wanted to emphasize that the
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
tests are intended to provide additional information to
______________
guide the Committee’s decisions. Participants agreed to
1 Attended the joint session of the Federal Open Market
consider potential additional revisions to the ON RRP
Committee and the Board of Governors.
exercise at future FOMC meetings. Following the dis-
cussion, the Committee unanimously approved the fol-
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
lowing resolution:
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
In a joint session of the Federal Open Market Commit- “The Federal Open Market Committee
tee (FOMC) and the Board of Governors of the Federal (FOMC) authorizes the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York to conduct a series of overnight

--- Page 3 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_6_–_1_7_, _2_0_1_4______________________P_a_g_e_ _3
reverse repurchase operations involving U.S. principles and plans based on the discussions at recent
government securities for the purpose of fur- Committee meetings. Participants agreed that it was ap-
ther assessing the appropriate structure of propriate at this time to provide additional information
such operations in supporting the implemen- regarding their approach to normalization. The pro-
tation of monetary policy during normaliza- posed statement was seen as a concise summary of par-
tion. The reverse repurchase operations au- ticipants’ views that would help the public understand
thorized by this resolution shall be (i) con- the steps that the Committee plans to take when the time
ducted at an offering rate that may vary from comes to begin the normalization process and that
zero to five basis points, (ii) for an overnight would convey the Committee’s confidence in its plans.
term, or such longer term as is warranted to However, it was emphasized that the Committee would
accommodate weekend, holiday, and similar need to be flexible and pragmatic during normalization,
trading conventions, (iii) subject to a per- adjusting the details of its approach, if necessary, in light
counterparty limit of up to $30 billion per day, of changing conditions. Regarding the specific points in
(iv) subject to an overall size limit of up to the proposed statement, a couple of participants ex-
$300 billion per day, (v) awarded to all submit- pressed their preference that the principles make greater
ters (A) at the specified offering rate if the allowance for sales of agency mortgage-backed securities
sum of the bids received is less than or equal (MBS) over the next few years in order to normalize the
to the overall size limit, or (B) at the stopout size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance
rate, determined by evaluating bids in ascend- sheet more quickly and to limit distortions in the alloca-
ing order by submitted rate up to the point at tion of credit that they believed were associated with the
which the total quantity of bids equals the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency MBS. In addition,
overall size limit, with all bids below this rate a few participants noted that they would have preferred
awarded in full at the stopout rate and all bids that the principles point to an earlier end to the reinvest-
at the stopout rate awarded on a pro rata basis, ment of repayments of principal on securities held in the
if the sum of the counterparty offers received SOMA portfolio. At the end of the discussion, all but
is greater than the overall size limit, and (vi) one participant could support the publication of the fol-
offered beginning with the operation con- lowing statement after the meeting:
ducted on September 22, 2014, with the reso-
Policy Normalization Principles and Plans
lution adopted at the January 28–29, 2014,
FOMC meeting remaining in place until the During its recent meetings, the Federal Open
conclusion of the operation conducted on Market Committee (FOMC) discussed ways
September 19, 2014. The Chair must approve to normalize the stance of monetary policy
any change in the offering rate within the and the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings.
range specified in (i) and any changes to the The discussions were part of prudent plan-
per-counterparty and overall size limits sub- ning and do not imply that normalization will
ject to the limits specified in (iii) and (iv). The necessarily begin soon. The Committee con-
System Open Market Account manager will tinues to judge that many of the normalization
notify the FOMC in advance about any principles that it adopted in June 2011 remain
changes to the offering rate, per-counterparty applicable. However, in light of the changes
limit, or overall size limit applied to opera- in the System Open Market Account (SOMA)
tions. These operations shall be authorized portfolio since 2011 and enhancements in the
through January 30, 2015.” tools the Committee will have available to im-
plement policy during normalization, the
Committee has concluded that some aspects
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Open of the eventual normalization process will
Market Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeet- likely differ from those specified earlier. The
ing period. There were no intervention operations in Committee also has agreed that it is appropri-
foreign currencies for the System’s account over the in- ate at this time to provide additional infor-
termeeting period. mation regarding its normalization plans. All
FOMC participants but one agreed on the fol-
Monetary Policy Normalization
lowing key elements of the approach they in-
Meeting participants considered publication of a sum-
mary statement of their monetary policy normalization

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
tend to implement when it becomes appropri- pace of any sales would be communicated
ate to begin normalizing the stance of mone- to the public in advance.
tary policy:
 The Committee intends that the Federal Re-
 The Committee will determine the timing serve will, in the longer run, hold no more
and pace of policy normalization—meaning securities than necessary to implement
steps to raise the federal funds rate and monetary policy efficiently and effectively,
other short-term interest rates to more nor- and that it will hold primarily Treasury se-
mal levels and to reduce the Federal Re- curities, thereby minimizing the effect of
serve’s securities holdings—so as to pro- Federal Reserve holdings on the allocation
mote its statutory mandate of maximum of credit across sectors of the economy.
employment and price stability.
 The Committee is prepared to adjust the de-
o When economic conditions and the eco- tails of its approach to policy normalization
nomic outlook warrant a less accommo- in light of economic and financial develop-
dative monetary policy, the Committee ments.
will raise its target range for the federal
The Board meeting concluded at the end of the discus-
funds rate.
sion of policy normalization principles and plans.
o During normalization, the Federal Re-
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
serve intends to move the federal funds
The information reviewed for the September 16–17
rate into the target range set by the
meeting suggested that economic activity was expanding
FOMC primarily by adjusting the interest
at a moderate pace in the third quarter. Labor market
rate it pays on excess reserve balances.
conditions improved a little further, although the unem-
o During normalization, the Federal Re- ployment rate was essentially unchanged over the inter-
serve intends to use an overnight reverse meeting period. Consumer price inflation was running
repurchase agreement facility and other below the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent,
supplementary tools as needed to help but measures of longer-run inflation expectations re-
control the federal funds rate. The Com- mained stable.
mittee will use an overnight reverse repur-
Total nonfarm payroll employment increased in July and
chase agreement facility only to the extent
August but at a slower pace than in the first half of the
necessary and will phase it out when it is
year. The unemployment rate was 6.1 percent in August,
no longer needed to help control the fed-
the same as in June, and the labor force participation rate
eral funds rate.
and the employment-to-population ratio also were un-
 The Committee intends to reduce the Fed- changed since that time. Both the share of workers em-
eral Reserve’s securities holdings in a grad- ployed part time for economic reasons and the rate of
ual and predictable manner primarily by long-duration unemployment declined a little over the
ceasing to reinvest repayments of principal past two months. Other recent indicators generally
on securities held in the SOMA. pointed to ongoing improvement in labor market condi-
tions: Although some measures of household expecta-
o The Committee expects to cease or com-
tions of the labor market situation deteriorated some-
mence phasing out reinvestments after it
what, the rates of job openings and of gross private-
begins increasing the target range for the
sector hiring moved up, initial claims for unemployment
federal funds rate; the timing will depend
insurance were essentially flat at a relatively low level,
on how economic and financial condi-
and some readings on firms’ hiring plans improved.
tions and the economic outlook evolve.
On balance, industrial production edged up over July
o The Committee currently does not antic-
and August, and the rate of manufacturing capacity uti-
ipate selling agency mortgage-backed se-
lization was unchanged. Automakers’ schedules indi-
curities as part of the normalization pro-
cated that the pace of motor vehicle assemblies would
cess, although limited sales might be war-
decline slightly in the fourth quarter, but broader indica-
ranted in the longer run to reduce or elim-
tors of manufacturing production, such as the readings
inate residual holdings. The timing and

--- Page 5 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_6_–_1_7_, _2_0_1_4______________________P_a_g_e_ _5
on new orders from the national and regional manufac- local government purchases appeared to be rising slowly
turing surveys, were consistent with moderate increases as the payrolls of these governments expanded a bit fur-
in factory output in the near term. ther in July and August and their nominal construction
expenditures increased in July.
Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) ap-
peared to be rising at a moderate pace in the third quar- The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in both
ter.5 The components of nominal retail sales data used June and July. Exports were little changed in June, but
by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) to construct they expanded robustly in July, with particular strength
its estimates of PCE increased at a solid rate in July and in industrial supplies and automotive products. Imports
August, and sales of light motor vehicles surged in Au- fell in June but then partly recovered in July, driven by
gust after edging down in July. Recent information per- swings in imports of oil and automotive products.
taining to key factors that influence consumer spending
Total U.S. consumer price inflation, as measured by the
were positive: Real disposable incomes continued to in-
PCE price index, was about 1½ percent over the
crease in July, households’ net worth likely edged up as
12 months ending in July. Over the 12 months ending
equity prices and home values rose somewhat further,
in August, the consumer price index (CPI) rose about
and consumer sentiment as measured by the Thomson
1¾ percent. Consumer energy prices declined in both
Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers
July and August, while consumer food prices rose. Core
improved in August and early September.
price inflation (which excludes food and energy prices)
The pace of activity in the housing sector seemed to be was essentially the same as total inflation for the PCE
picking up. Starts and permits of both new single-family price measure and for the CPI over their most recent
homes and multifamily units were higher in July than 12-month periods. Near-term inflation expectations
their average levels in the second quarter. Sales of exist- from the Michigan survey moved down a bit in August
ing homes increased further in July, although new home and early September, while longer-term inflation expec-
sales declined. tations in the survey were little changed.
Real private expenditures for business equipment and in- Measures of labor compensation increased a little faster
tellectual property products appeared to rise further go- than consumer prices. Compensation per hour in the
ing into the third quarter. Nominal shipments of non- business sector rose 2¾ percent over the year ending in
defense capital goods excluding aircraft moved up in the second quarter; with modest gains in labor produc-
July. Moreover, new orders for these capital goods con- tivity, unit labor costs advanced more slowly than com-
tinued to be above the level of shipments, pointing to pensation per hour. Over the same year-long period, the
increases in shipments in subsequent months. In addi- employment cost index rose only about 2 percent, and
tion, other forward-looking indicators, such as surveys average hourly earnings increased at a similar rate over
of business conditions, were consistent with moderate the 12 months ending in August.
gains in business equipment spending in the near term.
Foreign economies continued to expand in the second
Nominal business expenditures for nonresidential con-
quarter, but with significant differences across countries.
struction also increased in July. Recent book-value data
Economic growth rebounded strongly from a weak
for inventories, along with readings on inventories from
first-quarter pace in Canada, China, and Mexico, sup-
national and regional manufacturing surveys, did not
ported by improvement in exports. In contrast, the Jap-
point to significant inventory imbalances in most indus-
anese economy contracted sharply following the con-
tries; in the energy sector, inventories were drawn down
sumption tax increase in April, economic activity stag-
significantly early in the year and, despite substantial
nated in the euro area, and the Brazilian economy fell
stockbuilding since then, remained low.
into recession. In the third quarter, household spending
Total real government purchases seemed to be roughly appeared to be normalizing in Japan, and production
flat in the third quarter. Federal government purchases continued to rise in Mexico. However, indicators of
probably declined a little, as defense spending was lower economic activity in the euro area remained weak, and
in July and August than in the second quarter. State and Chinese economic data for July and August suggested
5 Recently released data for health-services consumption in the
second quarter were notably stronger than the Bureau of Eco-
nomic Analysis estimated when constructing its most recent
PCE estimates for the second quarter.

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
some slowing in the third quarter. With inflation very market remained stable in the face of these substantial
low in the euro area, the European Central Bank reduced flows.
its policy interest rates at its September 4 meeting and
Conditions in short-term dollar funding markets were
announced plans to purchase private assets.
little changed. The Federal Reserve continued its testing
Staff Review of the Financial Situation of ON RRP operations over the intermeeting period.
Data releases on domestic economic activity were re- Take-up in ON RRP operations increased a little, on av-
portedly interpreted by financial market participants as erage, over the period relative to the previous intermeet-
somewhat better than expected, on balance, notwith- ing period.
standing the disappointing employment report for Au-
Credit conditions for domestic businesses remained fa-
gust. Federal Reserve communications, particularly the
vorable. Corporate bond issuance slowed in July and
July FOMC minutes and the Chair’s speech at the Jack-
August, reflecting a fairly typical summer lull as well as
son Hole economic policy symposium, were viewed as
the elevated volatility in the high-yield bond market early
signaling slightly less policy accommodation than antici-
in the intermeeting period, but issuance rebounded
pated. Reflecting these and other developments, yields
strongly in the first week of September. Commercial pa-
on nominal Treasury securities rose somewhat and eq-
per outstanding and commercial and industrial loans at
uity prices edged up over the intermeeting period. On
banks expanded briskly. Credit conditions in the com-
net, the conflicts in the Middle East and Ukraine and
mercial real estate (CRE) sector continued to ease, and
other geopolitical tensions had limited effects on domes-
growth in CRE loans at banks stayed solid. The issuance
tic financial markets.
of commercial mortgage-backed securities remained ro-
The federal funds rate path implied by financial market bust in July and August.
quotes was essentially unchanged over the intermeeting
Issuance of institutional leveraged loans continued apace
period. But the results from the Desk’s September Sur-
in July and August, traditionally a slow period in this
vey of Primary Dealers indicated that the distribution of
market. The issuance of “new money” loans, which are
the likely date of liftoff across dealers shifted to some-
typically earmarked for corporate leveraged-buyouts and
what earlier dates, and showed the second quarter of
mergers and acquisitions, was strong, and the pipeline of
2015 as the most likely date for liftoff. However, the
such loans was reported to be quite large heading into
dealers’ expected levels of various employment and in-
the fall. The issuance of collateralized loan obligations
flation indicators at the time of liftoff did not change
was still a major source of demand for leveraged loans.
materially from the previous survey.
Financing conditions for households remained mixed.
The yield on 10-year nominal Treasury securities moved
Auto loans were widely available; standards and terms
up about 15 basis points, on net, since the FOMC met
for credit card loans eased somewhat, though they were
in July, likely boosted in part by Federal Reserve com-
still tight; and access to residential mortgages continued
munications. Measures of inflation compensation based
to be limited for all but those with excellent credit histo-
on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities edged down,
ries.
reportedly reflecting the lower-than-expected CPI data
in July and recent declines in oil prices. Responding in part to disappointing economic data
abroad, the U.S. dollar appreciated against most curren-
Broad measures of domestic equity prices were up mod-
cies over the intermeeting period, including large appre-
estly over the intermeeting period, with some reports
ciations against the euro, the yen, and the pound sterling.
suggesting that investors were interpreting incoming
Greater monetary accommodation in the euro area and
economic data as implying that the economic recovery
expectations of a lower policy rate in the near term
was strengthening.
added to the downward pressure on the euro while un-
Yields on corporate bonds and agency MBS rose about certainty about the outcome of the forthcoming referen-
in line with those on comparable-maturity Treasury se- dum on Scottish independence weighed on the value of
curities. High-yield bond mutual funds experienced the pound. In addition, near-term policy rate expecta-
sharp outflows early in the intermeeting period, and tions moved down in the United Kingdom, reacting to
spreads on such bonds widened noticeably; however, both the release of the August Inflation Report and uncer-
these spreads returned to their initial levels over subse- tainty induced by the referendum. Sovereign yields in
quent weeks, and high-yield bond funds attracted mod- the European economies generally declined, and yield
est inflows. Measures of liquidity in the corporate bond

--- Page 7 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_6_–_1_7_, _2_0_1_4______________________P_a_g_e_ _7
spreads of sovereign bonds from the euro-area periph- and essentially no change to inflation compared with its
ery over German bunds narrowed considerably. Most June forecast.
foreign equity indexes ended the period modestly higher.
The staff continued to view the uncertainty around its
Staff Economic Outlook projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment
In the economic forecast prepared by the staff for the rate, and inflation as similar to the average over the past
September FOMC meeting, the projection for growth in 20 years. The risks to the forecast for real GDP growth
real gross domestic product (GDP) in the second half of were still seen as tilted a little to the downside, as neither
this year was revised down slightly from the one pre- monetary policy nor fiscal policy was viewed as well po-
pared for the previous meeting, primarily because of a sitioned to help the economy withstand adverse shocks.
somewhat weaker near-term outlook for consumer At the same time, the staff viewed the risks around its
spending. The staff’s medium-term forecast for real outlook for the unemployment rate and for inflation as
GDP was also revised down a little, reflecting a higher roughly balanced.
projected path for the foreign exchange value of the dol-
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
lar along with slightly smaller projected gains for home
Economic Outlook
prices. The staff still anticipated that the pace of real
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of
GDP growth in 2015 and 2016 would exceed the growth
the Board of Governors and the Federal Reserve Bank
rate of potential output, supported by continued in-
presidents submitted their projections of real output
creases in consumer and business confidence, the fur-
growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the fed-
ther easing of the restraint on spending from changes in
eral funds rate for each year from 2014 through 2017
fiscal policy, additional improvements in credit availabil-
and over the longer run, conditional on each partici-
ity, and a pickup in foreign economic growth. In 2017,
pant’s assessment of appropriate monetary policy. The
real GDP growth was projected to begin slowing to-
longer-run projections represent each participant’s as-
ward, but to remain above, the rate of potential output
sessment of the value to which each variable would be
growth. The expansion in economic activity over the
expected to converge, over time, under appropriate
projection period was anticipated to steadily reduce re-
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to
source slack, and the unemployment rate was expected
the economy. These economic projections and policy
to decline gradually and temporarily move slightly below
assessments are described in the SEP, which is attached
the staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate toward
as an addendum to these minutes.
the end of the period.
In their discussion of the economic situation and the
The staff’s near-term forecast for inflation was a little
outlook, meeting participants viewed the information re-
lower than the projection prepared for the previous
ceived over the intermeeting period as suggesting that
FOMC meeting, reflecting recent readings on core con-
economic activity was expanding at a moderate rate. On
sumer price inflation that were lower than anticipated
balance, labor market conditions improved somewhat
and declines in oil prices that were faster than expected,
further; however, the unemployment rate was little
but the forecast for inflation over the medium term was
changed, and most participants judged that there re-
little changed. The staff continued to project inflation
mained significant underutilization of labor resources.
to be lower in the second half of this year than in the
Participants generally expected that, over the medium
first half and to remain below the Committee’s longer-
term, real economic activity would increase at a pace suf-
run objective of 2 percent over the next few years. With
ficient to lead to a further gradual decline in the unem-
longer-term inflation expectations assumed to remain
ployment rate toward levels consistent with the Commit-
stable, resource slack projected to diminish slowly, and
tee’s objective of maximum employment. Inflation was
changes in commodity and import prices expected to be
running below the Committee’s longer-run objective,
subdued, inflation was projected to rise gradually and to
but longer-term inflation expectations were stable. Par-
reach the Committee’s objective in the longer run.
ticipants anticipated that inflation would move toward
Overall, the staff’s economic projection for the Septem- the Committee’s 2 percent goal in coming years, with
ber meeting was quite similar to the forecast presented several expressing concern that inflation might persist
at the June meeting, when the FOMC last prepared a below the Committee’s objective for quite some time.
Summary of Economic Projections (SEP). The staff’s Most viewed the risks to the outlook for economic ac-
September projection showed a slightly higher path for tivity and the labor market as broadly balanced. How-
the unemployment rate, a bit lower real GDP growth, ever, a number of participants noted that economic
growth over the medium term might be slower than they

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
expected if foreign economic growth came in weaker the technology sector, and the need to replace aging cap-
than anticipated, structural productivity continued to in- ital. A couple of participants added that nonresidential
crease only slowly, or the recovery in residential con- construction activity was rising in their Districts.
struction continued to lag.
The improvement in business conditions was reflected
Household spending appeared to be rising moderately, in reports of increased demand for loans at banks in sev-
with several participants noting that the recent positive eral Districts. Demand rose for loans to both house-
reports on retail sales, motor vehicle purchases, and holds and businesses, and a couple of participants indi-
health-care spending had reduced their concern about cated that borrowers were expanding their use of exist-
weakness in the underlying pace of household spending. ing credit lines as well as obtaining new commitments.
Among the favorable factors attending the outlook for Bankers in one District stated that, while they had eased
consumer spending, participants cited continued gains in the terms and conditions on loans in response to com-
household wealth, improved household balance sheets, petition from other lenders, they had not taken on riskier
low delinquency rates, a high saving rate, or rising confi- loans. Some financial developments that could under-
dence in employment and income prospects. However, mine financial stability over time were noted, including a
other participants said they heard mixed reports from deterioration in leveraged lending standards, stretched
business contacts regarding consumer spending or were stock market valuations, and compressed risk spreads.
uncertain about the prospects for stronger gains in real However, one participant suggested that the leveraged
income necessary to sustain moderate growth in house- loan market seemed to be moving into better balance,
hold spending. and that market participants appeared to be taking ap-
propriate account of the changes in interest rates that
The recovery in housing activity remained slow in all but
might be associated with the eventual normalization of
a few areas of the country despite relatively low mort-
the stance of monetary policy. Moreover, a couple of
gage rates, rising house prices, and improvements in
participants, while stressing the importance of remaining
household wealth. Contacts in a couple of Districts re-
vigilant about potential risks to financial stability, ob-
ported that new construction was being held back by
served that conditions in financial markets at present did
shortages of materials, of lots available for development,
not suggest the types of financial stability considerations
and of skilled workers or by the overhang of vacant
that would impede the achievement of the Committee’s
homes not on the market. Households with relatively
macroeconomic objectives.
low credit scores continued to have difficulty obtaining
mortgage loans. It was noted that this difficulty could Some participants noted that expectations for the path
be a factor restraining the demand for housing, particu- of the federal funds rate implied by market quotes ap-
larly among younger households who have high levels of peared to remain below most of the projections of the
student loan debt or weak job prospects. A few partici- federal funds rate provided by Committee participants
pants pointed out the relative strength in construction of in the SEP, which represent each individual participant’s
and demand for multifamily units, which possibly was assessment of the appropriate path for the federal funds
due to a shift in demand among younger homebuyers rate consistent with his or her economic outlook. How-
away from single-family homes. ever, it was pointed out that measures of financial mar-
ket participants’ expectations incorporate their judg-
Information from business contacts in most parts of the
ments regarding not only the most likely outcomes, but
country indicated improvements in business conditions,
also the possible downside tail risks that might be asso-
rising confidence about the economic outlook, and in-
ciated with especially low paths for the federal funds
creasing willingness to undertake new investment pro-
rate. For example, respondents to the recent Survey of
jects. According to national and regional surveys, man-
Primary Dealers placed considerable odds on the federal
ufacturing activity was strong, and several participants
funds rate returning to the zero lower bound during the
had received reports of hiring and increased capital
two years following the initial increase in that rate. The
spending in that sector. Among the other industries
probability that investors attach to such low interest rate
cited as relatively strong in recent months were transpor-
scenarios could pull the expected path of the federal
tation, energy, and services. Several participants noted
funds rate computed from market quotes below most
positive signs of further increases in investment spend-
Committee participants’ assessments of appropriate pol-
ing going forward, including elevated levels of new or-
icy as reported in the SEP.
ders and shipments of capital goods, strong interest in
The restraint on economic activity from fiscal policy was
seen as diminishing, and a couple of participants pointed

--- Page 9 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_6_–_1_7_, _2_0_1_4______________________P_a_g_e_ _9
out that, over the second half of the year, the remaining a couple of participants pointed out that the stability of
drag was likely to be small. Nonetheless, the cutbacks in the participation rate, on balance, over the past year sug-
both defense and nondefense federal outlays, as well as gested that some of the cyclical shortfall had diminished.
state governments’ budget restraint, continued to weigh Most agreed that the Committee’s assessment of labor
on jobs and income in some parts of the country. Fiscal market slack should be grounded in its review of a range
policy overall was anticipated to be a neutral factor for of labor market indicators, although a few saw the gap
economic growth over the next several years. between the unemployment rate and their estimate of its
longer-run normal level as a reliable indicator of slack.
During participants’ discussion of prospects for eco-
nomic activity abroad, they commented on a number of Most measures of labor compensation showed no
uncertainties and risks attending the outlook. Over the broad-based increase in wage inflation. However, busi-
intermeeting period, the foreign exchange value of the nesses in several Districts continued to report upward
dollar had appreciated, particularly against the euro, the pressure on wages in specific industries and occupations
yen, and the pound sterling. Some participants ex- associated with labor shortages or difficult-to-fill jobs,
pressed concern that the persistent shortfall of economic while a couple of participants noted a more general rise
growth and inflation in the euro area could lead to a fur- in current or planned wage increases in their regions.
ther appreciation of the dollar and have adverse effects Several participants commented that the relatively sub-
on the U.S. external sector. Several participants added dued rise in nominal labor compensation was still below
that slower economic growth in China or Japan or un- longer-run trend rates of productivity growth and infla-
anticipated events in the Middle East or Ukraine might tion and was a signal of slack remaining in the labor mar-
pose a similar risk. At the same time, a couple of partic- ket. However, a couple of others suggested some cau-
ipants pointed out that the appreciation of the dollar tion in reading subdued wage inflation as an indicator of
might also tend to slow the gradual increase in inflation labor market underutilization. They pointed out that if
toward the FOMC’s 2 percent goal. nominal wages did not adjust downward when unem-
ployment was high, pent-up wage deflation could help
Labor market conditions continued to improve over the
explain the modest increases in wages so far during the
intermeeting period. Although the unemployment rate
recovery, and wages could rise more rapidly going for-
was little changed, participants variously cited positive
ward as the unemployment rate continues to decline.
readings from other indicators, including a decline in
longer-term unemployment, the low level of new claims Inflation had been running below the Committee’s
for unemployment insurance, the rise in job openings, longer-run objective, and the readings on consumer
and survey reports of increased hiring plans and job prices over the intermeeting period were somewhat
availability. While the most recent estimate of nonfarm softer than during the preceding four months, in part
payroll employment showed a smaller monthly gain than because of declining energy prices. Most participants
earlier in the year, it followed six months in which in- anticipated that inflation would move gradually back to-
creases had averaged more than 200,000. Some partici- ward its objective over the medium term. However, par-
pants were reluctant to place much weight on one ticipants differed somewhat in their assessments of how
monthly report or noted that the first estimate for Au- quickly inflation would move up. Some cited the stabil-
gust has frequently been revised up in recent years. Par- ity of longer-run inflation expectations at a level con-
ticipants generally agreed that the accumulated progress sistent with the Committee’s objective as an important
in labor market conditions since the Committee’s cur- factor in their forecasts that inflation would reach 2 per-
rent asset purchase program began in September 2012 cent in coming years. Participants’ views on the respon-
had been substantial and expected that progress would siveness of inflation to the level and change in resource
be sustained. Nonetheless, they continued to express utilization varied, with a few seeing labor markets as suf-
differing views on the extent of remaining slack in labor ficiently tight that wages and prices would soon begin to
markets. Most agreed that underutilization of labor re- move up noticeably but with some others indicating that
sources remained significant; these participants noted inflation was unlikely to approach 2 percent until the un-
variously that the level of nonfarm payroll jobs had only employment rate falls below its longer-run normal level.
recently returned to its pre-recession level, that the num- While most viewed the risk that inflation would run per-
ber of individuals working part time for economic rea- sistently below 2 percent as having diminished some-
sons was still elevated relative to the level of unemploy- what since earlier in the year, a couple noted the possi-
ment, and that the labor force participation rate was still bility that longer-term inflation expectations might be
below assessments of its structural trend. In this regard, slightly lower than the Committee’s 2 percent objective

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
or that domestic inflation might be held down by persis- be misinterpreted as a signal of a fundamental shift in
tent disinflation among U.S. trading partners and further the stance of policy that could result in an unintended
appreciation of the dollar. tightening of financial conditions.
In their discussion of the appropriate path for monetary Participants also discussed how the forward-guidance
policy over the medium term, meeting participants language might evolve once the Committee decides that
agreed that the timing of the first increase in the federal the current formulation no longer appropriately conveys
funds rate and the appropriate path of the policy rate its intentions about the future stance of policy. Most
thereafter would depend on incoming economic data participants indicated a preference for clarifying the de-
and their implications for the outlook. That said, several pendence of the current forward guidance on economic
participants thought that the current forward guidance data and the Committee’s assessment of progress toward
regarding the federal funds rate suggested a longer pe- its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent
riod before liftoff, and perhaps also a more gradual in- inflation. A clarification along these lines was seen as
crease in the federal funds rate thereafter, than they be- likely to improve the public’s understanding of the Com-
lieved was likely to be appropriate given economic and mittee’s reaction function while allowing the Committee
financial conditions. In addition, the concern was raised to retain flexibility to respond appropriately to changes
that the reference to “considerable time” in the current in the economic outlook. One participant favored using
forward guidance could be misunderstood as a commit- a numerical threshold based on the inflation outlook as
ment rather than as data dependent. However, it was a form of forward guidance. A few participants, how-
noted that the current formulation of the Committee’s ever, noted the difficulties associated with expressing
forward guidance clearly indicated that the Committee’s forward guidance in terms of numerical thresholds for
policy decisions were conditional on its ongoing assess- some set of economic variables. Another participant in-
ment of realized and expected progress toward its objec- dicated a preference for reducing reliance on explicit for-
tives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation, ward guidance in the statement and conveying instead
and that its assessment reflected its review of a broad guidance regarding the future stance of monetary policy
array of economic indicators. It was emphasized that the through other mechanisms, including the SEP. It was
current forward guidance for the federal funds rate was noted that providing explicit forward guidance regarding
data dependent and did not indicate that the first in- the future path of the federal funds rate might become
crease in the target range for the federal funds rate would less important once a highly accommodative stance of
occur mechanically after some fixed calendar interval policy is no longer appropriate and the process of policy
following the completion of the current asset purchase normalization is well under way. It was generally agreed
program. If employment and inflation converged more that when changes to the forward guidance become ap-
rapidly toward the Committee’s goals than currently ex- propriate, they will likely present communication chal-
pected, the date of liftoff could be earlier, and subse- lenges, and that caution will be needed to avoid sending
quent increases in the federal funds rate target more unintended signals about the Committee’s policy out-
rapid, than participants currently anticipated. Con- look.
versely, if employment and inflation returned toward the
Committee Policy Action
Committee’s objectives more slowly than currently an-
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
ticipated, the date of liftoff for the federal funds rate
ahead, members judged that information received since
could be later, and future federal funds rate target in-
the FOMC met in July indicated that economic activity
creases could be more gradual. In addition, some par-
was expanding at a moderate pace. Household spending
ticipants saw the current forward guidance as appropri-
appeared to be rising moderately, and business fixed in-
ate in light of risk-management considerations, which
vestment was advancing, while the recovery in the hous-
suggested that it would be prudent to err on the side of
ing sector remained slow. Fiscal policy was restraining
patience while awaiting further evidence of sustained
economic growth, although the extent of restraint was
progress toward the Committee’s goals. In their view,
diminishing and would soon be quite small. Inflation
the costs of downside shocks to the economy would be
was running below the Committee’s longer-run objec-
larger than those of upside shocks because, in current
tive, but longer-term inflation expectations were stable.
circumstances, it would be less problematic to remove
The Committee expected that, with appropriate policy
accommodation quickly, if doing so becomes necessary,
accommodation, economic activity would expand at a
than to add accommodation. A number of participants
also noted that changes to the forward guidance might

--- Page 11 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_6_–_1_7_, _2_0_1_4_____________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
moderate pace, with labor market indicators and infla- rate and to reiterate its forward guidance about the fed-
tion moving toward levels that the Committee judges eral funds rate. The guidance continued to state that the
consistent with its dual mandate. Committee’s decisions about how long to maintain the
current target range for the federal funds rate would de-
With incoming information continuing to broadly sup-
pend on its assessment of actual and expected progress
port the Committee’s expectation of ongoing improve-
toward its objectives of maximum employment and
ment in labor market conditions and inflation moving
2 percent inflation. The Committee again anticipated
back toward the Committee’s 2 percent objective, mem-
that it likely would be appropriate to maintain the cur-
bers agreed that a further measured reduction in the pace
rent target range for the federal funds rate for a consid-
of asset purchases was appropriate at this meeting. Ac-
erable time after the asset purchase program ends, espe-
cordingly, the Committee agreed that, beginning in Oc-
cially if projected inflation continued to run below the
tober, it would add to its holdings of agency MBS at a
Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and provided
pace of $5 billion per month rather than $10 billion per
that longer-term inflation expectations remained well
month, and it would add to its holdings of longer-term
anchored. The forward guidance also reiterated the
Treasury securities at a pace of $10 billion per month
Committee’s expectation that, even after employment
rather than $15 billion per month. The Committee
and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, eco-
judged that, if incoming information broadly supported
nomic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping
its expectations that labor market indicator and inflation
the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee
would continue to move toward mandate-consistent lev-
views as normal in the longer run. Two members, how-
els, it would end its current program of asset purchases
ever, dissented because, in their view, the statement lan-
at its October meeting.
guage did not accurately reflect the progress made to
Members discussed their assessments of progress to- date toward the Committee’s goals of maximum em-
ward the Committee’s objectives of maximum employ- ployment and inflation of 2 percent, and they believed
ment and 2 percent inflation and considered possible en- that ongoing progress will likely warrant an earlier in-
hancements to the statement that would more clearly crease in the federal funds rate than suggested by the
communicate the Committee’s view on such progress. forward guidance in the Committee’s postmeeting state-
Regarding the labor market, many members indicated ment.
that, although labor market conditions had generally
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
continued to improve, there was still significant slack in
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
labor markets. A few members, however, expressed res-
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to
ervations about continuing to characterize the extent of
execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with
underutilization of labor resources as significant. In the
the following domestic policy directive:
end, members agreed to indicate that labor market con-
ditions had improved somewhat further, but that the un- “Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
employment rate was little changed and a range of labor Federal Open Market Committee seeks
market indicators continued to suggest that there re- monetary and financial conditions that will
mained significant underutilization of labor resources. It foster maximum employment and price
was noted, however, that the characterization of labor stability. In particular, the Committee seeks
market underutilization might have to be changed if pro- conditions in reserve markets consistent with
gress in the labor market continued. Regarding inflation, federal funds trading in a range from 0 to
members agreed that inflation had moved closer to the ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk
Committee’s 2 percent objective during the first half of to undertake open market operations as
the year but, more recently, had fallen back somewhat. necessary to maintain such conditions.
As a consequence, they updated the language in the Beginning in October, the Desk is directed to
statement to indicate that inflation had been running be- purchase longer-term Treasury securities at a
low the Committee’s longer-run objective. However, pace of about $10 billion per month and to
with stable longer-term inflation expectations, the Com- purchase agency mortgage-backed securities
mittee continued to judge that the likelihood of inflation at a pace of about $5 billion per month. The
running persistently below 2 percent had diminished Committee also directs the Desk to engage in
somewhat since early in the year. dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
necessary to facilitate settlement of the
After the discussion, all members but two voted to main-
Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed
tain the Committee’s target range for the federal funds

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
securities transactions. The Committee The Committee currently judges that there is
directs the Desk to maintain its policy of sufficient underlying strength in the broader
rolling over maturing Treasury securities into economy to support ongoing improvement
new issues and its policy of reinvesting in labor market conditions. In light of the
principal payments on all agency debt and cumulative progress toward maximum
agency mortgage-backed securities in agency employment and the improvement in the
mortgage-backed securities. The System outlook for labor market conditions since
Open Market Account manager and the the inception of the current asset purchase
secretary will keep the Committee informed program, the Committee decided to make a
of ongoing developments regarding the further measured reduction in the pace of its
System’s balance sheet that could affect the asset purchases. Beginning in October, the
attainment over time of the Committee’s Committee will add to its holdings of agency
objectives of maximum employment and mortgage-backed securities at a pace of
price stability.” $5 billion per month rather than $10 billion
per month, and will add to its holdings of
The vote encompassed approval of the statement below
longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of
to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
$10 billion per month rather than $15 billion
per month. The Committee is maintaining
“Information received since the Federal Open
its existing policy of reinvesting principal
Market Committee met in July suggests that
payments from its holdings of agency debt
economic activity is expanding at a moderate
and agency mortgage-backed securities in
pace. On balance, labor market conditions
agency mortgage-backed securities and of
improved somewhat further; however, the
rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
unemployment rate is little changed and a
auction. The Committee’s sizable and still-
range of labor market indicators suggests that
increasing holdings of longer-term securities
there remains significant underutilization of
should maintain downward pressure on
labor resources. Household spending appears
longer-term interest rates, support mortgage
to be rising moderately and business fixed
markets, and help to make broader financial
investment is advancing, while the recovery in
conditions more accommodative, which in
the housing sector remains slow. Fiscal policy
turn should promote a stronger economic
is restraining economic growth, although the
recovery and help to ensure that inflation,
extent of restraint is diminishing. Inflation
over time, is at the rate most consistent with
has been running below the Committee’s
the Committee’s dual mandate.
longer-run objective. Longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable.
The Committee will closely monitor incoming
information on economic and financial
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
developments in coming months and will
Committee seeks to foster maximum
continue its purchases of Treasury and agency
employment and price stability. The
mortgage-backed securities, and employ its
Committee expects that, with appropriate
other policy tools as appropriate, until the
policy accommodation, economic activity
outlook for the labor market has improved
will expand at a moderate pace, with labor
substantially in a context of price stability. If
market indicators and inflation moving
incoming information broadly supports the
toward levels the Committee judges
Committee’s expectation of ongoing
consistent with its dual mandate. The
improvement in labor market conditions and
Committee sees the risks to the outlook for
inflation moving back toward its longer-run
economic activity and the labor market as
objective, the Committee will end its current
nearly balanced and judges that the
program of asset purchases at its next
likelihood of inflation running persistently
meeting. However, asset purchases are not on
below 2 percent has diminished somewhat
a preset course, and the Committee’s
since early this year.
decisions about their pace will remain
contingent on the Committee’s outlook for

--- Page 13 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_6_–_1_7_, _2_0_1_4_____________________P__ag_e_ _1_3
the labor market and inflation as well as its Dudley, Lael Brainard, Stanley Fischer, Narayana
assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of Kocherlakota, Loretta J. Mester, Jerome H. Powell, and
such purchases. Daniel K. Tarullo.
Voting against this action: Richard W. Fisher and
To support continued progress toward
Charles I. Plosser.
maximum employment and price stability, the
Committee today reaffirmed its view that a President Fisher dissented because he believed that the
highly accommodative stance of monetary continued strengthening of the real economy, the
policy remains appropriate. In determining improved outlook for labor utilization and for general
how long to maintain the current 0 to price stability, and continued signs of financial market
¼ percent target range for the federal funds excess will likely warrant an earlier reduction in
rate, the Committee will assess progress— monetary accommodation than is suggested by the
both realized and expected—toward its Committee’s stated forward guidance.
objectives of maximum employment and
Mr. Plosser dissented because he objected to the
2 percent inflation. This assessment will take
statement’s guidance indicating that it likely will be
into account a wide range of information,
appropriate to maintain the current target range for the
including measures of labor market
federal funds rate for “a considerable time after the asset
conditions, indicators of inflation pressures
purchase program ends.” In his view, the reference to
and inflation expectations, and readings on
calendar time should be replaced with language that
financial developments. The Committee
indicates how monetary policy will respond to incoming
continues to anticipate, based on its
data. Moreover, he judged that the statement did not
assessment of these factors, that it likely will
acknowledge the substantial progress that had been
be appropriate to maintain the current target
made toward the Committee’s economic goals and thus
range for the federal funds rate for a
risks unnecessary and disruptive volatility in financial
considerable time after the asset purchase
markets, and perhaps in the economy, if the Committee
program ends, especially if projected inflation
reduces accommodation sooner or more quickly than
continues to run below the Committee’s
financial markets anticipate.
2 percent longer-run goal, and provided that
longer-term inflation expectations remain well It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
anchored. would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, October 28–29,
2014. The meeting adjourned at 10:35 a.m. on
September 17, 2014.
When the Committee decides to begin to
remove policy accommodation, it will take a Notation Vote
balanced approach consistent with its longer-
By notation vote completed on August 19, 2014, the
run goals of maximum employment and
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
inflation of 2 percent. The Committee
Committee meeting held on July 29–30, 2014.
currently anticipates that, even after
employment and inflation are near mandate-
consistent levels, economic conditions may,
for some time, warrant keeping the target
federal funds rate below levels the Committee _____________________________
views as normal in the longer run.”
William B. English
Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C. Secretary

--- Page 14 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the September 16–17, 2014, Federal individual interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s
Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, meeting objectives of maximum employment and stable prices.
participants submitted their projections of real output
Overall, FOMC participants expected that, under appro-
growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the fed-
priate monetary policy, economic growth would be
eral funds rate for each year from 2014 through 2017
faster in the second half of 2014 and in 2015 than their
and in the longer run.1 Each participant’s projection was
estimates of the U.S. economy’s longer-run normal
based on information available at the time of the meet-
growth rate. Participants then saw real growth moving
ing plus his or her assessment of appropriate monetary
back slowly toward its longer-run rate in 2016 and 2017.
policy and assumptions about the factors likely to affect
The unemployment rate was projected to continue to
economic outcomes. The longer-run projections repre-
decline gradually over the forecast period, and to be at
sent each participant’s assessment of the value to which
or below participants’ individual judgments of its longer-
each variable would be expected to converge, over time,
run normal level by the end of 2017 (table 1 and
under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of
figure 1). Almost all participants projected that inflation,
further shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary
as measured by the four-quarter change in the price in-
policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each
dex for personal consumption expenditures (PCE),
participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for
would rise gradually over the next few years, reaching a
economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her
level at or near the Committee’s 2 percent objective in
________________ 2016 or 2017.
1 As discussed in its Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, Participants judged that it would be appropriate to begin
released on September 17, 2014, the Committee intends to tar- adjusting the current highly accommodative stance of
get a range for the federal funds rate during normalization. policy over the projection period as labor market indica-
Participants were asked to provide, in their contributions to
tors and inflation move back toward values the Commit-
the Summary of Economic Projections, either the midpoint of
tee judges consistent with the attainment of its mandated
the target range for the federal funds rate for any period when
objectives of maximum employment and stable prices.
a range was anticipated or the target level for the federal funds
As shown in figure 2, all but a few participants antici-
rate, as appropriate. In the lower panel of figure 2, these val-
pated that it would be appropriate to begin raising the
ues have been rounded to the nearest ⅛ percentage point.
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, September 2014
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer run 2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer run
Change in real GDP . . 2.0 to 2.2 2.6 to 3.0 2.6 to 2.9 2.3 to 2.5 2.0 to 2.3 1.8 to 2.3 2.1 to 3.2 2.1 to 3.0 2.0 to 2.6 1.8 to 2.6
June projection . . . . . . 2.1 to 2.3 3.0 to 3.2 2.5 to 3.0 n.a. 2.1 to 2.3 1.9 to 2.4 2.2 to 3.6 2.2 to 3.2 n.a. 1.8 to 2.5
Unemployment rate . . 5.9 to 6.0 5.4 to 5.6 5.1 to 5.4 4.9 to 5.3 5.2 to 5.5 5.7 to 6.1 5.2 to 5.7 4.9 to 5.6 4.7 to 5.8 5.0 to 6.0
June projection . . . . . . 6.0 to 6.1 5.4 to 5.7 5.1 to 5.5 n.a. 5.2 to 5.5 5.8 to 6.2 5.2 to 5.9 5.0 to 5.6 n.a. 5.0 to 6.0
PCE inflation . . . . . . . 1.5 to 1.7 1.6 to 1.9 1.7 to 2.0 1.9 to 2.0 2.0 1.5 to 1.8 1.5 to 2.4 1.6 to 2.1 1.7 to 2.2 2.0
June projection . . . . . . 1.5 to 1.7 1.5 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 n.a. 2.0 1.4 to 2.0 1.4 to 2.4 1.5 to 2.0 n.a. 2.0
Core PCE inflation3 . . 1.5 to 1.6 1.6 to 1.9 1.8 to 2.0 1.9 to 2.0 1.5 to 1.8 1.6 to 2.4 1.7 to 2.2 1.8 to 2.2
June projection . . . . . . 1.5 to 1.6 1.6 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 n.a. 1.4 to 1.8 1.5 to 2.4 1.6 to 2.0 n.a.
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal
consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian
unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy.
Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy
and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The June projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
on June 17–18, 2014.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

--- Page 15 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure1. Centraltendenciesandrangesofeconomicprojections,2014–17andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
Central tendency of projections 4
Range of projections
3
2
Actual 1
+
0
-
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesofthevariablesare
annual.

--- Page 16 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_6–_1_7_,_ 2_0_1_4____________P_a_g_e_ _3
Figure2. OverviewofFOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy
Number of participants
Appropriate timing of policy firming
15
14
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
2
1
1
2014 2015 2016
Percent
Appropriate pace of policy firming: Midpoint of target range or target level for the federal funds rate
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer run
Note: Intheupperpanel,theheightofeachbardenotesthenumberofFOMCparticipantswhojudgethat,under
appropriatemonetarypolicy,thefirstincreaseinthetargetrangeforthefederalfundsratefromitscurrentrangeof0to
1/4percentwilloccurinthespecifiedcalendaryear. InJune2014,thenumbersofFOMCparticipantswhojudgedthat
the first increase in the target federal fundsrate would occur in 2014, 2015, and 2016 were, respectively, 1, 12, and 3.
Inthelowerpanel,eachshadedcircleindicatesthevalue(roundedtothenearest1/8percentagepoint)ofanindividual
participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate
targetlevelforthefederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun.

--- Page 17 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
target range for the federal funds rate in 2015, with most projections of real GDP growth over the longer run was
projecting that it will be appropriate to raise the target 2.0 to 2.3 percent, essentially the same as in June.
federal funds rate fairly gradually. Consistent with the
Participants anticipated that the unemployment rate
improvement in the outlook for the labor market since
would continue to decline gradually over the forecast pe-
the Committee began its current asset purchase program
riod and, by the fourth quarter of 2017, would be close
in September 2012, as well as participants’ expectation
to or below their individual assessments of its longer-run
of ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and
normal level. The central tendencies of participants’
inflation moving back toward their longer-run objective,
forecasts for the unemployment rate in the fourth quar-
all participants judged that it would be appropriate to
ter of each year were 5.9 to 6.0 percent in 2014, 5.4 to
complete the asset purchase program in October of this
5.6 percent in 2015, 5.1 to 5.4 percent in 2016, and
year.
4.9 to 5.3 percent in 2017. Participants’ projected paths
Most participants saw the uncertainty associated with for the unemployment rate were slightly lower than in
their outlooks for economic growth, the unemployment June, with many participants citing lower-than-expected
rate, and inflation as similar to that of the past 20 years, incoming unemployment data. The central tendency of
although a few judged it as somewhat higher. In addi- participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of
tion, most participants considered the risks to the out- unemployment that would prevail under appropriate
look for real gross domestic product (GDP) growth and monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to
the unemployment rate to be broadly balanced, and a the economy was unchanged at 5.2 to 5.5 percent.
substantial majority saw the risks to inflation as broadly
Figures 3.A and 3.B show that participants held a range
balanced. However, a few participants, on net, saw the
of views regarding the likely outcomes for real GDP
risks to their forecasts for economic growth or inflation
growth and the unemployment rate through 2017. The
as tilted to the downside.
diversity of views reflected their individual assessments
The Outlook for Economic Activity of the rate at which the forces that have been restraining
Participants generally projected that, conditional on their the pace of the economic recovery would abate, of the
individual assumptions about appropriate monetary pol- anticipated path for foreign economic activity, of the tra-
icy, economic growth would pick up from its low level jectory for growth in consumption as labor market slack
in the first half of the year and run above their estimates diminishes, and of the appropriate path of monetary pol-
of the longer-run normal rate of economic growth in the icy. Relative to June, the dispersions of participants’ pro-
second half of 2014 and in 2015. Participants pointed to jections for real GDP growth and for the unemployment
a number of factors that they expected would contribute rate over the entire projection period were little changed.
to a pickup in economic growth in the second half of
The Outlook for Inflation
this year and next year, including rising household net
Compared with June, the central tendencies of partici-
worth, diminished restraint from fiscal policy, improving
pants’ projections for inflation under the assumption of
labor market conditions, and highly accommodative
appropriate policy were largely unchanged for 2014 to
monetary policy. In general, participants then saw real
2016, and the trends anticipated over that period were
growth moving gradually back toward, but remaining at
generally expected to continue in 2017. Almost all par-
or somewhat above, its longer-run rate in 2016 and 2017.
ticipants projected that PCE inflation would rise gradu-
Many participants revised down their projections of real ally over the next few years to a level at or near the Com-
GDP growth somewhat in one or more years and par- mittee’s 2 percent objective. A few participants expected
ticularly for 2015, compared with their projections in PCE inflation to rise somewhat above 2 percent at some
June. Participants pointed to a couple of factors leading point during the forecast period, while several others ex-
them to mark down their projected paths for real GDP pected inflation to remain below 2 percent even at the
growth including the incorporation of weaker-than- end of 2017. The central tendencies for PCE inflation
expected data on consumer spending and perceptions of were 1.5 to 1.7 percent in 2014, 1.6 to 1.9 percent in
slower growth in potential GDP. The central tendencies 2015, 1.7 to 2.0 percent in 2016, and 1.9 to 2.0 percent
of participants’ projections for real GDP growth in their in 2017. The central tendencies of the forecasts for core
most recent projections were 2.0 to 2.2 percent in 2014, inflation were broadly similar to those for the headline
2.6 to 3.0 percent in 2015, 2.6 to 2.9 percent in 2016, and measure. It was noted that a combination of factors—
2.3 to 2.5 percent in 2017. The central tendency of the including stable inflation expectations, steadily diminish-
ing resource slack, a pickup in wage growth, a gradual

--- Page 18 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_6–_1_7_,_ 2_0_1_4____________P_a_g_e_ _5
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2014–17andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2014
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2015
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 19 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2014–17andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2014
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.6 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2
4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2015
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.6 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2
4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.6 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2
4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.6 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2
4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.6 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2
4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_6–_1_7_,_ 2_0_1_4____________P_a_g_e_ _7
decline in the foreign exchange value for the dollar, and points and 38 basis points to 1.38 percent and 2.88 per-
still-accommodative monetary policy—was likely to cent, respectively, while the mean values rose 10 basis
contribute to a gradual rise of inflation back toward the points and 16 basis points to 1.28 percent and 2.69 per-
Committee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent. cent, respectively. The dispersion of projections for the
appropriate level of the federal funds rate was little
Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the diver-
changed in 2015 and 2016. Most participants judged
sity of participants’ views about the outlook for inflation.
that it would be appropriate to set the federal funds rate
The ranges of participants’ projections for inflation in
at or near its longer-run normal level in 2017, though
2014, 2015, and 2016 were little changed relative to June.
some projected that the federal funds rate would still
The range in 2017 shows a very substantial concentra-
need to be set appreciably below its longer-run normal
tion near the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective
level, and one anticipated that it would be appropriate to
by that time.
target a level noticeably above its longer-run normal
Appropriate Monetary Policy level. Participants provided a number of reasons why
Participants judged that it would be appropriate to begin they thought it would be appropriate for the federal
reducing policy accommodation over the projection pe- funds rate to remain below its longer-run normal level
riod as labor market indicators and inflation move back for some time after inflation and unemployment were
toward values the Committee judges consistent with the near mandate-consistent levels. These reasons included
attainment of its mandated objectives of maximum em- an assessment that headwinds holding back the recovery
ployment and price stability. As shown in figure 2, all will continue to exert restraint on economic activity at
but a few participants anticipated that it would be appro- that time and that the risks to the economic outlook are
priate to begin raising the target range for the federal asymmetric as a result of the constraints on monetary
funds rate in 2015, and most projected that the appro- policy caused by the effective lower bound on the federal
priate level of the federal funds rate would remain below funds rate.
its longer-run normal level through 2016. Most partici-
As in June, estimates of the longer-run level of the fed-
pants expected the appropriate level of the federal funds
eral funds rate ranged from 3.25 to about 4.25 percent.
rate would be approaching, or would already have
All participants judged that inflation in the longer run
reached, their individual view of its longer-run normal
would be equal to the Committee’s inflation objective of
level by the end of 2017.
2 percent, implying that their individual judgments re-
All participants projected that the unemployment rate garding the appropriate longer-run level of the real fed-
would be below 5.75 percent at the end of the year in eral funds rate in the absence of further shocks to the
which they judged the initial increase in the target range economy ranged from 1.25 to about 2.25 percent.
for the federal funds rate would be warranted, and all but
Participants also described their views regarding the ap-
one anticipated that inflation would be at or below the
propriate path of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.
Committee’s 2 percent goal at that time. Most partici-
Conditional on their respective economic outlooks, all
pants projected that the unemployment rate would be
participants judged that it likely would be appropriate to
above their estimates of its longer-run normal level at
conclude asset purchases in October of this year. A few
the end of the year in which they saw the target range for
participants thought that it would be appropriate to
the federal funds rate increasing from its effective lower
begin reducing the size of the balance sheet relatively
bound, although all but one thought that, by the end of
soon, with a couple of them judging that the Committee
2016, the unemployment rate would be at or below their
should reduce or cease the reinvestment of principal
individual judgments of its longer-run normal rate.
payments on securities held in the Federal Reserve’s
Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’ portfolio.
judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target
Participants’ views of the appropriate path for monetary
federal funds rate at the end of each calendar year from
policy were informed by their judgments about the state
2014 to 2017 and over the longer run. As noted earlier,
of the economy, including the values of the unemploy-
nearly all participants judged that economic conditions
ment rate and other labor market indicators that would
would warrant maintaining the current exceptionally low
be consistent with maximum employment, the extent to
level of the federal funds rate into 2015. Relative to their
which the economy was currently falling short of maxi-
projections in June, the median values of the federal
mum employment, the prospects for inflation to return
funds rate at the end of 2015 and 2016 increased 26 basis
to the Committee’s longer-term objective of 2 percent,

--- Page 21 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2014–17andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2014
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2015
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 22 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_6–_1_7_,_ 2_0_1_4____________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2014–17
Number of participants
2014
September projections 18
June projections
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2015
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 23 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’judgmentsofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfunds
rateortheappropriatetargetlevelforthefederalfundsrate,2014-17andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2014
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2015
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Note: Themidpointsofthetargetrangesforthefederalfundsrateandthetargetlevelsforthefederalfundsrate
aremeasuredattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun.

--- Page 24 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_6–_1_7_,_ 2_0_1_4___________P__ag_e_ _1_1
the desire to minimize potential disruption in financial upward pull on prices from inflation expectations might
markets, and the balance of risks around the outlook. be weaker than assumed; the current lack of inflationary
Many participants also mentioned the prescriptions of pressures domestically or from abroad; and the judg-
various monetary policy rules as factors they considered ment that, in current circumstances, it would be difficult
in judging the appropriate path for the federal funds rate. for the Committee to respond effectively to low-infla-
tion outcomes. Conversely, one participant saw upside
Uncertainty and Risks
risks to inflation, citing uncertainty about the timing and
A significant majority of participants continued to judge
efficacy of the Committee’s withdrawal of monetary pol-
the levels of uncertainty about their projections for real
icy accommodation.
GDP growth and the unemployment rate as broadly
similar to the norms during the previous 20 years
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
(figure 4).2 Most participants continued to judge the
Percentage points
risks to their outlooks for real GDP growth and the un- Variable 2014 2015 2016 2017
employment rate to be broadly balanced. A few partici- Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . . . ±1.3 ±1.9 ±2.1 ±2.2
pants viewed the risks to real GDP growth as weighted
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . . . ±0.3 ±1.0 ±1.6 ±1.9
to the downside; one viewed the risks as weighted to the
upside. Those participants who viewed risks as weighted Total consumer prices2 . . . . . . . . ±0.8 ±1.0 ±1.1 ±1.0
to the downside cited, for example, concern about the NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root
mean squared error of projections for 1994 through 2013 that were released
limited ability of monetary policy at the effective lower
in the spring by various private and government forecasters. As described
bound to respond to further negative shocks to the in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is
economy. As in June, nearly all participants judged the about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unem-
ployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size
risks to the outlook for the unemployment rate to be
of projection errors made in the past. For more information, see David
broadly balanced. Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the
Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Eco-
Participants generally saw the level of uncertainty and nomics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System, November), available at www.federalre-
the balance of risks around their forecasts for overall
serve.gov/ pubs/feds/2007/200760/200760abs.html; and Board of Gov-
PCE inflation and core inflation as little changed from ernors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Research and Statistics
June. Most participants continued to judge the levels of (2014), “Updated Historical Forecast Errors,” memorandum, April 9,
www.federalreserve.gov/foia/files/20140409-historical-forecast-er-
uncertainty associated with their forecasts for the two
rors.pdf.
inflation measures to be broadly similar to historical 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
norms, and most continued to see the risks to those pro- 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that
has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts.
jections as broadly balanced. Several participants, how-
Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the
ever, viewed the risks to their inflation forecasts as tilted fourth quarter of the year indicated.
to the downside, reflecting, for example, the possibility
that the recent low levels of inflation could prove more
persistent than anticipated; the possibility that the
2 Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for the
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con-
sumer price inflation over the period from 1994 through 2013.
At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty”
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess
the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projec-
tions.

--- Page 25 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4. Uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth Risks to GDP growth
September projections 18 September projections 18
June projections 16 June projections 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation Risks to PCE inflation
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation Risks to core PCE inflation
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”Defini-
tionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 26 ---

_ ________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_6–_1_7_,_ 2_0_1_4___________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the third year, and 0.8 to 5.2 percent in the
the members of the Board of Governors and fourth year. The corresponding 70 percent
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks confidence intervals for overall inflation would
inform discussions of monetary policy among be 1.2 to 2.8 percent in the current year, 1.0 to
policymakers and can aid public understand- 3.0 percent in the second year, 0.9 to 3.1 per-
ing of the basis for policy actions. Consider- cent in the third year, and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in
able uncertainty attends these projections, the fourth year.
however. The economic and statistical models Because current conditions may differ
and relationships used to help produce eco- from those that prevailed, on average, over his-
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de- tory, participants provide judgments as to
scriptions of the real world, and the future whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
path of the economy can be affected by myr- jections of each variable is greater than, smaller
iad unforeseen developments and events. than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, forecast uncertainty in the past, as shown in
participants consider not only what appears to table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
be the most likely economic outcome as em- to whether the risks to their projections are
bodied in their projections, but also the range weighted to the upside, are weighted to the
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
their occurring, and the potential costs to the participants judge whether each variable is
economy should they occur. more likely to be above or below their projec-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical tions of the most likely outcome. These judg-
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including ments about the uncertainty and the risks at-
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports tending each participant’s projections are dis-
and those prepared by the Federal Reserve tinct from the diversity of participants’ views
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the about the most likely outcomes. Forecast un-
Federal Open Market Committee. The pro- certainty is concerned with the risks associated
jection error ranges shown in the table il- with a particular projection rather than with
lustrate the considerable uncertainty associat- divergences across a number of different pro-
ed with economic forecasts. For example, jections.
suppose a participant projects that real gross As with real activity and inflation, the out-
domestic product (GDP) and total consumer look for the future path of the federal funds
prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, re- rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This
spectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty arises primarily because each partic-
uncertainty attending those projections is simi- ipant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of
lar to that experienced in the past and the risks monetary policy depends importantly on the
around the projections are broadly balanced, evolution of real activity and inflation over
the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a time. If economic conditions evolve in an un-
probability of about 70 percent that actual expected manner, then assessments of the ap-
GDP would expand within a range of 1.7 to propriate setting of the federal funds rate
4.3 percent in the current year, 1.1 to 4.9 per- would change from that point forward.
cent in the second year, 0.9 to 5.1 percent in

# Tables

## Page_4_Table_1


| pace of any sales would be communicated   |
|-------------------------------------------|
| to the public in advance.                 |


## Page_4_Table_2


|  The Committee intends that the Federal Re-   |
|------------------------------------------------|
| serve will, in the longer run, hold no more    |
| securities than necessary to implement         |
| monetary policy efficiently and effectively,   |
| and that it will hold primarily Treasury se-   |
| curities, thereby minimizing the effect of     |
| Federal Reserve holdings on the allocation     |
| of credit across sectors of the economy.       |
|  The Committee is prepared to adjust the de-  |
| tails of its approach to policy normalization  |
| in light of economic and financial develop-    |
| ments.                                         |


## Page_4_Table_3


|  The Committee will determine the timing    |
|----------------------------------------------|
| and pace of policy normalization—meaning     |
| steps to raise the federal funds rate and    |
| other short-term interest rates to more nor- |
| mal levels and to reduce the Federal Re-     |
| serve’s securities holdings—so as to pro-    |
| mote its statutory mandate of maximum        |
| employment and price stability.              |


## Page_4_Table_4


| o When economic conditions and the eco-     |
|---------------------------------------------|
| nomic outlook warrant a less accommo-       |
| dative monetary policy, the Committee       |
| will raise its target range for the federal |
| funds rate.                                 |
| o During normalization, the Federal Re-     |
| serve intends to move the federal funds     |
| rate into the target range set by the       |
| FOMC primarily by adjusting the interest    |
| rate it pays on excess reserve balances.    |
| o During normalization, the Federal Re-     |
| serve intends to use an overnight reverse   |
| repurchase agreement facility and other     |
| supplementary tools as needed to help       |
| control the federal funds rate. The Com-    |
| mittee will use an overnight reverse repur- |
| chase agreement facility only to the extent |
| necessary and will phase it out when it is  |
| no longer needed to help control the fed-   |
| eral funds rate.                            |


## Page_4_Table_5


|  The Committee intends to reduce the Fed-    |
|-----------------------------------------------|
| eral Reserve’s securities holdings in a grad- |
| ual and predictable manner primarily by       |
| ceasing to reinvest repayments of principal   |
| on securities held in the SOMA.               |


## Page_4_Table_6


| o The Committee expects to cease or com-   |
|--------------------------------------------|
| mence phasing out reinvestments after it   |
| begins increasing the target range for the |
| federal funds rate; the timing will depend |
| on how economic and financial condi-       |
| tions and the economic outlook evolve.     |


## Page_4_Table_7


| o The Committee currently does not antic-   |
|---------------------------------------------|
| ipate selling agency mortgage-backed se-    |
| curities as part of the normalization pro-  |
| cess, although limited sales might be war-  |
| ranted in the longer run to reduce or elim- |
| inate residual holdings. The timing and     |


## Page_14_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |      |      |      |            |      |      |      |      |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|------|------------|------|------|------|------|
| 2014                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | 2015 | 2016 | 2017 | Longer run | 2014 | 2015 | 2016 | 2017 |
| 2.0 to 2.2 2.6 to 3.0 2.6 to 2.9 2.3 to 2.5 2.0 to 2.3
2.1 to 2.3 3.0 to 3.2 2.5 to 3.0 n.a. 2.1 to 2.3
5.9 to 6.0 5.4 to 5.6 5.1 to 5.4 4.9 to 5.3 5.2 to 5.5
6.0 to 6.1 5.4 to 5.7 5.1 to 5.5 n.a. 5.2 to 5.5
1.5 to 1.7 1.6 to 1.9 1.7 to 2.0 1.9 to 2.0 2.0
1.5 to 1.7 1.5 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 n.a. 2.0
1.5 to 1.6 1.6 to 1.9 1.8 to 2.0 1.9 to 2.0
1.5 to 1.6 1.6 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 n.a. |      |      |      |            |      |      |      |      |