# 20140730_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:37:23*
*Pages: 11, Tables: 0*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
July 29–30, 2014
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Policy and Research, Board of Governors
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on
Tuesday, July 29, 2014, at 10:00 a.m. and continued on Matthew J. Eichner,1 Deputy Director, Division of
Wednesday, July 30, 2014, at 9:00 a.m. Research and Statistics, Board of Governors;
Maryann F. Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of
PRESENT: Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of
Janet L. Yellen, Chair Governors; Stephen A. Meyer and William R.
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Nelson, Deputy Directors, Division of Monetary
Lael Brainard Affairs, Board of Governors
Stanley Fischer
Richard W. Fisher Jon W. Faust and Stacey Tevlin, Special Advisers to the
Narayana Kocherlakota Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
Loretta J. Mester Governors
Charles I. Plosser
Jerome H. Powell Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office
Daniel K. Tarullo of Board Members, Board of Governors
Charles L. Evans, Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Lockhart, and John C. Williams, Alternate Board Members, Board of Governors
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers,
James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St.
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively David Bowman, Associate Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors; David
William B. English, Secretary and Economist E. Lebow² and Michael G. Palumbo, Associate
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Directors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Board of Governors; Fabio M. Natalucci1 and
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Gretchen C. Weinbach,1 Associate Directors,
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Steven B. Kamin, Economist
David W. Wilcox, Economist Jane E. Ihrig, Deputy Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Evan F.
Koenig, Thomas Laubach, Michael P. Leahy, Paolo Eric C. Engstrom, Patrick E. McCabe,1 and Karen M.
A. Pesenti, Mark E. Schweitzer, and William Pence, Advisers, Division of Research and
Wascher, Associate Economists Statistics, Board of Governors
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Penelope A. Beattie,1 Assistant to the Secretary, Office
of the Secretary, Board of Governors
Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open
Market Account ________________
1 Attended the joint session of the Federal Open Market
Robert deV. Frierson,1 Secretary of the Board, Office Committee and the Board of Governors.
of the Secretary, Board of Governors ² Attended the portion of the meeting following the joint
session of the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board
of Governors.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Francisco Covas and Elizabeth Klee,1 Section Chiefs, in helping the Committee frame and organize the discus-
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors sion of a broad range of communications issues.
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
In a joint session of the Federal Open Market Commit-
tee (FOMC) and the Board of Governors of the Federal
Katie Ross,1 Manager, Office of the Secretary, Board of
Reserve System, the manager of the System Open Mar-
Governors
ket Account (SOMA) reported on developments in do-
mestic and foreign financial markets. The manager also
Elmar Mertens, Senior Economist, Division of
reported on the System open market operations con-
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
ducted during the period since the Committee met on
June 17–18, 2014, summarized the outcomes of recent
Peter M. Garavuso, Records Project Manager, Division
test operations of the Term Deposit Facility (TDF), de-
of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
scribed the results from the fixed-rate overnight reverse
repurchase agreement (ON RRP) operational exercise,
Gregory L. Stefani, First Vice President, Federal
and reviewed the ongoing effects of recent foreign cen-
Reserve Bank of Cleveland
tral bank policy actions on yields on the international
portion of the SOMA portfolio. In addition, the man-
David Altig, Ron Feldman, Jeff Fuhrer, and Daniel G.
ager noted plans for a pilot program for increasing the
Sullivan, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal
number of the Open Market Desk’s counterparties for
Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Minneapolis, Boston,
agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) operations to
and Chicago, respectively
include a few firms that are too small to qualify as pri-
mary dealers. By unanimous vote, the Committee rati-
Michael Dotsey and Meg McConnell, Senior Vice
fied the Desk’s domestic transactions over the inter-
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia
meeting period. There were no intervention operations
and New York, respectively
in foreign currencies for the System’s account over the
intermeeting period.
Fred Furlong, Group Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco Monetary Policy Normalization
Meeting participants continued their discussion of issues
Antoine Martin,1 Douglas Tillett, David C. Wheelock, associated with the eventual normalization of the stance
Jonathan L. Willis, and Patricia Zoebel,1 Vice and conduct of monetary policy, consistent with the
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Committee’s intention to provide additional information
Chicago, St. Louis, Kansas City, and New York, to the public later this year, well before most participants
respectively anticipate the first steps in reducing policy accommoda-
tion to become appropriate. The staff detailed a possible
Robert L. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve approach for implementing and communicating mone-
Bank of Richmond tary policy once the Committee begins to tighten the
________________ stance of policy. The approach reflected the Commit-
1 Attended the joint session of the Federal Open Market tee’s discussion of normalization strategies and policy
Committee and the Board of Governors. tools during the previous two meetings.
Participants expressed general support for the normali-
zation approach outlined by the staff, though some
noted reservations about one or more of its features. Al-
most all participants agreed that it would be appropriate
During the interval between the June and July meetings,
to retain the federal funds rate as the key policy rate, and
Chair Yellen appointed a subcommittee on communica-
they supported continuing to target a range of 25 basis
tions issues chaired by Governor Fischer and including
points for this rate at the time of liftoff and for some
President Mester, Governor Powell, and President Wil-
time thereafter. However, one participant preferred to
liams. Governor Fischer indicated that the subcommit-
use the range for the federal funds rate as a communica-
tee would continue the work of previous subcommittees
tion tool rather than as a hard target, and another pre-

--- Page 3 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f _J_u_ly_ 2_9_–_3_0_,_ 2_0_1_4_________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
ferred that policy communications during the normali- decisions regarding its framework for monetary policy.
zation period focus on the rate of interest on excess re- Most participants supported reducing or ending re-
serves (IOER) and the ON RRP rate in addition to the investment sometime after the first increase in the target
federal funds rate. Participants agreed that adjustments range for the federal funds rate. A few, however, be-
in the IOER rate would be the primary tool used to lieved that ceasing reinvestment before liftoff was a bet-
move the federal funds rate into its target range and in- ter approach because it would lead to an earlier reduc-
fluence other money market rates. In addition, most tion in the size of the portfolio. Most participants con-
thought that temporary use of a limited-scale ON RRP tinued to anticipate that the Committee would not sell
facility would help set a firmer floor under money mar- MBS, except perhaps to eliminate residual holdings.
ket interest rates during normalization. Most partici- However, a couple of participants preferred to sell MBS
pants anticipated that, at least initially, the IOER rate in order to unwind the effect of the Federal Reserve’s
would be set at the top of the target range for the federal holdings on mortgage rates relative to other interest rates
funds rate, and the ON RRP rate would be set at the more rapidly than would occur as a result of repayments
bottom of the federal funds target range. Alternatively, of principal alone. Some others noted that, given the
some participants suggested the ON RRP rate could be uncertainties attending the normalization process and
set below the bottom of the federal funds target range, the outlook for the economy and financial markets, it
judging that it might be possible to begin the normaliza- could be helpful to retain the option to sell some assets.
tion process with minimal or no reliance on an ON RRP
Participants agreed that the Committee should provide
facility and increase its role only if necessary. However,
additional information to the public regarding the details
many other participants thought that such a strategy
of normalization well before most participants anticipate
might result in insufficient control of money market
the first steps in reducing policy accommodation to be-
rates at liftoff, which could cause confusion about the
come appropriate. They stressed the importance of
likely path of monetary policy or raise questions about
communicating a clear plan while at the same time not-
the Committee’s ability to implement policy effectively.
ing the importance of maintaining flexibility so that ad-
Participants generally agreed that the ON RRP facility justments to the normalization approach could be made
should be only as large as needed for effective monetary as the situation changed and in light of experience. Par-
policy implementation and should be phased out when ticipants requested additional analysis from the staff on
it is no longer needed for that purpose. Participants ex- issues related to normalization as background for further
pressed their desire to include features in the facility’s discussion at their next meeting. A few participants also
design that would limit the Federal Reserve’s role in fi- suggested that the Committee should solicit additional
nancial intermediation and mitigate the risk that the fa- information from the public regarding the possible ef-
cility might magnify strains in short-term funding mar- fects of an ON RRP facility, but some others pointed
kets during periods of financial stress. They discussed out that the Committee would continue to receive such
options to address these concerns, including methods feedback informally in response to its ongoing commu-
for limiting the program’s size. Many participants noted nications regarding normalization. The Board meeting
that further testing would provide additional infor- concluded at the end of the discussion of approaches to
mation that could help determine the appropriate fea- policy normalization.
tures to temper the risks that might be associated with
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
an ON RRP facility.
The information reviewed for the July 29–30 meeting in-
Participants also discussed approaches to normalizing dicated that real gross domestic product (GDP) re-
the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s bal- bounded in the second quarter following its first-quarter
ance sheet. In general, they agreed that the size of the decline, but it expanded at only a modest pace, on bal-
balance sheet should be reduced gradually and predicta- ance, over the first half of the year. Consumer price in-
bly. In addition, they believed that, in the long run, the flation rose somewhat in the second quarter, but futures
balance sheet should be reduced to the smallest level prices for energy and agricultural commodities generally
consistent with efficient implementation of monetary were trending down over the next couple of years and
policy and should consist primarily of Treasury securities longer-run measures of inflation expectations remained
in order to minimize the effect of the SOMA portfolio stable. The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) re-
on the allocation of credit across sectors of the economy. leased its advance estimate for second-quarter real GDP,
A few participants noted that the appropriate size of the along with revised data for earlier periods, on the second
balance sheet would depend on the Committee’s future day of the FOMC meeting. The staff’s assessment of

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
economic activity and inflation in the first half of 2014, through May, though the rate of increase was less rapid
based on information available before the meeting be- than earlier in the year.
gan, was broadly consistent with the new information
Real private expenditures for business equipment and in-
from the BEA.
tellectual property products increased in the second
Measures of labor market conditions generally contin- quarter. Nominal new orders for nondefense capital
ued to improve during the intermeeting period. Total goods were little changed, on net, in May and June; how-
nonfarm payroll employment increased strongly in June, ever, the level of orders was above that for shipments,
and the average monthly gain for the second quarter was pointing to increases in shipments in subsequent
the largest since the first quarter of 2012. The unem- months. Other forward-looking indicators, such as na-
ployment rate declined to 6.1 percent in June, the labor tional and regional surveys of business conditions, also
force participation rate was unchanged, and the employ- generally suggested moderate increases in business
ment-to-population ratio edged up. The rate of long- equipment spending in the near term. Real business ex-
duration unemployment moved down, and the share of penditures for nonresidential construction also in-
workers employed part time for economic reasons edged creased in the second quarter. Meanwhile, business in-
up; both measures remained elevated by historical stand- ventories generally appeared well aligned with sales,
ards. Initial claims for unemployment insurance de- apart from the energy sector, where inventories re-
clined further in recent weeks. The rate of job openings mained below year-earlier levels.
rose further in May, but the rate of hiring was unchanged
Real federal government purchases decreased over the
and remained at a modest level.
first half of the year, reflecting ongoing fiscal consolida-
Industrial production increased in the second quarter, as tion and continued declines in defense spending. In
higher output from manufacturers and mines more than contrast, real state and local government purchases in-
offset a decline in the output of electric and natural gas creased in the second quarter, as payrolls expanded at a
utilities. Capacity utilization also moved higher in the faster pace than in the first quarter and outlays for con-
second quarter. Automakers’ production schedules in- struction moved higher.
dicated that light motor vehicle assemblies would in-
The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in May as
crease in the third quarter, and readings on new orders
imports fell and exports rose. The rise in exports was
from national and regional manufacturing surveys were
concentrated in petroleum products and automotive
consistent with moderate gains in factory output in the
parts. The fall in imports was led by declines in oil and
near term.
consumer goods. For the second quarter overall, net ex-
Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose ports exerted a moderate drag on the change in U.S. real
more quickly in the second quarter than in the first, GDP, compared with a more substantial negative con-
partly reflecting higher purchases of light motor vehicles. tribution in the first quarter.
Key factors that tend to influence household spending
U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price in-
remained positive in recent months. In particular, gains
dex, increased at a faster pace in the second quarter than
in equity values and home prices boosted household net
in the first and were about 1½ percent higher than a year
worth, and real disposable personal income continued to
earlier. Consumer energy price inflation rose in the sec-
rise in the second quarter. Consumer sentiment in the
ond quarter, but retail gasoline prices, measured on a
Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of
seasonally adjusted basis, subsequently moved lower
Consumers edged down in early July but was only
through the fourth week of July. Consumer food price
slightly below its average over the first half of the year.
inflation also increased in the second quarter, reflecting
Real expenditures for residential investment turned up the effects of drought and disease on crop and livestock
in the second quarter after declining for two consecutive production; however, spot prices for crops moved down
quarters. Starts of new single-family houses declined in in recent weeks, and futures prices pointed to lower
June, but they rose for the quarter as a whole, and the prices for livestock in the year ahead. The PCE price
level of permit issuance was consistent with increases in index for items excluding food and energy also rose
starts in subsequent months. In the multifamily sector, more quickly in the second quarter than in the first and
starts and permits also increased, on net, in the second was 1½ percent higher than a year earlier. Near-term
quarter. Existing home sales moved up during the sec- inflation expectations from the Michigan survey were lit-
ond quarter but remained below year-earlier levels, while tle changed, on net, in June and early July, while longer-
new home sales declined. Home prices continued to rise

--- Page 5 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f _J_u_ly_ 2_9_–_3_0_,_ 2_0_1_4_________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
term expectations declined. Measures of labor compen- Middle East and the release of the June minutes ap-
sation indicated that gains in nominal wages and em- peared to contribute to the declines in longer-term
ployee benefits remained modest. Treasury yields. The decline in yields at the long end of
the curve likely also reflected a continuation of a pattern
Recent indicators suggested that foreign economic activ-
that began last year, which some market participants at-
ity strengthened in the second quarter: Chinese GDP
tributed to a reduction in investors’ expectations for
accelerated substantially, and Mexican data suggested a
longer-run economic growth and declines in term pre-
pickup there. Real GDP growth remained strong in the
miums. Measures of longer-horizon inflation compen-
United Kingdom, and data for both Canada and the euro
sation based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities
area showed improvement relative to the first quarter.
were about unchanged.
By contrast, household spending in Japan dropped
sharply following the country’s April 1 consumption tax Conditions in unsecured short-term dollar funding mar-
increase. In many advanced foreign economies, inflation kets remained stable over the intermeeting period. The
picked up in the second quarter from very low rates in Federal Reserve continued its ON RRP exercise and
the first, although second-quarter inflation in the euro TDF testing. As a result of somewhat higher market
area remained well below the European Central Bank’s rates on repurchase agreements, ON RRP take-up, on
objective. average, was a little lower than in the prior intermeeting
period, although participation in the ON RRP exercise
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
jumped to a record high at quarter-end on June 30.
Financial conditions eased somewhat, on balance, be-
Moreover, the ON RRP exercise appeared to have con-
tween the June and July FOMC meetings, although geo-
tinued to help firm the floor under money market inter-
political risks weighed on investor sentiment at times.
est rates. In TDF testing that ran from mid-May to early
On net, yields on longer-term Treasury securities fell, eq-
July, gradual increases in offer rates and in the maximum
uity prices rose, and the foreign exchange value of the
individual award amounts generally resulted in higher
dollar was little changed.
participation.
Market participants characterized the Federal Reserve’s
The S&P 500 index rose about 1½ percent over the in-
monetary policy communications over the intermeeting
termeeting period, as earnings reports from a range of
period as suggesting a slightly more accommodative pol-
companies appeared to indicate that profits in the sec-
icy stance than had been expected. The anticipated path
ond quarter had increased modestly relative to the first
of the federal funds rate shifted down modestly follow-
quarter. The VIX, an index of option-implied volatility
ing the June FOMC statement and the Chair’s press con-
for one-month returns on the S&P 500 index, remained
ference. Policy expectations also edged down on the re-
at low levels over the intermeeting period.
lease of the minutes of the June FOMC meeting. Market
participants took note of the discussion of monetary pol- Credit flows to nonfinancial corporations remained
icy normalization in the minutes and, particularly, the strong in the second quarter. Gross issuance of invest-
discussion of the likely spread between the ON RRP rate ment- and speculative-grade bonds stayed brisk. Com-
and the IOER rate. mercial and industrial loans on banks’ balance sheets
continued to increase at a robust pace, consistent with
Results from the Desk’s July Survey of Primary Dealers,
reports in the July Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey
conducted shortly before the July FOMC meeting, indi-
on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) of easier lending
cated that market participants’ expectations for the tim-
standards and terms as well as stronger loan demand
ing of the first increase in the federal funds rate and the
from firms of all sizes. Issuance of leveraged loans by
subsequent policy path were largely unchanged from
institutional investors also remained solid.
those reported in the survey taken just before the June
meeting. The median dealer continued to see the third Credit conditions in markets for commercial real estate
quarter of 2015 as the most likely time for the liftoff of (CRE) improved further in the second quarter. Accord-
the federal funds rate from the effective lower bound, ing to the July SLOOS, banks continued to ease their
although, relative to the June survey, the distribution of standards and report stronger demand for CRE loans
the modal expected time of liftoff became more concen- during the second quarter on balance. CRE loans on
trated around the third quarter of 2015. banks’ books continued to expand moderately, and issu-
ance of commercial mortgage-backed securities re-
On balance, 10- and 30-year nominal Treasury yields
mained solid.
both declined about 20 basis points over the intermeet-
ing period. Concerns about tensions in Ukraine and the

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Credit conditions in residential mortgage markets gener- Staff Economic Outlook
ally remained tight over the intermeeting period. Mort- The data received since the staff prepared its forecast for
gage interest rates held steady around 4 percent, and the June FOMC meeting suggested that real GDP
origination volumes continued to be low. According to growth was even weaker in the first half of the year than
the July SLOOS, underwriting standards on prime had been anticipated.3 However, the staff left its fore-
home-purchase loans appeared to have eased further at cast for real GDP growth in the second half of the year
banks during the second quarter but, on net, standards essentially unrevised because other indicators of eco-
on all types of residential real estate loans reportedly re- nomic activity appeared comparatively strong in relation
mained tighter than the midpoints of the respondent to real GDP during the first half of the year. In particu-
banks’ longer-term ranges. lar, payroll employment continued to advance at a solid
pace, the unemployment rate declined further, industrial
In contrast to mortgage lending, consumer credit con-
production posted steady gains, and readings from busi-
tinued to expand robustly in May, largely on the strength
ness surveys were strong. The staff’s medium-term fore-
of auto and student loans, though credit card debt
cast for real GDP growth was also little revised. The
picked up somewhat as well. Banks responding to the
staff continued to project that real GDP would expand
July SLOOS indicated that demand for auto loans
at a faster pace in the second half of this year and over
strengthened further in the second quarter. In addition,
the next two years than in 2013. This forecast was pred-
demand for credit card loans increased, and a few large
icated on a further anticipated waning of the restraint on
banks reported having eased lending policies for such
spending growth from changes in fiscal policy, contin-
loans.
ued improvement in credit availability, increases in con-
Benchmark yields on long-term sovereign bonds in the sumer and business confidence, and a pickup in foreign
advanced foreign economies continued the downward economic growth. In response to a further downward
trend that began at the start of the year, with rising ten- surprise in the unemployment rate, the staff again low-
sions in the Middle East and Ukraine during the inter- ered its forecast for the unemployment rate over the pro-
meeting period likely adding some to the downward jection period. To reconcile the downward revision to
pressure. Concerns about one of Portugal’s largest real GDP growth for the first half of year with an unem-
banks and about litigation risks facing European banks ployment rate that was now closer to the staff’s estimate
weighed on European financial markets, prompting of its longer-run natural rate, the staff lowered its as-
yield spreads on peripheral sovereign bonds in the euro sumed pace of potential output growth this year by more
area to widen and equity price indexes for European than it marked down GDP growth. As a result, resource
banks to decline. Intermeeting data releases on euro- slack in this projection was anticipated to be somewhat
area industrial production came in below market expec- narrower this year than in the previous forecast and to
tations, also weighing on headline equity markets in the be taken up slowly over the projection period.
region. Mixed news from emerging market economies,
The staff’s near-term forecast for inflation was revised
including better-than-expected GDP growth in China
up a little, as recent data showed somewhat faster-than-
and concerns about Argentina’s scheduled debt pay-
anticipated increases that were judged to be only partly
ments, generally had modest market effects. Changes in
transitory. With a little less resource slack in this projec-
emerging market equity indexes were mixed over the pe-
tion, the medium-term forecast for inflation was also re-
riod, and emerging market bond yields generally de-
vised up slightly. Nonetheless, as in the June projection,
clined. The broad trade-weighted dollar was little
inflation was projected to step down in the second half
changed, on net, over the intermeeting period.
of this year and to remain below the Committee’s
The staff’s periodic report on potential risks to financial longer-run objective of 2 percent over the next few
stability concluded that relatively strong capital positions years. With longer-run inflation expectations assumed
of U.S. banks, subdued use of maturity transformation to remain stable, changes in commodity and import
and leverage within the broader financial sector, and rel- prices expected to be subdued, and slack in labor and
atively low levels of leverage for the aggregate nonfinan-
________________
cial sector were important factors supporting overall fi-
3 The staff’s forecast for the July FOMC meeting was prepared
nancial stability. However, the staff report also high-
prior to the July 30 release of the BEA’s advance estimate of
lighted that low and declining risk premiums, low levels
real GDP in the second quarter and revisions for earlier peri-
of market volatility, and a loosening of underwriting ods.
standards in a number of markets raised somewhat the
risk of an eventual correction in asset valuations.

--- Page 7 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f _J_u_ly_ 2_9_–_3_0_,_ 2_0_1_4_________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
product markets anticipated to diminish only slowly, in- as well as difficulty in obtaining mortgage credit, partic-
flation was forecast to rise gradually and to reach the ularly for younger, first-time homebuyers. It was also
Committee’s objective in the longer run. noted that the weakness in homebuilding along with the
continued rise in house prices suggested that supply con-
The staff continued to view uncertainty around its pro-
straints were also weighing on construction activity. A
jections for real GDP growth, inflation, and the unem-
couple of participants indicated that some demand ap-
ployment rate as roughly in line with the average of the
peared to have shifted to rental properties. The rising
past 20 years. Although the risks to GDP growth were
demand for rentals was in part being satisfied by inves-
still seen as tilted a little to the downside, as neither mon-
tors buying homes for the rental market; it was also
etary policy nor fiscal policy was viewed as well posi-
providing support for multifamily construction. Some
tioned to help the economy withstand adverse shocks,
participants noted their concern that a number of the
these risks were considered to be more nearly balanced
factors restraining residential construction might persist,
than in the previous projection. The staff continued to
damping the housing recovery for some time.
view the risks around its outlook for the unemployment
rate and for inflation as roughly balanced. Many participants reported continued improvement in
sentiment among their business contacts and noted pos-
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
itive readings from recent regional and national surveys
Economic Outlook
of manufacturing and service-sector activity. In particu-
In their discussion of the economic situation and the
lar, participants cited strength in airlines, railroads, truck-
outlook, meeting participants generally viewed the re-
ing firms, businesses supplying the motor vehicle and
bound in real GDP in the second quarter and the ongo-
aerospace industries, and those in the high-tech sector.
ing improvement in labor market conditions as support-
In addition, higher energy prices continued to provide
ing their expectations for continued moderate economic
support for activity in the energy sector. In the agricul-
expansion with labor market indicators and inflation
ture sector, favorable growing conditions for crops had
moving toward levels the Committee judges consistent
lowered prices but increased the profitability of livestock
with its dual mandate. Although most participants con-
producers. The reports from their business contacts
tinued to view the risks to the outlook for economic ac-
provided support for participants’ expectation of
tivity and the labor market as nearly balanced, some
stronger economic growth in the second half of the year.
pointed to possible sources of downside risk, including
In some cases, the information from businesses sug-
persistent weakness in the housing sector, a continued
gested increases in spending on capital equipment or a
slow rise in household income, or spillovers from devel-
pickup in investment in commercial and industrial con-
opments in the Middle East and Ukraine. Participants
struction and transportation. Contacts in a number of
noted that inflation had moved somewhat closer to the
areas indicated that credit was readily available, and re-
Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective and gener-
ports from participants’ business and financial contacts
ally saw the risks of inflation running persistently below
indicated a strengthening in demand for bank credit.
their objective as having diminished somewhat.
However, several participants reported that businesses
Household spending appeared to be rising moderately remained somewhat uncertain about the economic out-
and was expected to contribute to stronger economic look and thus were still cautious about stepping up cap-
growth in the second half of the year than in the first ital spending and hiring. Federal fiscal restraint report-
half. Business contacts in several Districts reported a edly continued to depress business activity in some areas
pickup in consumer spending after the weakness in the dependent on federal spending.
first quarter. However, a few participants raised con-
Labor market conditions improved in recent months ac-
cerns that households might remain cautious, with the
cording to participants’ reports on developments in their
personal saving rate staying elevated, or that the slow rise
Districts as well as a range of national indicators. The
in wages and income might be insufficient to support
improvement was reflected not only in a pickup in pay-
stronger consumer spending.
roll employment gains and a noticeable decline in the
The recovery in housing activity remained slow accord- overall unemployment rate, but also in reductions in
ing to most participants. Although mortgage rates were broader measures of underutilization such as long-
still low and housing appeared to be relatively affordable, duration joblessness and the number of workers with
various factors were seen as restraining demand, includ- part-time jobs who would prefer full-time employment.
ing low expected income and high levels of student debt The labor force participation rate was stable, and a cou-
ple of participants pointed out that the transition rate

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
from long-duration unemployment to employment had expectations remained stable. In support of their assess-
moved up. Moreover, some participants cited positive ments, several reported results from various statistical
signs of increased hiring and turnover in the labor mar- models of inflation and inflation expectations. Most
ket, including increases in job openings and hiring plans, now judged that the downside risks to inflation had di-
higher quit rates, and apparent improvements in match- minished, but a few participants continued to see infla-
ing workers and jobs. tion as likely to persist below the Committee’s objective
over the medium term. Several commented that the up-
Participants generally agreed that both the recent im-
side risks had not increased. However, a few others ar-
provement in labor market conditions and the cumula-
gued that the recent tightening of the labor market had
tive progress over the past year had been greater than
increased the upside risks to inflation and inflation ex-
anticipated and that labor market conditions had moved
pectations, particularly in an environment in which the
noticeably closer to those viewed as normal in the longer
economic expansion was expected to strengthen further.
run. Participants differed, however, in their assessments
of the remaining degree of labor market slack and how In their discussion of financial stability issues, partici-
to measure it. A few argued that the unemployment rate pants noted evidence of valuation pressures in some par-
continues to serve as a reliable summary statistic for the ticular asset markets, but those pressures did not appear
overall state of the labor market and thought that it to be widespread and other measures of vulnerability in
should be the Committee’s principal focus for evaluating the financial system were at low to moderate levels. As
labor market conditions. However, many participants a result, they generally saw the vulnerabilities in the fi-
continued to see a larger gap between current labor mar- nancial system as well contained. Some participants dis-
ket conditions and those consistent with their assess- cussed how the Committee might better incorporate fi-
ments of normal levels of labor utilization than indicated nancial stability risks in its discussion of macroeconomic
by the difference between the unemployment rate and risks. They also suggested that the Committee consider
estimates of its longer-run normal level. These partici- how promptly various financial stability concerns could
pants cited, for example, the still-elevated levels of long- be addressed, if need be, and which tools, including
term unemployment and workers employed part time monetary policy and regulatory responses, would be
for economic reasons as well as low labor force partici- most timely and effective in doing so.
pation. Several participants pointed out that the recent
With respect to monetary policy over the medium run,
drop in the unemployment rate had been associated with
participants generally agreed that labor market condi-
progress in reabsorbing the long-term unemployed into
tions and inflation had moved closer to the Committee’s
jobs and reducing part-time work, suggesting that slack
longer-run objectives in recent months, and most antic-
was diminishing and could be reduced further as em-
ipated that progress toward those goals would continue.
ployment opportunities expanded.
Moreover, many participants noted that if convergence
Labor compensation was still rising only modestly. toward the Committee’s objectives occurred more
Many participants continued to attribute the subdued quickly than expected, it might become appropriate to
rise in wages to the remaining slack in the labor market; begin removing monetary policy accommodation
it was noted that the elevated level of relatively low-paid sooner than they currently anticipated. Indeed, some
part-time workers was holding down overall wage in- participants viewed the actual and expected progress to-
creases. Several other participants pointed to reports ward the Committee’s goals as sufficient to call for a rel-
that wage pressures had increased in some regions and atively prompt move toward reducing policy accommo-
occupations that were experiencing labor shortages or dation to avoid overshooting the Committee’s unem-
relatively low unemployment. However, a couple of par- ployment and inflation objectives over the medium
ticipants indicated that the pass-through of labor costs term. These participants were increasingly uncomforta-
has been more attenuated since the mid-1980s and that ble with the Committee’s forward guidance. In their
wage pressures might not be a reliable leading indicator view, the guidance suggested a later initial increase in the
of higher inflation. target federal funds rate as well as lower future levels of
the funds rate than they judged likely to be appropriate.
Inflation firmed in recent months, and most participants
They suggested that the guidance should more clearly
anticipated that it would continue to move up toward
communicate how policy-setting would respond to the
the Committee’s 2 percent objective. Many of them ex-
evolution of economic data. However, most partici-
pected that inflation was likely to rise gradually over the
pants indicated that any change in their expectations for
medium term, as resource slack diminished and inflation
the appropriate timing of the first increase in the federal

--- Page 9 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f _J_u_ly_ 2_9_–_3_0_,_ 2_0_1_4_________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
funds rate would depend on further information on the and inflation as well as its assessment of the likely effi-
trajectories of economic activity, the labor market, and cacy and costs of such purchases.
inflation. In particular, although participants generally
Members discussed their assessments of progress—both
saw the drop in real GDP in the first quarter as transi-
realized and expected—toward the Committee’s objec-
tory, some noted that it increased uncertainty about the
tives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation
outlook, and they were looking to additional data on
and considered enhancements to the statement language
production, spending, and labor market developments
that would more clearly communicate the Committee’s
to shed light on the underlying pace of economic
view on such progress. Regarding the labor market,
growth. Moreover, despite recent inflation develop-
many members concluded that a range of indicators of
ments, several participants continued to believe that in-
labor market conditions—including the unemployment
flation was likely to move back to the Committee’s ob-
rate as well as a number of other measures of labor uti-
jective very slowly, thereby warranting a continuation of
lization—had improved more in recent months than
highly accommodative policy as long as projected infla-
they anticipated earlier. They judged it appropriate to
tion remained below 2 percent and longer-term inflation
replace the description of recent labor market conditions
expectations were well anchored.
that mentioned solely the unemployment rate with a de-
Committee Policy Action scription of their assessment of the remaining underuti-
In their discussion of monetary policy in the period lization of labor resources based on their evaluation of a
ahead, members judged that information received since range of labor market indicators. In their discussion,
the Federal Open Market Committee met in June indi- some members expressed reservations about describing
cated that economic activity rebounded in the second the extent of underutilization in labor resources more
quarter. Household spending appeared to be rising broadly. In particular, they worried that the degree of
moderately, and business fixed investment was advanc- labor market slack was difficult to characterize succinctly
ing, while the recovery in the housing sector remained and that the statement language might prove difficult to
slow. Fiscal policy was restraining economic growth, al- adjust as labor market conditions continued to improve.
though the extent of the restraint was diminishing. The Moreover, they were concerned that, despite the im-
Committee expected that, with appropriate policy ac- provement in labor market conditions, the new language
commodation, economic activity would expand at a might be misinterpreted as indicating increased concern
moderate pace with labor market indicators and inflation about underutilization of labor resources. At the con-
moving toward levels that the Committee judges con- clusion of the discussion, the Committee agreed to state
sistent with its dual mandate. that labor market conditions had improved, with the un-
employment rate declining further, while also stating
With the incoming information broadly supporting the
that a range of labor market indicators suggested that
Committee’s expectation of ongoing improvement in la-
there remained significant underutilization of labor re-
bor market conditions and inflation moving back to the
sources. Many members noted, however, that the char-
Committee’s 2 percent objective, members generally
acterization of labor market underutilization might have
agreed that a further measured reduction in the pace of
to change before long, particularly if progress in the la-
asset purchases was appropriate at this meeting. Ac-
bor market continued to be faster than anticipated. Re-
cordingly, the Committee agreed that, beginning in Au-
garding inflation, members agreed to update the lan-
gust, it would add to its holdings of agency MBS at a
guage in the statement to acknowledge that inflation had
pace of $10 billion per month rather than $15 billion per
recently moved somewhat closer to the Committee’s
month, and it would add to its holdings of Treasury se-
longer-run objective and to convey their judgment that
curities at a pace of $15 billion per month rather than
the likelihood of inflation running persistently below
$20 billion per month. The Committee again judged
2 percent had diminished somewhat.
that, if incoming data broadly supported its expectations
that labor market indicators and inflation would con- After the discussion, all members but one voted to main-
tinue to move toward mandate-consistent levels, the tain the Committee’s target range for the federal funds
Committee would likely reduce the pace of asset pur- rate and to reiterate its forward guidance on how it
chases in further measured steps at future meetings. would assess the appropriate timing of the first increase
However, the Committee reiterated that asset purchases in the target rate and the anticipated behavior of the fed-
were not on a preset course and that its decisions re- eral funds rate after it is raised. One member, however,
mained contingent on the outlook for the labor market objected to the guidance that it would likely be appro-
priate to maintain the current range for the federal funds

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
rate for a considerable time after the asset purchase pro- declining further. However, a range of labor
gram ends because it was time dependent and did not market indicators suggests that there remains
recognize the implications for monetary policy of the significant underutilization of labor resources.
considerable progress that had been made toward the Household spending appears to be rising
Committee’s goals. moderately and business fixed investment is
advancing, while the recovery in the housing
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
sector remains slow. Fiscal policy is
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
restraining economic growth, although the
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to
extent of restraint is diminishing. Inflation
execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with
has moved somewhat closer to the
the following domestic policy directive:
Committee’s longer-run objective. Longer-
“Consistent with its statutory mandate, the term inflation expectations have remained
Federal Open Market Committee seeks stable.
monetary and financial conditions that will
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
foster maximum employment and price
Committee seeks to foster maximum
stability. In particular, the Committee seeks
employment and price stability. The
conditions in reserve markets consistent with
Committee expects that, with appropriate
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to
policy accommodation, economic activity will
¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk
expand at a moderate pace, with labor market
to undertake open market operations as
indicators and inflation moving toward levels
necessary to maintain such conditions.
the Committee judges consistent with its dual
Beginning in August, the Desk is directed to
mandate. The Committee sees the risks to the
purchase longer-term Treasury securities at a
outlook for economic activity and the labor
pace of about $15 billion per month and to
market as nearly balanced and judges that the
purchase agency mortgage-backed securities
likelihood of inflation running persistently
at a pace of about $10 billion per month. The
below 2 percent has diminished somewhat.
Committee also directs the Desk to engage in
dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as The Committee currently judges that there is
necessary to facilitate settlement of the sufficient underlying strength in the broader
Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed economy to support ongoing improvement in
securities transactions. The Committee labor market conditions. In light of the
directs the Desk to maintain its policy of cumulative progress toward maximum
rolling over maturing Treasury securities into employment and the improvement in the
new issues and its policy of reinvesting outlook for labor market conditions since the
principal payments on all agency debt and inception of the current asset purchase
agency mortgage-backed securities in agency program, the Committee decided to make a
mortgage-backed securities. The System further measured reduction in the pace of its
Open Market Account manager and the asset purchases. Beginning in August, the
secretary will keep the Committee informed Committee will add to its holdings of agency
of ongoing developments regarding the mortgage-backed securities at a pace of
System’s balance sheet that could affect the $10 billion per month rather than $15 billion
attainment over time of the Committee’s per month, and will add to its holdings of
objectives of maximum employment and longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of
price stability.” $15 billion per month rather than $20 billion
per month. The Committee is maintaining its
The vote encompassed approval of the statement below
existing policy of reinvesting principal
to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
payments from its holdings of agency debt
“Information received since the Federal Open and agency mortgage-backed securities in
Market Committee met in June indicates that agency mortgage-backed securities and of
growth in economic activity rebounded in the rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
second quarter. Labor market conditions auction. The Committee’s sizable and still-
improved, with the unemployment rate increasing holdings of longer-term securities

--- Page 11 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f _J_u_ly_ 2_9_–_3_0_,_ 2_0_1_4________________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
should maintain downward pressure on continues to run below the Committee’s
longer-term interest rates, support mortgage 2 percent longer-run goal, and provided that
markets, and help to make broader financial longer-term inflation expectations remain well
conditions more accommodative, which in anchored.
turn should promote a stronger economic
When the Committee decides to begin to
recovery and help to ensure that inflation,
remove policy accommodation, it will take a
over time, is at the rate most consistent with
balanced approach consistent with its longer-
the Committee’s dual mandate.
run goals of maximum employment and
The Committee will closely monitor incoming inflation of 2 percent. The Committee
information on economic and financial currently anticipates that, even after
developments in coming months and will employment and inflation are near mandate-
continue its purchases of Treasury and agency consistent levels, economic conditions may,
mortgage-backed securities, and employ its for some time, warrant keeping the target
other policy tools as appropriate, until the federal funds rate below levels the Committee
outlook for the labor market has improved views as normal in the longer run.”
substantially in a context of price stability. If
Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C.
incoming information broadly supports the
Dudley, Lael Brainard, Stanley Fischer, Richard W.
Committee’s expectation of ongoing
Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, Loretta J. Mester,
improvement in labor market conditions and
Jerome H. Powell, and Daniel K. Tarullo.
inflation moving back toward its longer-run
objective, the Committee will likely reduce the Voting against this action: Charles I. Plosser.
pace of asset purchases in further measured
Mr. Plosser dissented because he objected to the state-
steps at future meetings. However, asset
ment’s guidance indicating that it likely will be appropri-
purchases are not on a preset course, and the
ate to maintain the current target range for the federal
Committee’s decisions about their pace will
funds rate for “a considerable time after the asset pur-
remain contingent on the Committee’s
chase program ends.” In his view, the reference to cal-
outlook for the labor market and inflation as
endar time should be replaced with language that indi-
well as its assessment of the likely efficacy and
cates how monetary policy will respond to incoming
costs of such purchases.
data. Moreover, he judged that the statement did not
To support continued progress toward acknowledge the substantial progress that had been
maximum employment and price stability, the made toward the Committee’s economic goals and thus
Committee today reaffirmed its view that a risks unnecessary and disruptive volatility in financial
highly accommodative stance of monetary markets, and perhaps in the economy, if the Committee
policy remains appropriate. In determining reduces accommodation sooner or more quickly than fi-
how long to maintain the current 0 to nancial markets anticipate.
¼ percent target range for the federal funds
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
rate, the Committee will assess progress—
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, September 16–
both realized and expected—toward its
17, 2014. The meeting adjourned at 11:55 a.m. on July
objectives of maximum employment and
30, 2014.
2 percent inflation. This assessment will take
into account a wide range of information, Notation Vote
including measures of labor market By notation vote completed on July 8, 2014, the
conditions, indicators of inflation pressures Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
and inflation expectations, and readings on Committee meeting held on June 17–18, 2014.
financial developments. The Committee
continues to anticipate, based on its
assessment of these factors, that it likely will
be appropriate to maintain the current target
range for the federal funds rate for a
_____________________________
considerable time after the asset purchase
William B. English
program ends, especially if projected inflation
Secretary