# 20140618_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:37:41*
*Pages: 25, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
June 17–18, 2014
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Robert deV. Frierson,1 Secretary of the Board, Office
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the of the Secretary, Board of Governors
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on
Tuesday, June 17, 2014, at 10:00 a.m. and continued on Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability
Wednesday, June 18, 2014, at 9:00 a.m. Policy and Research, Board of Governors
PRESENT: Stephen A. Meyer and William R. Nelson, Deputy
Janet L. Yellen, Chair Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Governors
Lael Brainard
Stanley Fischer Mark E. Van Der Weide, Deputy Director, Division of
Richard W. Fisher Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of
Narayana Kocherlakota Governors
Loretta J. Mester
Charles I. Plosser Jon W. Faust and Stacey Tevlin, Special Advisers to the
Jerome H. Powell Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
Daniel K. Tarullo Governors
Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Jeffrey M. Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office
Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and John C. Williams, of Board Members, Board of Governors
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren,
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Brian M. Doyle, Senior Adviser, Division of
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively International Finance, Board of Governors; Ellen
E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers,
William B. English, Secretary and Economist Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Daniel M. Covitz, Eric M. Engen, Michael T. Kiley,
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel and David E. Lebow, Associate Directors, Division
Steven B. Kamin, Economist of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors;
David W. Wilcox, Economist Fabio M. Natalucci1 and Gretchen C. Weinbach,1
Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs,
James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Evan F. Board of Governors; Beth Anne Wilson, Associate
Koenig, Thomas Laubach, Michael P. Leahy, Director, Division of International Finance, Board
Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl, Mark E. Schweitzer, and of Governors
William Wascher, Associate Economists
William F. Bassett and Jane E. Ihrig,1 Deputy Associate
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors; Joshua Gallin, Deputy Associate
Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Director, Division of Research and Statistics,
Market Account Board of Governors
________________ Min Wei,² Assistant Director, Division of Monetary
1 Attended the joint session of the Federal Open Market Affairs, Board of Governors
Committee and the Board of Governors.
² Attended Tuesday’s session only.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Jeremy B. Rudd, Adviser, Division of Research and In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that
Statistics, Board of Governors Loretta J. Mester had been elected a member of the
Federal Open Market Committee and that she had
Penelope A. Beattie,1 Assistant to the Secretary, Office executed her oath of office.
of the Secretary, Board of Governors
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
Laura Lipscomb,1 Section Chief, Division of Monetary
In a joint session of the Federal Open Market Commit-
Affairs, Board of Governors
tee (FOMC) and the Board of Governors of the Feder-
al Reserve System, the deputy manager of the System
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of
Open Market Account (SOMA) reported on develop-
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
ments in domestic and foreign financial markets. The
SOMA manager reported on the System open market
Katie Ross,1 Manager, Office of the Secretary, Board of
operations during the period since the Committee met
Governors
on April 29–30, 2014, outlined the testing of the Term
Deposit Facility, described the results from the fixed-
Wendy Dunn and Patrick McCabe,1 Senior
rate overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP)
Economists, Division of Research and Statistics,
operational exercise, and provided some possible op-
Board of Governors; Etienne Gagnon, Senior
tions for adjusting the list of counterparties eligible to
Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
participate in ON RRP operations. The manager also
Governors
noted the effects of recent foreign central bank policy
actions on the yields on the international portion of the
Jonathan Rose, Economist, Division of Monetary
SOMA portfolio and discussed ongoing staff work on
Affairs, Board of Governors
improving data collections regarding bank funding
markets. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified
Achilles Sangster II, Records Management Analyst,
the Open Market Desk’s domestic transactions over
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
the intermeeting period. There were no intervention
operations in foreign currencies for the System’s ac-
Mark L. Mullinix, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
count over the intermeeting period.
Bank of Richmond
Monetary Policy Normalization
David Altig and Daniel G. Sullivan, Executive Vice Meeting participants continued their discussion of is-
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and sues associated with the eventual normalization of the
Chicago, respectively stance and conduct of monetary policy. The Commit-
tee’s consideration of this topic was undertaken as part
Cletus C. Coughlin, Mary Daly, Troy Davig, Michael of prudent planning and did not imply that normaliza-
Dotsey, Joshua L. Frost, and John A. Weinberg, tion would necessarily begin sometime soon. A staff
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of presentation included some possible strategies for im-
St. Louis, San Francisco, Kansas City, Philadelphia, plementing and communicating monetary policy during
New York, and Richmond, respectively a period when the Federal Reserve will have a very
large balance sheet. In addition, the presentation out-
Deborah L. Leonard,1 Giovanni Olivei, and Douglas lined design features of a potential ON RRP facility
Tillett, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of and discussed options for the Committee’s policy of
New York, Boston, and Chicago, respectively rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction and
reinvesting principal payments on all agency debt and
Marc Giannoni, Research Officer, Federal Reserve agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) in agency
Bank of New York MBS.
Most participants agreed that adjustments in the rate of
interest on excess reserves (IOER) should play a cen-
________________
tral role during the normalization process. It was gen-
1 Attended the joint session of the Federal Open Market
erally agreed that an ON RRP facility with an interest
Committee and the Board of Governors.
rate set below the IOER rate could play a useful sup-

--- Page 3 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_7_–_1_8,_ 2_0_1_4_________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
porting role by helping to firm the floor under money on usage either in the aggregate or by counterparty and
market interest rates. One participant thought that the a relatively wide spread between the ON RRP rate and
ON RRP rate would be the more effective policy tool the IOER rate that would help limit the facility’s size.
during normalization in light of the wider variety of Several participants emphasized that, although the ON
counterparties eligible to participate in ON RRP opera- RRP rate would be useful in controlling short-term
tions. The appropriate size of the spread between the interest rates during normalization, they did not antici-
IOER and ON RRP rates was discussed, with many pate that such a facility would be a permanent part of
participants judging that a relatively wide spread— the Committee’s longer-run operating framework. Fi-
perhaps near or above the current level of 20 basis nally, a number of participants expressed concern
points—would support trading in the federal funds about conducting monetary policy operations with
market and provide adequate control over market in- nontraditional counterparties.
terest rates. Several participants noted that the spread
Participants also discussed the appropriate time for
might be adjusted during the normalization process. A
making a change to the Committee’s policy of rolling
couple of participants suggested that adequate control
over maturing Treasury securities at auction and rein-
of short-term rates might be accomplished with a very
vesting principal payments on all agency debt and
wide spread or even without an ON RRP facility. A
agency MBS in agency MBS. It was noted that, in the
few participants commented that the Committee
staff’s models, making a change to the Committee’s
should also be prepared to use its other policy tools,
reinvestment policy prior to the liftoff of the federal
including term deposits and term reverse repurchase
funds rate, at the time of liftoff, or sometime thereafter
agreements, if necessary. Most participants thought
would be expected to have only limited implications for
that the federal funds rate should continue to play a
macroeconomic outcomes, the Committee’s statutory
role in the Committee’s operating framework and
objectives, or remittances to the Treasury. Many par-
communications during normalization, with many of
ticipants agreed that ending reinvestments at or after
them indicating a preference for continuing to an-
the time of liftoff would be best, with most of these
nounce a target range. However, a few participants
participants preferring to end them after liftoff. These
thought that, given the degree of uncertainty about the
participants thought that an earlier change to the rein-
effects of the Committee’s tools on market rates, it
vestment policy would involve risks to the economic
might be preferable to focus on an administered rate in
outlook if it was seen as suggesting that the Committee
communicating the stance of policy during the normal-
was likely to tighten policy more rapidly than currently
ization period. In addition, participants examined pos-
anticipated or if it had unexpectedly large effects in
sibilities for changing the calculation of the effective
MBS markets; moreover, an early change could add
federal funds rate in order to obtain a more robust
complexity to the Committee’s communications at a
measure of overnight bank funding rates and to apply
time when it would be clearer to signal changes in poli-
lessons from international efforts to develop improved
cy through interest rates alone. However, some partic-
standards for benchmark interest rates.
ipants favored ending reinvestments prior to the first
While generally agreeing that an ON RRP facility could firming in policy interest rates, as stated in the Commit-
play an important role in the policy normalization pro- tee’s exit strategy principles announced in June 2011.
cess, participants discussed several potential unintended Those participants thought that such an approach
consequences of using such a facility and design fea- would avoid weakening the credibility of the Commit-
tures that could help to mitigate these consequences. tee’s communications regarding normalization, would
Most participants expressed concerns that in times of act to modestly reduce the size of the Federal Reserve’s
financial stress, the facility’s counterparties could shift balance sheet, or would help prepare the public for the
investments toward the facility and away from financial eventual rise in short-term interest rates. Regardless of
and nonfinancial corporations, possibly causing disrup- whether they preferred to introduce a change to the
tions in funding that could magnify the stress. In addi- Committee’s reinvestment policy before or after the
tion, a number of participants noted that a relatively initial tightening in short-term interest rates, a number
large ON RRP facility had the potential to expand the of participants thought that it might be best to follow a
Federal Reserve’s role in financial intermediation and graduated approach with respect to winding down re-
reshape the financial industry in ways that were difficult investments or to manage reinvestments in a manner
to anticipate. Participants discussed design features that would smooth the decline in the balance sheet.
that could address these concerns, including constraints

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Some stressed that the details should depend on finan- the mining sector expanded and more than offset a
cial and economic conditions. further decline in the output of utilities from the ele-
vated levels recorded during the unusually cold winter
Overall, participants generally expressed a preference
months. As a result, the rate of industrial capacity utili-
for a simple and clear approach to normalization that
zation rose in recent months. Automakers’ schedules
would facilitate communication to the public and en-
indicated that the pace of light motor vehicle assem-
hance the credibility of monetary policy. It was ob-
blies would step up in the coming months, and broader
served that it would be useful for the Committee to
indicators of manufacturing production, such as the
develop and communicate its plans to the public later
readings on new orders from national manufacturing
this year, well before the first steps in normalizing poli-
surveys, were consistent with moderate increases in
cy become appropriate. Most participants indicated
factory output in the near term.
that they expected to learn more about the effects of
the Committee’s various policy tools as normalization Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) de-
proceeds, and many favored maintaining flexibility clined a little in April following strong gains in Febru-
about the evolution of the normalization process as ary and March. The component of the nominal retail
well as the Committee’s longer-run operating frame- sales data used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis to
work. Participants requested additional analysis from construct its estimate of PCE edged down in May, but
the staff on issues related to normalization and agreed light motor vehicle sales moved up briskly. Recent in-
that it would be helpful to continue to review these formation about key factors that influence household
issues at upcoming meetings. The Board meeting con- spending mostly pointed to gains in PCE in the coming
cluded at the end of the discussion. months. Real disposable income continued to rise in
April, and households’ net worth likely increased as
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
equity prices and home values advanced further; how-
The information reviewed for the June 17–18 meeting
ever, consumer sentiment in the Thomson Reu-
indicated that real gross domestic product (GDP) had
ters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers
dropped significantly early in the year but that econom-
moved down somewhat in May and early June.
ic growth had bounced back in recent months. The
average pace of employment gains stepped up, and the The pace of activity in the housing sector remained
unemployment rate declined markedly in April and held subdued. Starts of new single-family homes declined
steady in May, although it was still elevated. Consumer slightly, on net, in April and May, although starts of
price inflation picked up in recent months, while multifamily units increased. Permits for single-family
measures of longer-run inflation expectations remained homes, which are usually a better indicator of the un-
stable. derlying pace of residential construction, increased only
a little on balance. Sales of new homes rose in April
Most measures of labor market conditions improved in
but remained near their average monthly level last year.
recent months. Total nonfarm payroll employment
Existing home sales only edged up in April and were
expanded in April and May at a faster rate than the av-
still below last year’s average level, while pending home
erage monthly pace during the previous two quarters.
sales were little changed.
The unemployment rate dropped to 6.3 percent in
April and remained at that level in May. However, the Real private expenditures for business equipment and
labor force participation rate also declined in April and intellectual property products were estimated to have
then held steady in May, while the employment-to- increased slowly in the first quarter as a whole. In
population ratio remained flat. Both the share of April, nominal orders and shipments of nondefense
workers employed part time for economic reasons and capital goods excluding aircraft decreased a little after
the rate of long-duration unemployment edged down in rising briskly in March. However, the level of new or-
recent months, although both measures were still high. ders for these capital goods remained above the level of
Initial claims for unemployment insurance decreased shipments in April, pointing to increases in shipments
slightly, on net, over the intermeeting period, and the in subsequent months. Other forward-looking indica-
rate of job openings stepped up in April; nevertheless, tors, such as surveys of business conditions, were also
the rate of hiring was unchanged and remained at a generally consistent with modest increases in business
modest level. equipment spending in the near term. Nominal busi-
ness spending for nonresidential structures was essen-
Industrial production increased, on balance, in April
tially unchanged in April. Recent data on the book
and May, as manufacturing output and production in

--- Page 5 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_7_–_1_8,_ 2_0_1_4_________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
value of inventories, along with readings on inventories economies. Real GDP also increased more slowly in
from national and regional manufacturing surveys, did Canada, in part because of severe winter weather, and
not point to significant inventory imbalances in most the pace of economic activity remained weak in the
industries except in the energy sector, where invento- euro area. Economic growth continued to be strong in
ries appeared unusually low after having been drawn the United Kingdom, and economic activity jumped in
down during the winter. Japan as household spending surged in advance of
April’s consumption tax hike. Indicators for the sec-
Federal spending data for April and May pointed to-
ond quarter generally suggested that foreign economic
ward only a small decline in real federal government
growth picked up from the first quarter. In some ad-
purchases in the second quarter, as the pace of decreas-
vanced foreign economies, inflation moved up recently
es in defense expenditures seemed to ease. Real state
from earlier low readings. Inflation continued to be
and local government purchases appeared to edge up
low, however, in the euro area, and the European Cen-
going into the second quarter. The payrolls of these
tral Bank (ECB) announced additional stimulus
governments expanded in April and May, and nominal
measures.
state and local construction expenditures increased a
little in April. Staff Review of the Financial Situation
On balance, financial conditions in the United States
The U.S. international trade deficit widened in March
remained supportive of growth in economic activity
and in April. Both imports and exports recovered from
and employment: The expected path of the federal
weak readings in February, with imports of consumer
funds rate was slightly lower in the long run, yields on
goods, automotive products, and capital goods rising
longer-term Treasury securities moved down modestly,
significantly and exports of capital goods and industrial
equity prices rose, corporate bond spreads narrowed,
supplies showing particular strength.
and the foreign exchange value of the dollar was little
U.S. consumer price inflation, as measured by the PCE changed.
price index, was about 1½ percent over the 12 months
Federal Reserve communications over the intermeeting
ending in April, below the Committee’s longer-run ob-
period had limited effects in financial markets. The
jective of 2 percent. Over the same 12-month period,
April FOMC statement and minutes appeared to be
consumer energy prices rose faster than total consumer
generally in line with expectations, while the Chair’s
prices, while consumer food prices climbed more slow-
congressional testimony before the Joint Economic
ly than overall prices; core PCE inflation—which ex-
Committee in early May and the subsequent question-
cludes food and energy prices—was also around
and-answer session were viewed by market participants
1½ percent. In May, the consumer price index (CPI)
as suggesting marginally more accommodative policy
increased at a faster pace than in the preceding few
than expected.
months; both food and energy prices rose more briskly,
and core CPI inflation also stepped up. Over the Results from the Desk’s June Survey of Primary Deal-
12 months ending in May, both total and core CPI in- ers indicated no change in the dealers’ consensus ex-
flation were about 2 percent. Near-term inflation ex- pectation about the most likely timing of the first in-
pectations from the Michigan survey declined slightly, crease in the federal funds rate target but showed a
on balance, in May and early June, while longer-term lower median longer-run level of the federal funds rate
inflation expectations from the survey were little relative to the April survey. Expectations for Federal
changed. Reserve asset purchases were largely unchanged. In
addition, although there was significant dispersion
Increases in measures of labor compensation remained
among dealer responses, the median dealer expected
modest. Compensation per hour in the nonfarm busi-
the FOMC to end its reinvestment of principal pay-
ness sector rose about 2¼ percent over the year ending
ments on Treasury securities, agency debt, and agency
in the first quarter; with small gains in labor productivi-
MBS sometime after the first increase in the federal
ty, unit labor costs advanced more slowly than com-
funds rate target; in the April survey, the median dealer
pensation per hour. Over the year ending in May, av-
had expected reinvestments to end before liftoff.
erage hourly earnings for all employees increased
around 2 percent. Yields on short- and medium-term nominal Treasury
securities increased slightly, on balance, over the inter-
Foreign real GDP growth slowed in the first quarter,
meeting period. In contrast, yields at the long end of
especially in China and some other emerging market
the curve edged lower, continuing a downward trend

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
evident over much of this year. Market participants es to the June Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on
continued to discuss the decreases in long forward rates Dealer Financing Terms indicated that investor de-
since the beginning of the year and pointed to a variety mand for financing to fund purchases of collateralized
of domestic and global factors possibly contributing to loan obligations rose somewhat since the beginning of
this trend, including lower expectations for potential the year.
growth and policy rates in the longer run, a decline in
Commercial real estate loans continued to increase
inflation risk premiums, purchases of longer-term secu-
amid some further easing of underwriting standards for
rities by price-insensitive investors, unwinding of short
commercial mortgages. While issuance of commercial
Treasury positions, and falling interest rate uncertainty.
mortgage-backed securities started the year a bit slow
Measures of longer-horizon inflation compensation
relative to 2013, it has picked up recently. Bank and
based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities re-
insurance company originations of commercial mort-
mained about steady.
gages expanded in the first quarter.
Conditions in unsecured short-term dollar funding
Mortgage credit conditions generally remained tight,
markets remained stable over the intermeeting period.
though further incremental signs of easing emerged
The Federal Reserve continued its ON RRP exercise.
amid continued gains in house prices. Mortgage inter-
Total take-up in the ON RRP exercise rose in April and
est rates declined somewhat more than long-term
May before falling back in June. Much of the transitory
Treasury yields over the intermeeting period, while
increase in take-up occurred in response to a large sea-
option-adjusted spreads on production-coupon MBS
sonal reduction in outstanding Treasury debt and an
narrowed. Both mortgage applications for home pur-
associated drop in the rates on Treasury repurchase
chases and refinancing applications remained at very
agreements during the first half of the second quarter
low levels.
that were reversed during the second half. In May, the
Federal Reserve began an eight-week series of test auc- Conditions in consumer credit markets were solid in
tions of seven-day term deposits. The number of par- recent months. Credit card loan balances increased.
ticipants and the total amount awarded increased over Growth in student loans moderated further but re-
the course of the first five operations. mained solid, and outstanding auto loans continued to
pick up. Issuance of auto and credit card asset-backed
Broad stock price indexes rose over the intermeeting
securities was again robust.
period, apparently boosted by a more optimistic as-
sessment of near-term economic prospects and likely The expected path of ECB policy rates implied by mar-
supported by continued low interest rates. Despite ket quotes for short-term interest rates fell over the
generally lackluster results for first-quarter earnings, intermeeting period, as investors anticipated the easing
corporate guidance for profits in coming quarters led to of policy announced by the ECB at its June meeting.
upward revisions in analysts’ forecasts of year-ahead By contrast, late in the period, market participants in-
earnings per share for S&P 500 firms. The VIX, an terpreted statements by Bank of England Governor
index of option-implied volatility for one-month re- Carney as signaling an earlier tightening of policy than
turns on the S&P 500 index, continued to decline and had been anticipated, and near-term policy rate expec-
ended the period near its historical lows. Measures of tations moved higher in response. Benchmark sover-
uncertainty in other financial markets also declined; eign bond yields declined modestly in most countries,
results from the Desk’s primary dealer survey suggested but U.K. gilt yields rose. The foreign exchange value
this development might have reflected low realized vol- of the dollar was little changed, on balance, over the
atilities, generally favorable economic news, less uncer- period, as the dollar appreciated against the euro but
tainty for the path of monetary policy, and complacen- declined against the Canadian dollar and many emerg-
cy on the part of market participants about potential ing market currencies. Consistent with some im-
risks. provement in investor sentiment toward risky assets,
foreign equity prices generally rose over the intermeet-
Credit flows to nonfinancial corporations remained
ing period, and foreign sovereign and corporate bond
strong. Amid low yields and reduced market volatility,
spreads narrowed. In addition, both bond and equity
gross issuance of investment- and speculative-grade
emerging market mutual funds saw net inflows over the
bonds rebounded in May. Commercial and industrial
period.
(C&I) loans on banks’ balance sheets increased and
issuance of leveraged loans remained strong. Respons-

--- Page 7 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_7_–_1_8,_ 2_0_1_4_________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
Staff Economic Outlook and import prices expected to be subdued, and slack in
In the economic forecast prepared by the staff for the labor and product markets anticipated to diminish
June FOMC meeting, real GDP growth in the first half slowly, inflation was projected to rise gradually toward
of this year as a whole was lower, on net, than in the the Committee’s objective. The staff continued to pro-
projection for the April meeting. In particular, the ject that inflation would reach the Committee’s objec-
available readings on exports, inventory investment, tive in the longer run.
outlays for health-care services, and construction
The staff’s economic projections for the June meeting
pointed to much weaker real GDP in the first quarter
were somewhat different from the forecasts presented
than the staff had expected. However, the staff still
at the March meeting, when the FOMC last prepared a
anticipated that real GDP growth would rebound brisk-
Summary of Economic Projections (SEP). The staff’s
ly in the second quarter, consistent with recent indica-
June projections for the unemployment rate, real GDP
tors for consumer spending and business investment,
growth, and inflation over the next few years were all a
along with the expectation that exports and inventory
little lower, on balance, than those in its March fore-
investment would return to more normal levels and
cast.
that economic activity that had been restrained by the
severe winter weather would bounce back. Primarily The staff viewed the extent of uncertainty around its
because of the combination of recent downward sur- June projections for real GDP growth and the unem-
prises in the unemployment rate and weaker-than- ployment rate as roughly in line with the average over
expected real GDP, the staff slightly lowered its as- the past 20 years. Nonetheless, the risks to the forecast
sumed pace of potential output growth this year and for real GDP growth were viewed as tilted a little to the
next and slightly decreased its assumption for the natu- downside, as neither monetary policy nor fiscal policy
ral rate of unemployment over this same period. As a was seen as being well positioned to help the economy
result, the staff’s medium-term forecast for real GDP withstand adverse shocks. At the same time, the staff
growth was revised down a little on balance. Neverthe- viewed the risks around its outlook for the unemploy-
less, the staff continued to project that real GDP would ment rate and for inflation as roughly balanced.
expand at a faster pace in the second half of this year
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
and over the next two years than it did last year and
Economic Outlook
that it would rise more quickly than potential output.
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, the meeting
The faster pace of real GDP growth was expected to
participants submitted their assessments of real output
be supported by diminishing drag on spending from
growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the tar-
changes in fiscal policy, increases in consumer and
get federal funds rate for each year from 2014 through
business confidence, further improvements in credit
2016 and over the longer run, under each participant’s
availability, and a pickup in the rate of foreign econom-
judgment of appropriate monetary policy.3 The longer-
ic growth. The expansion in economic activity was
run projections represent each participant’s assessment
anticipated to slowly reduce resource slack over the
of the rate to which each variable would be expected to
projection period, and the unemployment rate was ex-
converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy
pected to decline gradually to the staff’s estimate of its
and in the absence of further shocks to the economy.
longer-run natural rate in the medium term. In the
These economic projections and policy assessments are
longer-run outlook, the staff slightly lowered its as-
described in the SEP, which is attached as an adden-
sumptions for real GDP growth and the level of equi-
dum to these minutes.
librium real interest rates.
In their discussion of the economic situation and the
The staff’s forecast for inflation in the near term was
outlook, meeting participants viewed the information
revised up a little as recent data showed somewhat fast-
received over the intermeeting period as suggesting that
er increases in consumer prices than anticipated. How-
economic activity was rebounding in the second quar-
ever, the medium-term projection for inflation was re-
vised down slightly, reflecting a reassessment by the
3 Four members of the Board of Governors and the presi-
staff of the underlying trend in inflation. The staff con-
dents of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks submitted projections.
tinued to forecast that inflation would remain below
Governor Brainard took office on June 16, 2014, and partic-
the Committee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent over
ipated in the June 17–18, 2014, meeting; she was not able to
the next few years. With longer-run inflation expecta-
submit economic projections.
tions assumed to remain stable, changes in commodity

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
ter following a surprisingly large decline in real GDP in tories of desirable homes for sale, an overhang of
the first quarter of the year. Labor market conditions homes associated with foreclosures or seriously delin-
generally improved further. Although participants quent mortgages, or rising construction costs. Several
marked down their expectations for average growth of other participants suggested the possibility that more
real GDP over the first half of 2014, their projections persistent structural changes in housing demand associ-
beginning in the second half of 2014 changed little. ated with an aging population and evolving lifestyle
Over the next two and a half years, they continued to preferences were boosting demand for multifamily
expect economic activity to expand at a rate sufficient units at the expense of single-family homes.
to lead to a further decline in the unemployment rate to
Information from participants’ business contacts sug-
levels close to their current assessments of its longer-
gested capital spending was likely to increase going
run normal value. Among the factors anticipated to
forward. Contacts in a number of Districts reported
support the sustained economic expansion were ac-
that they were generally optimistic about the business
commodative monetary policy, diminished drag from
outlook, although in a couple of regions respondents
fiscal restraint, further gains in household net worth,
remained cautious about prospects for stronger eco-
improving credit conditions for households and busi-
nomic growth or worried about a renewal of federal
nesses, and rising employment and wages. While infla-
fiscal restraint after the current congressional budget
tion was still seen as running below the Committee’s
agreement expires. Among the industries cited as rela-
longer-run objective, longer-run inflation expectations
tively strong in recent months were transportation, en-
remained stable and the Committee anticipated that
ergy, telecommunications, and manufacturing, particu-
inflation would move back toward its 2 percent objec-
larly motor vehicles. Some participants commented
tive over the forecast period. Most participants viewed
that their contacts in small and medium-sized business-
the risks to the outlook for the economy, the labor
es reported an improved outlook for sales, and several
market, and inflation as broadly balanced.
heard businesses more generally discuss plans to in-
Household spending appeared to have risen moderate- crease capital expenditures. One participant noted that
ly, on balance, in recent months, with sales of motor District businesses were investing largely to meet re-
vehicles, in particular, rising strongly. However, several placement needs, while another suggested that the
participants read the recent soft information on retail backlog of such needs would likely provide some impe-
sales and health-care spending as raising some concern tus to business investment.
about the underlying strength in consumer spending.
Favorable financial conditions appeared be supporting
A couple of participants noted that, to date, consumer
economic activity. While information about mortgage
spending had been supported importantly by gains in
lending was mixed, a number of participants reported
household net worth while income gains had been held
increases in C&I lending by banks in their Districts, a
back by only modest increases in wages. In their view,
pickup in loan demand at banks, or better credit quality
an important element in the economic outlook was a
for borrowers. In addition, small businesses reported
pickup in income, from higher wages as well as ongo-
improvements in credit availability. However, partici-
ing employment gains, that would be expected to sup-
pants also discussed whether some recent trends in
port a sustained rise in consumer spending.
financial markets might suggest that investors were not
The recovery in the housing sector was reported to appropriately taking account of risks in their invest-
have remained slow in all but a few areas of the coun- ment decisions. In particular, low implied volatility in
try. Many participants expressed concern about the equity, currency, and fixed-income markets as well as
still-soft indicators of residential construction, and they signs of increased risk-taking were viewed by some par-
discussed a range of factors that might be contributing ticipants as an indication that market participants were
to either a temporary delay in the housing recovery or a not factoring in sufficient uncertainty about the path of
persistently lower level of homebuilding than previous- the economy and monetary policy. They agreed that
ly anticipated. Despite attractive mortgage rates, hous- the Committee should continue to carefully monitor
ing demand was seen as being damped by such factors financial conditions and to emphasize in its communi-
as restrictive credit conditions, particularly for house- cations the dependence of its policy decisions on the
holds with low credit scores; high down payments; or evolution of the economic outlook; it was also pointed
low demand among younger homebuyers, due in part out that, where appropriate, supervisory measures
to the burden of student loan debt. Others noted sup- should be applied to address excessive risk-taking and
ply constraints, pointing to shortages of lots, low inven- associated financial imbalances. At the same time, it

--- Page 9 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_7_–_1_8,_ 2_0_1_4_________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
was noted that monetary policy needed to continue to upward pressure on wages in some areas or occupa-
promote the favorable financial conditions required to tions and that an increasing proportion of small busi-
support the economic expansion. nesses were planning to raise wages. Participants dis-
cussed the prospects for wage increases to pick up as
In discussing economic developments abroad, a couple
slack in the labor market diminishes. Several noted that
of participants noted that recent monetary policy ac-
a return to growth in real wages in line with productivi-
tions by the ECB and the Bank of Japan had improved
ty growth would provide welcome support for house-
the outlook for economic activity in those areas and
hold spending.
could help return inflation to target. Several others,
however, remained concerned that persistent low infla- Readings on a range of price measures—including the
tion in Europe and Japan could eventually erode infla- PCE price index, the CPI, and a number of the analyti-
tion expectations more broadly. And a couple of par- cal measures developed at the Reserve Banks—
ticipants expressed uncertainty about the outlook for appeared to provide evidence that inflation had moved
economic growth in Japan and China. In addition, sev- up recently from low levels earlier in the year, con-
eral saw developments in Iraq and Ukraine as posing sistent with the Committee’s forecast of a gradual in-
possible downside risks to global economic activity or crease in inflation over the medium term. Reports
potential upside risks to world oil prices. from business contacts were mixed, spanning an ab-
sence of price pressures in some Districts and rising
Labor market conditions generally continued to im-
input costs in others. Some participants expressed
prove over the intermeeting period. That improvement
concern about the persistence of below-trend inflation,
was evidenced by the decline in the unemployment rate
and a couple of them suggested that the Committee
as well as by changes in other indicators, such as solid
may need to allow the unemployment rate to move
gains in nonfarm payrolls, a low level of new claims for
below its longer-run normal level for a time in order
unemployment insurance, uptrends in quits and job
keep inflation expectations anchored and return infla-
openings, and more positive views of job availability by
tion to its 2 percent target, though one participant em-
households. In assessing labor market conditions, par-
phasized the risks of doing so. In contrast, some oth-
ticipants again offered a range of views on how far
ers expected a faster pickup in inflation or saw upside
conditions in the labor market were from those associ-
risks to inflation and inflation expectations because
ated with maximum employment. Many judged that
they anticipated a more rapid decline in economic slack.
slack remained elevated, and a number of them thought
it was greater than measured by the official unemploy- During their consideration of issues related to mone-
ment rate, citing, in particular, the still-high level of tary policy over the medium term, participants generally
workers employed part time for economic reasons or supported the Committee’s current guidance about the
the depressed labor force participation rate. Even so, likely path of its asset purchases and about its approach
several participants pointed out that both long- and to determining the timing of the first increase in the
short-term unemployment and measures that include federal funds rate and the path of the policy rate there-
marginally attached workers had declined. Most partic- after. Participants offered views on a range of issues
ipants projected the improvement in labor market con- related to policy communications. Some participants
ditions to continue, with the unemployment rate mov- suggested that the Committee’s communications about
ing down gradually over the medium term. However, a its forward guidance should emphasize more strongly
couple of participants anticipated that the decline in that its policy decisions would depend on its ongoing
unemployment would be damped as part-time workers assessment across a range of indicators of economic
shift to full-time jobs and as nonparticipants rejoin the activity, labor market conditions, inflation and inflation
labor force, while a few others commented that they expectations, and financial market developments. In
expected no lasting reversal of the decline in labor that regard, circumstances that might entail either a
force participation. slower or a more rapid removal of policy accommoda-
tion were cited. For example, a number of participants
Aggregate wage measures continued to rise at only a
noted their concern that a more gradual approach
modest rate, and reports on wages from business con-
might be appropriate if forecasts of above-trend eco-
tacts and surveys in a number of Districts were mixed.
nomic growth later this year were not realized. And a
Several of those reports pointed to an absence of wage
couple suggested that the Committee might need to
pressures, while some others indicated that tight labor
strengthen its commitment to maintain sufficient policy
markets or shortages of skilled workers were leading to
accommodation to return inflation to its target over the

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
medium term in order to prevent an undesirable de- commodation, economic activity would expand at a
cline in inflation expectations. Alternatively, some oth- moderate pace and labor market conditions would con-
er participants expressed concern that economic tinue to improve gradually, moving toward those the
growth over the medium run might be faster than cur- Committee judges consistent with its dual mandate.
rently expected or that the rate of growth of potential Members saw the risks to the outlook for the economy
output might be lower than currently expected, calling and the labor market as nearly balanced. Inflation was
for a more rapid move to begin raising the federal running below the Committee’s longer-run objective,
funds rate in order to avoid significantly overshooting but the Committee anticipated that with stable inflation
the Committee’s unemployment and inflation objec- expectations and strengthening economic activity, infla-
tives. tion would, over time, return to the Committee’s 2 per-
cent objective. However, members continued to rec-
While the current asset purchase program is not on a
ognize that inflation persistently below its longer-run
preset course, participants generally agreed that if the
objective could pose risks to economic performance
economy evolved as they anticipated, the program
and agreed to monitor inflation developments closely
would likely be completed later this year. Some com-
for evidence that inflation was moving back toward its
mittee members had been asked by members of the
objective over the medium term.
public whether, if tapering in the pace of purchases
continues as expected, the final reduction would come Members judged that the economy had sufficient un-
in a single $15 billion per month reduction or in a derlying strength to support ongoing improvement in
$10 billion reduction followed by a $5 billion reduction. labor market conditions and a return of inflation to-
Most participants viewed this as a technical issue with ward the Committee’s longer-run 2 percent objective,
no substantive macroeconomic consequences and no and thus agreed that a further measured reduction in
consequences for the eventual decision about the tim- the pace of the Committee’s asset purchases was ap-
ing of the first increase in the federal funds rate—a propriate at this meeting. Accordingly, the Committee
decision that will depend on the Committee’s evolving agreed that beginning in July, it would add to its hold-
assessments of actual and expected progress toward its ings of agency MBS at a pace of $15 billion per month
objectives. In light of these considerations, participants rather than $20 billion per month, and it would add to
generally agreed that if incoming information continued its holdings of Treasury securities at a pace of
to support its expectation of improvement in labor $20 billion per month rather than $25 billion per
market conditions and a return of inflation toward its month. Members again judged that, if incoming in-
longer-run objective, it would be appropriate to com- formation broadly supported the Committee’s expecta-
plete asset purchases with a $15 billion reduction in the tions for ongoing progress toward meeting its dual ob-
pace of purchases in order to avoid having the small, jectives of maximum employment and inflation of
remaining level of purchases receive undue focus 2 percent, the Committee would likely reduce the pace
among investors. If the economy progresses about as of asset purchases in further measured steps at future
the Committee expects, warranting reductions in the meetings. The Committee reiterated, however, that
pace of purchases at each upcoming meeting, this final purchases were not on a preset course, and that its de-
reduction would occur following the October meeting. cisions about the pace of purchases would remain con-
tingent on its outlook for the labor market and inflation
Committee Policy Action
as well as its assessment of the likely efficacy and costs
In their discussion of monetary policy in the period
of such purchases.
ahead, members judged that information received since
the Federal Open Market Committee met in April indi- The Committee agreed to maintain its target range for
cated that economic activity was rebounding from the the federal funds rate and to reiterate its forward guid-
decline in the first quarter of the year. Labor market ance about how it would assess the appropriate timing
indicators generally showed further improvement. The of the first increase in the target rate and the anticipat-
unemployment rate, though lower, remained elevated. ed behavior of the federal funds rate after it is raised.
Household spending appeared to be rising moderately The guidance continued to emphasize that the Com-
and business fixed investment resumed its advance, mittee’s decisions about how long to maintain the cur-
while the recovery in the housing sector remained slow. rent target range for the federal funds rate would de-
Fiscal policy was restraining economic growth, alt- pend on its assessment of actual and expected progress
hough the extent of restraint was diminishing. The toward its objectives of maximum employment and
Committee expected that, with appropriate policy ac- 2 percent inflation. The Committee again stated that it

--- Page 11 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_7_–_1_8,_ 2_0_1_4________________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
currently anticipated that it likely would be appropriate The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
to maintain the current target range for the federal low to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
funds rate for a considerable time after the asset pur-
“Information received since the Federal
chase program ends, especially if projected inflation
Open Market Committee met in April indi-
continued to run below the Committee’s 2 percent
cates that growth in economic activity has
longer-run goal, and provided that longer-term infla-
rebounded in recent months. Labor market
tion expectations remained well anchored. The for-
indicators generally showed further im-
ward guidance also reiterated the Committee’s expecta-
provement. The unemployment rate,
tion that even after employment and inflation are near
though lower, remains elevated. Household
mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may,
spending appears to be rising moderately
for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds
and business fixed investment resumed its
rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the
advance, while the recovery in the housing
longer run.
sector remained slow. Fiscal policy is re-
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee straining economic growth, although the ex-
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank tent of restraint is diminishing. Inflation
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe- has been running below the Committee’s
cute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the longer-run objective, but longer-term infla-
following domestic policy directive: tion expectations have remained stable.
“Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
Federal Open Market Committee seeks Committee seeks to foster maximum em-
monetary and financial conditions that will ployment and price stability. The Commit-
foster maximum employment and price sta- tee expects that, with appropriate policy ac-
bility. In particular, the Committee seeks commodation, economic activity will ex-
conditions in reserve markets consistent pand at a moderate pace and labor market
with federal funds trading in a range from 0 conditions will continue to improve gradu-
to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the ally, moving toward those the Committee
Desk to undertake open market operations judges consistent with its dual mandate.
as necessary to maintain such conditions. The Committee sees the risks to the out-
Beginning in July, the Desk is directed to look for the economy and the labor market
purchase longer-term Treasury securities at as nearly balanced. The Committee recog-
a pace of about $20 billion per month and nizes that inflation persistently below its
to purchase agency mortgage-backed securi- 2 percent objective could pose risks to eco-
ties at a pace of about $15 billion per nomic performance, and it is monitoring in-
month. The Committee also directs the flation developments carefully for evidence
Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon that inflation will move back toward its ob-
swap transactions as necessary to facilitate jective over the medium term.
settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency
The Committee currently judges that there
mortgage-backed securities transactions.
is sufficient underlying strength in the
The Committee directs the Desk to main-
broader economy to support ongoing im-
tain its policy of rolling over maturing
provement in labor market conditions. In
Treasury securities into new issues and its
light of the cumulative progress toward
policy of reinvesting principal payments on
maximum employment and the improve-
all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed
ment in the outlook for labor market condi-
securities in agency mortgage-backed securi-
tions since the inception of the current asset
ties. The System Open Market Account
purchase program, the Committee decided
manager and the secretary will keep the
to make a further measured reduction in the
Committee informed of ongoing develop-
pace of its asset purchases. Beginning in Ju-
ments regarding the System’s balance sheet
ly, the Committee will add to its holdings of
that could affect the attainment over time
agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace
of the Committee’s objectives of maximum
of $15 billion per month rather than
employment and price stability.”

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
$20 billion per month, and will add to its its objectives of maximum employment and
holdings of longer-term Treasury securities 2 percent inflation. This assessment will
at a pace of $20 billion per month rather take into account a wide range of infor-
than $25 billion per month. The Commit- mation, including measures of labor market
tee is maintaining its existing policy of rein- conditions, indicators of inflation pressures
vesting principal payments from its holdings and inflation expectations, and readings on
of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed financial developments. The Committee
securities in agency mortgage-backed securi- continues to anticipate, based on its assess-
ties and of rolling over maturing Treasury ment of these factors, that it likely will be
securities at auction. The Committee’s siz- appropriate to maintain the current target
able and still-increasing holdings of longer- range for the federal funds rate for a con-
term securities should maintain downward siderable time after the asset purchase pro-
pressure on longer-term interest rates, sup- gram ends, especially if projected inflation
port mortgage markets, and help to make continues to run below the Committee’s
broader financial conditions more accom- 2 percent longer-run goal, and provided that
modative, which in turn should promote a longer-term inflation expectations remain
stronger economic recovery and help to en- well anchored.
sure that inflation, over time, is at the rate
When the Committee decides to begin to
most consistent with the Committee’s dual
remove policy accommodation, it will take a
mandate.
balanced approach consistent with its long-
The Committee will closely monitor incom- er-run goals of maximum employment and
ing information on economic and financial inflation of 2 percent. The Committee cur-
developments in coming months and will rently anticipates that, even after employ-
continue its purchases of Treasury and ment and inflation are near mandate-
agency mortgage-backed securities, and em- consistent levels, economic conditions may,
ploy its other policy tools as appropriate, for some time, warrant keeping the target
until the outlook for the labor market has federal funds rate below levels the Commit-
improved substantially in a context of price tee views as normal in the longer run.”
stability. If incoming information broadly
Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C.
supports the Committee’s expectation of
Dudley, Lael Brainard, Stanley Fischer, Richard W.
ongoing improvement in labor market con-
Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, Loretta J. Mester,
ditions and inflation moving back toward its
Charles I. Plosser, Jerome H. Powell, and Daniel K.
longer-run objective, the Committee will
Tarullo.
likely reduce the pace of asset purchases in
further measured steps at future meetings. Voting against this action: None.
However, asset purchases are not on a pre-
set course, and the Committee’s decisions It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
about their pace will remain contingent on would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, July 29–30.
the Committee’s outlook for the labor mar- The meeting adjourned at 11:10 a.m. on June 18, 2014.
ket and inflation as well as its assessment of
Notation Vote
the likely efficacy and costs of such pur-
By notation vote completed on May 19, 2014, the
chases.
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
To support continued progress toward Committee meeting held on April 29–30, 2014.
maximum employment and price stability,
the Committee today reaffirmed its view
that a highly accommodative stance of
monetary policy remains appropriate. In de-
termining how long to maintain the current
_________________________________________
0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal
William B. English
funds rate, the Committee will assess pro-
Secretary
gress—both realized and expected—toward

--- Page 13 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the June 17–18, 2014, Federal pick up notably in the second half of 2014 and remain
Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, meeting in 2015 and 2016 above their estimates of the longer-
participants submitted their assessments of real output run normal rate of economic growth. Consistent with
growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the tar- that outlook, the unemployment rate was projected to
get federal funds rate for each year from 2014 through continue to decline toward its longer-run normal level
2016 and over the longer run.1 Each participant’s as- over the projection period (table 1 and figure 1). The
sessment was based on information available at the majority of participants projected that inflation, as
time of the meeting plus his or her judgment of appro- measured by the annual change in the price index for
priate monetary policy and assumptions about the fac- personal consumption expenditures (PCE), would rise
tors likely to affect economic outcomes. The longer- to a level at or slightly below the Committee’s 2 percent
run projections represent each participant’s judgment objective in 2016.
of the value to which each variable would be expected
The majority of participants expected that highly ac-
to converge, over time, under appropriate monetary
commodative monetary policy would remain appropri-
policy and in the absence of further shocks to the
ate over the next few years to foster progress toward
economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as
the Federal Reserve’s longer-run objectives. As shown
the future path of policy that each participant deems
in figure 2, all but one of the participants anticipated
most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity
that it would be appropriate to wait at least until 2015
and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual in-
before beginning to increase the federal funds rate, and
terpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objectives of max-
most projected that it would then be appropriate to
imum employment and stable prices
raise the target federal funds rate fairly gradually. Giv-
Overall, FOMC participants expected that, under ap- en their economic outlooks, most participants judged
propriate monetary policy, economic growth would that it would be appropriate to continue gradually slow-
_______________________ ing the pace of the Committee’s purchases of longer-
1 Four members of the Board of Governors and the presi- term securities and complete the asset purchase pro-
dents of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks submitted projections. gram later this year.
Governor Brainard took office on June 16, 2014, and partic-
ipated in the June 17–18, 2014, FOMC meeting; she was not Most participants saw the uncertainty associated with
able to submit economic projections. their outlooks for economic growth, the unemploy-
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, June 2014
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2014 2015 2016 Longer run 2014 2015 2016 Longer run
Change in real GDP . . . . . 2.1 to 2.3 3.0 to 3.2 2.5 to 3.0 2.1 to 2.3 1.9 to 2.4 2.2 to 3.6 2.2 to 3.2 1.8 to 2.5
March projection . . . . . 2.8 to 3.0 3.0 to 3.2 2.5 to 3.0 2.2 to 2.3 2.1 to 3.0 2.2 to 3.5 2.2 to 3.4 1.8 to 2.4
Unemployment rate . . . . . 6.0 to 6.1 5.4 to 5.7 5.1 to 5.5 5.2 to 5.5 5.8 to 6.2 5.2 to 5.9 5.0 to 5.6 5.0 to 6.0
March projection . . . . . 6.1 to 6.3 5.6 to 5.9 5.2 to 5.6 5.2 to 5.6 6.0 to 6.5 5.4 to 5.9 5.1 to 5.8 5.2 to 6.0
PCE inflation . . . . . . . . . . . 1.5 to 1.7 1.5 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 2.0 1.4 to 2.0 1.4 to 2.4 1.5 to 2.0 2.0
March projection . . . . . 1.5 to 1.6 1.5 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 2.0 1.3 to 1.8 1.5 to 2.4 1.6 to 2.0 2.0
Core PCE inflation3 . . . . . 1.5 to 1.6 1.6 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 1.4 to 1.8 1.5 to 2.4 1.6 to 2.0
March projection . . . . . 1.4 to 1.6 1.7 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 1.3 to 1.8 1.5 to 2.4 1.6 to 2.0
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for per-
sonal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civil-
ian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary
policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate mone-
tary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The March projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee on March 18–19, 2014.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

--- Page 14 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure1. Centraltendenciesandrangesofeconomicprojections,2014–16andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
Central tendency of projections 4
Range of projections
3
2
Actual 1
+
0
-
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesofthevariablesare
annual.

--- Page 15 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_1_4______________P_a_g_e_ _3
Figure2. OverviewofFOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy
Number of participants
Appropriate timing of policy firming
13
12
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
3
2
1
1
2014 2015 2016
Appropriate pace of policy firming Percent
Target federal funds rate at year end
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2014 2015 2016 Longer run
Note: Intheupperpanel,theheightofeachbardenotesthenumberofFOMCparticipantswhojudgethat,under
appropriatemonetarypolicy,thefirstincreaseinthetargetfederalfundsratefromitscurrentrangeof0to1/4percent
willoccurinthespecifiedcalendaryear. InMarch2014,thenumbersofFOMCparticipantswhojudgedthatthefirst
increaseinthetargetfederalfundsratewouldoccurin2014,2015,and2016were,respectively,1,13,and2. Inthelower
panel,eachshadedcircleindicatesthevalue(roundedtothenearest1/4percentagepoint)ofanindividualparticipant’s
judgmentof theappropriatelevelof thetarget federalfundsrate atthe endof the specifiedcalendaryearorover the
longerrun.

--- Page 16 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
ment rate, and inflation as similar to that of the past Figures 3.A and 3.B show that participants continued
20 years. In addition, most participants considered the to hold a range of views regarding the likely outcomes
risks to the outlook for real GDP growth and the un- for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate over
employment rate to be broadly balanced, and a majority the next two years. The diversity of views reflected
saw the risks to inflation as broadly balanced. Howev- their individual assessments of the rate at which the
er, some saw the risks to their forecasts for economic headwinds that have been holding back the pace of the
growth or inflation as tilted to the downside, and a economic recovery would abate and of the anticipated
couple saw the risks to their forecasts for inflation as path for foreign economic activity, the trajectory for
tilted to the upside. growth in household net worth, and the appropriate
path of monetary policy. Relative to March, the disper-
The Outlook for Economic Activity
sion of participants’ projections for real GDP growth
Participants generally projected that, conditional on
narrowed a bit in 2014 but was largely unchanged over
their individual assumptions about appropriate mone-
the next two years, and the dispersion of projections
tary policy, real GDP growth would pick up notably in
for the unemployment rate over the entire projection
the second half of this year and remain in 2015 and
period was little changed.
2016 above their estimates of the longer-run normal
rate of output growth. All participants revised down The Outlook for Inflation
their projections of real GDP growth for the first half Compared with March, the central tendencies of partic-
of 2014 compared with their projections in March, but ipants’ projections for inflation were largely unchanged
most left their forecasts for the remainder of the pro- for all years in the projection period, although many
jection period largely unchanged. Participants generally participants marked up a bit their projections for infla-
judged that real GDP growth in the first half of this tion in 2014. The vast majority of participants antici-
year was held down by transitory factors depressing pated that, on average, both headline and core inflation
output early in the year, and they pointed to a number would rise gradually over the next few years, and the
of factors that they expected would continue to con- majority of participants expected headline inflation to
tribute to a pickup in economic growth later this year be at or slightly below the Committee’s 2 percent ob-
and next, including rising household net worth, dimin- jective in 2016. Specifically, the central tendencies for
ished restraint from fiscal policy, improving labor mar- PCE inflation were 1.5 to 1.7 percent in 2014, 1.5 to
ket conditions, and highly accommodative monetary 2.0 percent in 2015, and 1.6 to 2.0 percent in 2016.
policy. The central tendencies of participants’ projec- The central tendencies of the forecasts for core infla-
tions for real GDP growth were 2.1 to 2.3 percent in tion were broadly similar to those for the headline
2014, 3.0 to 3.2 percent in 2015, and 2.5 to 3.0 percent measure. It was noted that some combination of stable
in 2016. The central tendency for the longer-run nor- inflation expectations and steadily diminishing resource
mal rate of growth of real GDP was 2.1 to 2.3 percent, slack was likely to contribute to a gradual rise of infla-
only slightly lower than in March. tion back toward the Committee’s longer-run objective
of 2 percent.
Participants continued to anticipate a gradual decline in
the unemployment rate over the projection period. Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the diver-
The central tendencies of participants’ forecasts for the sity of participants’ views about the outlook for infla-
unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of each year tion. The ranges of participants’ projections for overall
were 6.0 to 6.1 percent in 2014, 5.4 to 5.7 percent in inflation were little changed relative to March. The
2015, and 5.1 to 5.5 percent in 2016. Nearly all partici- forecasts for PCE inflation in 2016 were at or below
pants revised down their projected paths for the unem- the Committee’s longer-run objective. Similar to the
ployment rate this year and next relative to their March projections for headline inflation, the projections for
projections, with the majority pointing to the decline in core inflation in 2016 were concentrated at or below
the unemployment rate in recent months as a reason 2 percent.
for the downward revision. The central tendency of
Appropriate Monetary Policy
participants’ estimates of the longer-run normal rate of
As indicated in figure 2, nearly all participants judged
unemployment that would prevail under appropriate
that low levels of the federal funds rate would remain
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks
appropriate for the next few years. In particular,
to the economy also edged down, to 5.2 to 5.5 percent.
12 participants thought that the first increase in the
Most participants projected that the unemployment
target federal funds rate would not be warranted until
rate would be close to their individual estimates of its
sometime in 2015, and 3 judged that policy firming
longer-run level at the end of 2016.

--- Page 17 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_1_4______________P_a_g_e_ _5
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2014–16andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2014 20
June projections 18
March projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2016 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 18 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2014–16andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2014 20
June projections 18
March projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5. 0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5. 0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2016 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5. 0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5. 0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 19 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_1_4______________P_a_g_e_ _7
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2014–16andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2014 20
June projections 18
March projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2016 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2014–16
Number of participants
2014
20
June projections
March projections 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2015
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_1_4______________P_a_g_e_ _9
would likely not be appropriate until 2016. Only 1 par- regarding the appropriate longer-run level of the real
ticipant thought that an increase in the federal funds federal funds rate in the absence of further shocks to
rate would be warranted in 2014. the economy. Compared with March, some partici-
pants revised down their estimates of the longer-run
All participants projected that the unemployment rate
federal funds rate, with a lower assessment of the long-
would be below 6 percent at the end of the year in
er-run level of potential output growth cited as a con-
which they judged the initial increase in the federal
tributing factor for the majority of those revisions. As
funds rate to be warranted, and all but one anticipated
a result, the median estimate of the longer-run federal
that inflation would be at or below the Committee’s
funds rate shifted down to 3.75 percent from 4 percent
longer-run objective at that time. Most participants
in March, while its mean value declined 11 basis points
projected that the unemployment rate would remain
to 3.78 percent.
above their estimates of its longer-run normal level at
the end of the year in which they saw the federal funds Participants also described their views regarding the
rate increasing from its effective lower bound. appropriate path of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.
Conditional on their respective economic outlooks,
Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’
most participants judged that it would be appropriate
judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target
to continue to reduce the pace of the Committee’s pur-
federal funds rate at the end of each calendar year from
chases of longer-term securities in measured steps and
2014 to 2016 and over the longer run. As noted earlier,
to conclude the purchases later this year. A couple of
nearly all participants judged that economic conditions
participants judged that a more rapid reduction in the
would warrant maintaining the current exceptionally
pace of purchases and an earlier end to the asset pur-
low level of the federal funds rate at least until 2015.
chase program would be appropriate.
Relative to their projections in March, the median val-
ues of the federal funds rate at the end of 2015 and Participants’ views of the appropriate path for mone-
2016 increased 13 basis points and 25 basis points to tary policy were informed by their judgments about the
1.13 percent and 2.50 percent, respectively, while the state of the economy, including the values of the un-
mean values rose 7 basis points and 11 basis points to employment rate and other labor market indicators that
1.18 percent and 2.53 percent, respectively. The dis- would be consistent with maximum employment, the
persion of projections for the value of the federal funds extent to which the economy was currently falling short
rate was little changed in 2015 but widened slightly in of maximum employment, the prospects for inflation
2016. Most participants expected that the federal funds to return to the Committee’s longer-term objective of
rate at the end of 2016 would still be significantly below 2 percent, and the balance of risks around the outlook.
their individual assessments of its longer-run level. For Many participants also mentioned the prescriptions of
about half of these participants, the low level of the various monetary policy rules as factors they consid-
federal funds rate at that time was associated with infla- ered in judging the appropriate path for the federal
tion well below the Committee’s 2 percent objective. funds rate.
In contrast, the rest of these participants saw the feder-
Uncertainty and Risks
al funds rate at the end of 2016 as still significantly low
The vast majority of participants continued to judge the
despite their projections that the unemployment rate
levels of uncertainty about their projections for real
would be close to or below their individual longer-run
GDP growth and the unemployment rate as broadly
projections and inflation would be at or close to 2 per-
similar to the norms during the previous 20 years (fig-
cent at that time. These participants cited some com-
ure 4). Most participants continued to judge the risks
bination of a lower equilibrium real interest rate, con-
to real GDP growth and the unemployment rate to be
tinuing headwinds from the financial crisis and subse-
quent recession, and a desire to raise the federal funds
rate at a gradual pace after liftoff as explanations for
 Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for
the still-low level of the projected federal funds rate at
the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total
the end of 2016. A couple of participants also men-
consumer price inflation over the period from 1994 through
tioned broader measures of labor market slack that may
2013. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncer-
take longer to return to their normal levels than the
tainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertain-
unemployment rate. Estimates of the longer-run level
ty in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used
of the federal funds rate ranged from 3¼ to about to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’
4¼ percent, reflecting the Committee’s inflation objec- projections.
tive of 2 percent and participants’ individual judgments

--- Page 22 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthetargetfederalfundsrate,2014–16andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2014
June projections 20
March projections 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
2015
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Note: The target federal funds rate is measured as the level of the target rate at the end of the calendar year or
inthelongerrun.

--- Page 23 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_1_4_____________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Figure4. Uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth 20 Risks to GDP growth 20
June projections 18 June projections 18
March projections 16 March projections 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate 20 Risks to the unemployment rate 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation 20 Risks to PCE inflation 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation 20 Risks to core PCE inflation 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”Defini-
tionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 24 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
broadly balanced, although a few participants viewed
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
the risks as weighted to the downside, reflecting, for Percentage points
example, their concerns about the limited ability of Variable 2014 2015 2016
monetary policy at the zero lower bound to respond to Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . . ±1.4 ±2.0 ±2.1
negative shocks to the economy as well as external
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . . . ±0.4 ±1.2 ±1.8
economic and geopolitical risks. Similar to March,
Total consumer prices2 . . . . . . . ±0.8 ±1.0 ±1.0
nearly all participants continued to judge the risks to
the unemployment rate to be broadly balanced.
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root
mean squared error of projections for 1994 through 2013 that were
released in the spring by various private and government forecasters. As
Almost all participants saw the level of uncertainty and
described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions,
the balance of risks around their forecasts for overall there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real
PCE inflation and core inflation as little changed from GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by
the average size of projection errors made in the past. For more infor-
March. Most participants continued to judge the levels
mation, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the
of uncertainty associated with their forecasts for the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Er-
two inflation measures to be broadly similar to histori- rors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington:
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November), availa-
cal norms, and a majority continued to see the risks to ble at http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2007/200760/200760
those projections as broadly balanced. A few partici- abs.html ; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Divi-
sion of Research and Statistics (2014), “Updated Historical Forecast
pants, however, viewed the risks to their inflation fore-
Errors,” memorandum, April 9, http://www.federalreserve.gov/foia/
casts as tilted to the downside, reflecting, for example, files/20140409-historical-forecast-errors.pdf.
the possibilities that the recent low levels of inflation 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
could prove more persistent than anticipated, and that
that has been most widely used in government and private economic
the upward pull on prices from inflation expectations forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous
might be weaker than assumed. Conversely, two par- year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.
ticipants saw upside risks to inflation, with one citing
uncertainty about the timing and efficacy of the Com-
mittee’s withdrawal of accommodation.

--- Page 25 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_1_4_____________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by 4.4 percent in the current year, 1.0 to 5.0 per-
the members of the Board of Governors and cent in the second year, and 0.9 to 5.1 percent
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks in the third year. The corresponding 70 percent
inform discussions of monetary policy among confidence intervals for overall inflation would
policymakers and can aid public understand- be 1.2 to 2.8 percent in the current year and
ing of the basis for policy actions. Consider- 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second and third years.
able uncertainty attends these projections, Because current conditions may differ
however. The economic and statistical models from those that prevailed, on average, over his-
and relationships used to help produce eco- tory, participants provide judgments as to
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de- whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
scriptions of the real world, and the future jections of each variable is greater than, smaller
path of the economy can be affected by myr- than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
iad unforeseen developments and events. forecast uncertainty in the past, as shown in
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
participants consider not only what appears to to whether the risks to their projections are
be the most likely economic outcome as em- weighted to the upside, are weighted to the
bodied in their projections, but also the range downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of participants judge whether each variable is
their occurring, and the potential costs to the more likely to be above or below their projec-
economy should they occur. tions of the most likely outcome. These judg-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical ments about the uncertainty and the risks at-
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including tending each participant’s projections are dis-
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports tinct from the diversity of participants’ views
and those prepared by the Federal Reserve about the most likely outcomes. Forecast un-
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the certainty is concerned with the risks associated
Federal Open Market Committee. The pro- with a particular projection rather than with
jection error ranges shown in the table il- divergences across a number of different pro-
lustrate the considerable uncertainty associat- jections.
ed with economic forecasts. For example, As with real activity and inflation, the out-
suppose a participant projects that real gross look for the future path of the federal funds
domestic product (GDP) and total consumer rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This
prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, re- uncertainty arises primarily because each partic-
spectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the ipant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of
uncertainty attending those projections is simi- monetary policy depends importantly on the
lar to that experienced in the past and the risks evolution of real activity and inflation over
around the projections are broadly balanced, time. If economic conditions evolve in an un-
the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a expected manner, then assessments of the ap-
probability of about 70 percent that actual propriate setting of the federal funds rate
GDP would expand within a range of 1.6 to would change from that point forward.

# Tables

## Page_13_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |      |      |                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |      |      |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|-----------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|
| 2014                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | 2015 | 2016 | Longer run                                          | 2014                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | 2015 | 2016 |
| 2.1 to 2.3 3.0 to 3.2 2.5 to 3.0
2.8 to 3.0 3.0 to 3.2 2.5 to 3.0
6.0 to 6.1 5.4 to 5.7 5.1 to 5.5
6.1 to 6.3 5.6 to 5.9 5.2 to 5.6
1.5 to 1.7 1.5 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0
1.5 to 1.6 1.5 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0
1.5 to 1.6 1.6 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0
1.4 to 1.6 1.7 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 |      |      | 2.1 to 2.3
2.2 to 2.3
5.2 to 5.5
5.2 to 5.6
2.0
2.0 | 1.9 to 2.4 2.2 to 3.6 2.2 to 3.2
2.1 to 3.0 2.2 to 3.5 2.2 to 3.4
5.8 to 6.2 5.2 to 5.9 5.0 to 5.6
6.0 to 6.5 5.4 to 5.9 5.1 to 5.8
1.4 to 2.0 1.4 to 2.4 1.5 to 2.0
1.3 to 1.8 1.5 to 2.4 1.6 to 2.0
1.4 to 1.8 1.5 to 2.4 1.6 to 2.0
1.3 to 1.8 1.5 to 2.4 1.6 to 2.0 |      |      |