# 20141217_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:37:59*
*Pages: 24, Tables: 2*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
December 16–17, 2014
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on
Tuesday, December 16, 2014, at 1:00 p.m. and continued Stephen A. Meyer and William R. Nelson, Deputy
on Wednesday, December 17, 2014, at 9:00 a.m. Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
PRESENT:
Janet L. Yellen, Chair Andreas Lehnert, Deputy Director, Office of Financial
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Stability Policy and Research, Board of Governors
Lael Brainard
Stanley Fischer Andrew Figura, David Reifschneider, and Stacey
Richard W. Fisher Tevlin, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of
Narayana Kocherlakota Board Members, Board of Governors
Loretta J. Mester
Charles I. Plosser Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office
Jerome H. Powell of Board Members, Board of Governors
Daniel K. Tarullo
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Jeffrey M. Board Members, Board of Governors
Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and John C. Williams,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market Christopher J. Erceg, Senior Associate Director,
Committee Division of International Finance, Board of
Governors
James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren,
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Michael T. Kiley, Senior Adviser, Division of Research
St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively and Statistics, and Senior Associate Director,
Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research,
William B. English, Secretary and Economist Board of Governors
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers,
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Steven B. Kamin, Economist
David W. Wilcox, Economist Daniel M. Covitz, Eric M. Engen, and Diana Hancock,
Associate Directors, Division of Research and Sta-
James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Evan F. tistics, Board of Governors
Koenig, Thomas Laubach, Michael P. Leahy,
Paolo A. Pesenti, Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl, Mark David Lopez-Salido, Deputy Associate Director,
E. Schweitzer, and William Wascher, Associate Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors;
Economists John J. Stevens, Deputy Associate Director,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Governors
Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Stephanie R. Aaronson, Assistant Director, Division of
Market Account Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Robert deV. Frierson,1 Secretary of the Board, Office ________________
of the Secretary, Board of Governors 1 Attended the joint session of the Federal Open Market
Committee and the Board of Governors.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Robert J. Tetlow, Adviser, Division of Monetary Af- pledge funds held in a segregated account at the Federal
fairs, Board of Governors Reserve as collateral in borrowing transactions with pri-
vate creditors and which could potentially provide an ad-
Elizabeth Klee, Section Chief, Division of Monetary ditional supplementary tool during policy normalization.
Affairs, Board of Governors After further review, staff analysis suggested that such
accounts involved a number of operational, regulatory,
Katie Ross,1 Manager, Office of the Secretary, Board of and policy issues. These issues raised questions about
Governors these accounts’ possible effectiveness that would be dif-
ficult to resolve in a timely fashion. It was therefore de-
Achilles Sangster II, Information Management Analyst, cided that further work to implement such accounts
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors would be shelved for now.
The deputy manager followed with a discussion of the
Kelly J. Dubbert, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
outcomes of recent tests of supplementary normaliza-
Bank of Kansas City
tion tools, namely the Term Deposit Facility (TDF) and
term and overnight reverse repurchase agreements (term
David Altig and Alberto G. Musalem, Executive Vice
RRPs and ON RRPs, respectively). Regarding the TDF
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and
testing, the introduction of an early withdrawal option
New York, respectively
led to significant increases in the number of participating
depository institutions and in take-up relative to earlier
Michael Dotsey, Geoffrey Tootell, and Christopher J.
operations without this feature. As expected, both par-
Waller, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
ticipation and take-up in the operations continued to be
Banks of Philadelphia, Boston, and St. Louis,
sensitive to the offering rate and maximum individual
respectively
award amount. The Open Market Desk successfully
conducted the first two of four preannounced term RRP
Hesna Genay, Douglas Tillett, Robert G. Valletta, and
operations extending across the end of the year to help
Alexander L. Wolman, Vice Presidents, Federal
address expected downward pressures on short-term
Reserve Banks of Chicago, Chicago, San Francisco,
rates. Commentary from market participants suggested
and Richmond, respectively
that these operations may help alleviate some of the vol-
atility in short-term rates that would otherwise be ex-
Willem Van Zandweghe, Assistant Vice President,
pected around the year-end. Regarding the ON RRP
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
testing—during which the offered rate was varied be-
tween 3 and 10 basis points—increases in offered rates
________________
appeared to put some upward pressure on unsecured
1 Attended the joint session of the Federal Open Market
money market rates, as anticipated, and the offered rate
Committee and the Board of Governors.
continued to provide a soft floor for secured rates.
Changes in the spread between the rate paid on reserves
and the ON RRP offered rate did not appear to affect
the volume of activity in the federal funds market. While
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
the tests of ON RRPs had been informative, the staff
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
suggested that additional testing could further improve
In a joint session of the Federal Open Market Commit-
understanding of how this supplementary tool could be
tee (FOMC) and the Board of Governors of the Federal
used to achieve greater control of the federal funds rate
Reserve System, the manager of the System Open Mar-
during policy normalization. Accordingly, participants
ket Account (SOMA) reported on developments in do-
discussed a draft resolution to extend the Desk’s author-
mestic and foreign financial markets as well as System
ity to conduct the ON RRP exercise for 12 months be-
open market operations conducted during the period
yond the expiration of the current authorization on Jan-
since the Committee met on October 28–29, 2014. In
uary 30, 2015. It was noted that a one-year extension to
addition, the manager reviewed the implications of re-
what had been a one-year testing program was a practical
cent foreign central bank policy actions for the interna-
step and signaled nothing about either the timing of the
tional portion of the SOMA portfolio. The manager also
start of policy normalization or how long an ON RRP
provided an update on staff work related to potential ar-
facility might be needed.
rangements that would allow depository institutions to

--- Page 3 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r _1_6_–_1_7_, _2_0_14_______________________P_a_g_e_ _3
Following the discussion of the extension of ON RRP The Board meeting concluded at the end of the discus-
test operations, the Committee unanimously approved sion of developments in financial markets and the Fed-
the following resolution: eral Reserve’s balance sheet.
“The Federal Open Market Committee Staff Review of the Economic Situation
(FOMC) authorizes the Federal Reserve Bank The information reviewed for the December 16–17
of New York to conduct a series of overnight meeting suggested that economic activity was increasing
reverse repurchase operations involving U.S. at a moderate pace in the fourth quarter and that labor
government securities for the purpose of fur- market conditions had improved further. Consumer
ther assessing the appropriate structure of price inflation continued to run below the FOMC’s
such operations in supporting the implemen- longer-run objective of 2 percent, partly restrained by
tation of monetary policy during normaliza- declining energy prices. Market-based measures of in-
tion. The reverse repurchase operations au- flation compensation moved lower, but survey measures
thorized by this resolution shall be (i) con- of longer-run inflation expectations remained stable.
ducted at an offering rate that may vary from
Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded in Octo-
zero to five basis points; (ii) for an overnight
ber and November at a faster pace than in the third quar-
term or such longer term as is warranted to
ter. The unemployment rate edged down to 5.8 percent
accommodate weekend, holiday, and similar
in October and remained at that level in November.
trading conventions; (iii) subject to a per-
Both the labor force participation rate and the employ-
counterparty limit of up to $30 billion per day;
ment-to-population ratio rose slightly, and the share of
(iv) subject to an overall size limit of up to
workers employed part time for economic reasons de-
$300 billion per day; and (v) awarded to all
clined. The rate of private-sector job openings stayed,
submitters (A) at the specified offering rate if
on balance, at its recent elevated level in September and
the sum of the bids received is less than or
October, and the rates of hiring and of quits stepped up
equal to the overall size limit, or (B) at the
on net.
stop-out rate, determined by evaluating bids
in ascending order by submitted rate up to the Industrial production rose in October and November,
point at which the total quantity of bids equals led by strong increases in manufacturing output. Au-
the overall size limit, with all bids below this tomakers’ schedules indicated that the pace of light mo-
rate awarded in full at the stop-out rate and all tor vehicle assemblies would move up somewhat in the
bids at the stop-out rate awarded on a pro rata first quarter, and broader indicators of manufacturing
basis, if the sum of the counterparty offers re- production, such as the readings on new orders from the
ceived is greater than the overall size limit. national and regional manufacturing surveys, were gen-
The Chair must approve any change in the of- erally consistent with solid gains in factory output over
fering rate within the range specified in (i) and the near term.
any changes to the per-counterparty and over-
Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) ap-
all size limits subject to the limits specified in
peared to be rising robustly in the fourth quarter. The
(iii) and (iv). The System Open Market Ac-
components of the nominal retail sales data used to con-
count manager will notify the FOMC in ad-
struct estimates of PCE rose strongly in October and
vance about any changes to the offering rate,
November, and light motor vehicle sales increased no-
per-counterparty limit, or overall size limit ap-
ticeably. Key factors that influence household spending
plied to operations. These operations shall be
pointed toward further solid PCE growth. Real dispos-
authorized for one additional year beyond the
able income rose further in October, energy prices con-
previously authorized end date—that is,
tinued to decline, households’ net worth likely increased
through January 29, 2016.”
as home values advanced, and consumer sentiment in
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s early December from the Thomson Reuters/University
domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. of Michigan Surveys of Consumers was at its highest
There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- level since before the most recent recession.
cies for the System’s account over the intermeeting pe-
The pace of activity in the housing sector generally
riod.
remained slow. Both starts and permits of new single-

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
family homes increased only a little, on balance, in Oc- the nonfarm business sector rose about 2 percent over
tober and November. Starts of multifamily units de- the year ending in the third quarter. Similar rates of
clined, on net, over the past two months. Sales of new increase were observed for the employment cost index
and existing homes rose modestly in October. over the same year-long period and for average hourly
earnings for all employees over the 12 months ending in
Real private expenditures for business equipment and in-
November.
tellectual property appeared to be decelerating in the
fourth quarter. Nominal orders and shipments of non- Overall growth in foreign real gross domestic product
defense capital goods excluding aircraft declined in Oc- (GDP) remained subdued in the third quarter. In the
tober. However, new orders for these capital goods re- advanced foreign economies, real GDP contracted for a
mained above the level of shipments, and other forward- second consecutive quarter in Japan, rose only slightly in
looking indicators, such as national and regional surveys the euro area, but continued to expand moderately in
of business conditions, were generally consistent with Canada and the United Kingdom. In the emerging mar-
modest near-term gains in business equipment spending. ket economies, economic growth slowed in Mexico in
Firms’ nominal spending for nonresidential structures the third quarter and remained sluggish in Brazil; eco-
edged down in October after rising slightly in the third nomic growth in China likely slowed moderately in the
quarter. fourth quarter. Oil prices continued to decline, likely re-
flecting favorable supply developments as well as some
Data for October and November pointed toward a de-
weakening in global demand. Inflation in the advanced
cline in real federal government purchases in the fourth
foreign economies remained quite low during the inter-
quarter after a surprisingly large third-quarter increase.
meeting period, partly because of the fall in oil prices.
Real state and local government purchases appeared to
Declining oil prices had a smaller effect on inflation in
be rising modestly in the fourth quarter as their payrolls
the emerging market economies, reflecting the greater
and construction expenditures increased a little in recent
prevalence of administered energy prices.
months.
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
The U.S. international trade deficit was little changed in
Over the intermeeting period, market participants be-
October, as exports and imports both rose. The gains
came a bit more optimistic about U.S. economic pro-
in exports were concentrated in aircraft and other capital
spects while also responding to economic and policy de-
goods, and the increase in imports reflected a pickup in
velopments abroad. The sharp decline in oil prices
purchases of automotive products and computers. But
weighed on inflation compensation and left a mixed im-
with the October deficit remaining wider than the
print on other asset markets. On net, yields on longer-
monthly average in the third quarter, real net exports
term Treasury securities fell, corporate bond spreads
looked to be declining in the fourth quarter.
widened, equity prices were little changed, and the for-
Both total U.S. consumer price inflation, as measured by eign exchange value of the dollar appreciated.
the PCE price index, and core inflation, as measured by
Economic data releases reinforced the views of market
PCE prices excluding food and energy, were about
participants that the U.S. economic recovery continued
1½ percent over the 12 months ending in October; con-
to gain momentum. In addition, investors appeared to
sumer energy prices declined, while consumer food
read the October FOMC statement as suggesting a
prices rose more than overall prices. Over the
slightly less accommodative path for future monetary
12 months ending in November, total inflation as meas-
policy than they had previously expected.
ured by the consumer price index (CPI) was 1¼ percent,
partly reflecting the further decline in energy prices, Results from the December Survey of Primary Dealers
while core CPI inflation was 1¾ percent. Measures of indicated that the dealers’ expectations for the timing of
expected long-run inflation from a variety of surveys, in- the first increase in the federal funds target range and the
cluding the Michigan survey, the Blue Chip Economic Indi- subsequent policy path were little changed from the Oc-
cators, the Survey of Professional Forecasters, and the tober survey. The average probability distribution of the
Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers, remained stable. In expected date of liftoff continued to imply that the most
contrast, market-based measures of inflation compensa- likely date would be around the middle of 2015, with the
tion moved lower. distribution having narrowed slightly compared with the
previous survey.
Labor compensation continued to increase only a little
faster than consumer prices. Compensation per hour in

--- Page 5 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r _1_6_–_1_7_, _2_0_14_______________________P_a_g_e_ _5
Longer-term nominal Treasury yields declined signifi- intermeeting period. The dollar moved up significantly
cantly, on balance, over the intermeeting period. against the yen as the Bank of Japan expanded its asset
Measures of inflation compensation based on Treasury purchase program as well as against the currencies of oil
Inflation-Protected Securities and on inflation swaps de- exporters as oil prices declined. Over the period, market
creased, reportedly reflecting, in part, the decline in oil participants seemed to conclude that monetary policy in
prices and increased concerns about global economic Europe was likely to be put on a more accommodative
growth. path, and 10-year yields in Germany and the United
Kingdom declined further. As German yields fell to new
Broad U.S. equity price indexes were about unchanged
record lows, spreads of most euro-area peripheral bonds
over the intermeeting period. Option-implied volatility
over those yields narrowed. Changes in stock prices
for one-month returns on the S&P 500 index—the
abroad were mixed, on net, over the intermeeting period:
VIX—rose sharply late in the period to levels close to
There were large increases in Japan and China along with
those in mid-October. Investment- and speculative-
large decreases in oil-exporting countries, such as Can-
grade corporate bond spreads widened over the period.
ada, Mexico, and Russia.
Spreads on speculative-grade bonds for energy-related
firms rose substantially because of the pronounced de- Late in the intermeeting period, following the sharp fall
cline in oil prices. in oil prices, the Russian ruble depreciated rapidly and
substantially, prompting the Russian central bank, which
Business financing flows were robust over the inter-
had already raised its policy rate in early November, to
meeting period. Gross bond issuance by nonfinancial
raise the rate twice more in five days, with the most re-
corporations was the strongest in more than a year.
cent increase following an unscheduled policy meeting
Nonfinancial commercial paper outstanding expanded
on December 15.
noticeably in November, more than compensating for a
slowdown in October. Commercial and industrial loans Staff Economic Outlook
on banks’ books continued to expand briskly. In addi- In the staff forecast prepared for the December FOMC
tion, issuance of both leveraged loans and collateralized meeting, real GDP growth in the second half of 2014
loan obligations were strong in October and November. was higher than in the projection for the October meet-
ing, largely reflecting stronger-than-expected data for
Financing for commercial real estate (CRE) remained
PCE. Nevertheless, real GDP growth was anticipated
broadly available. CRE loans on banks’ books expanded
to slow in the fourth quarter as both net exports and
at a moderate pace in October and November, and issu-
federal government purchases—important positive con-
ance of commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS)
tributors to real GDP growth in the third quarter—were
was strong. According to the December Senior Credit
anticipated to drop back. The staff’s medium-term fore-
Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms,
cast for real GDP growth was revised up a little on net.
broker-dealers had eased somewhat all of the terms on
The projected path for oil prices was lower, and the tra-
which they finance CMBS for most-favored clients.
jectory for equity prices was a bit higher. And although
Measures of residential mortgage lending conditions the projected path of the dollar was revised up, the staff
were little changed over the intermeeting period. Credit revised down its estimate of how much the appreciation
conditions for mortgages remained tight for borrowers of the dollar since last summer would restrain projected
with less-than-pristine credit. Interest rates on 30-year growth in real GDP. The staff continued to forecast that
fixed-rate mortgages declined, consistent with the moves real GDP would expand at a faster pace in 2015 and
in longer-term Treasury yields. Refinancing activity was 2016 than it had this year and that it would rise more
subdued. quickly than potential output, supported by increases in
consumer and business confidence and a pickup in for-
Financing conditions in consumer credit markets gener-
eign economic growth, along with monetary policy that
ally stayed accommodative. Auto and student loan bal-
was assumed to remain highly accommodative for some
ances expanded robustly in October, and revolving
time. In 2017, real GDP growth was projected to begin
credit balances increased at a moderate pace. Issuance
slowing toward, but to remain above, the rate of poten-
of consumer asset-backed securities was strong in the
tial output growth as the normalization of monetary pol-
fourth quarter.
icy was assumed to proceed. The expansion in eco-
Reflecting divergent economic and monetary policy nomic activity over the medium term was anticipated to
prospects in the United States and abroad, the dollar ap- slowly reduce resource slack, and the unemployment
preciated substantially against most currencies over the rate was expected to decline gradually and to temporarily

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
move slightly below the staff’s estimate of its longer-run solid job gains and a lower unemployment rate; partici-
natural rate. pants judged that the underutilization of labor resources
was continuing to diminish. Participants expected that,
The staff’s forecast for inflation in the near term was re-
over the medium term, real economic activity would in-
vised down to reflect the further large energy price de-
crease at a pace sufficient to lead to further improve-
clines since the October FOMC meeting, which were an-
ments in labor market indicators toward levels con-
ticipated to lead to a temporary decrease in the total PCE
sistent with the Committee’s objective of maximum em-
price index late this year and early next year. The staff’s
ployment. Inflation was continuing to run below the
inflation projection for the next few years was essentially
Committee’s longer-run objective, reflecting in part con-
unchanged; the staff continued to project that inflation
tinued reductions in oil prices and falling import prices.
would move up gradually toward, but run somewhat be-
Market-based measures of inflation compensation de-
low, the Committee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent.
clined further, while survey-based measures of longer-
Nevertheless, inflation was projected to reach the Com-
term inflation expectations remained stable. Participants
mittee’s objective over time, with longer-run inflation
generally anticipated that inflation would rise gradually
expectations assumed to remain stable, prices of energy
toward the Committee’s 2 percent objective as the labor
and non-oil imports forecast to begin rising next year,
market improved further and the transitory effects of
and slack in labor and product markets anticipated to di-
lower energy prices and other factors dissipated. The
minish slowly.
risks to the outlook for economic activity and the labor
The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections market were seen as nearly balanced. Some participants
for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- suggested that the recent domestic economic data had
tion as similar to the average over the past 20 years. The increased their confidence in the outlook for growth go-
risks to the forecast for real GDP growth and inflation ing forward. Participants generally regarded the net ef-
were viewed as tilted a little to the downside, reflecting fect of the recent decline in energy prices as likely to be
the staff’s assessment that neither monetary policy nor positive for economic activity and employment. How-
fiscal policy was well positioned to help the economy ever, many of them thought that a further deterioration
withstand adverse shocks. At the same time, the staff in the foreign economic situation could result in slower
viewed the risks around its outlook for the unemploy- domestic economic growth than they currently expected.
ment rate as roughly balanced.
Household spending continued to advance over the in-
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the termeeting period, and reports from contacts in several
Economic Outlook parts of the country indicated that recent retail or auto
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of sales had been robust. Many participants pointed to rel-
the Board of Governors and the Federal Reserve Bank atively high levels of consumer confidence as signaling
presidents submitted their projections of the most likely near-term strength in discretionary consumer spending,
outcomes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and most participants judged that the recent significant
inflation, and the federal funds rate for each year from decline in energy prices would provide a boost to con-
2014 through 2017 and over the longer run, conditional sumer spending. Participants also cited solid gains in
on each participant’s judgment of appropriate monetary payroll employment, low interest rates, and the decline
policy. The longer-run projections represent each par- in levels of household debt relative to income as factors
ticipant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable that were expected to support continued growth in con-
would be expected to converge, over time, under appro- sumer spending. In contrast, residential construction
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further continued to be slow, and recent readings on single-
shocks to the economy. These economic projections family building permits suggested that this sluggishness
and policy assessments are described in the Summary of was likely to continue in the short run.
Economic Projections (SEP), which is attached as an ad-
Industry contacts pointed to generally solid business
dendum to these minutes.
conditions, with businesses in many parts of the country
In their discussion of the economic situation and the expressing some optimism about prospects for further
outlook, meeting participants regarded the information improvement in 2015. Manufacturing activity was
received over the intermeeting period as supporting their strong, as indicated by the index of industrial production
view that economic activity was expanding at a moderate and a variety of regional reports. Information from
pace. Labor market conditions improved further, with some regions pointed to a pickup in capital investment,
although the continued decline in oil prices led business

--- Page 7 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r _1_6_–_1_7_, _2_0_14_______________________P_a_g_e_ _7
contacts to expect a slowdown in drilling activity and, if exchange value of the dollar on import prices. Most par-
prices remain low, reduced capital investment in the oil ticipants saw these influences as temporary and thus
and gas industries. In the agricultural sector, the robust continued to expect inflation to move back gradually to
fall harvest reportedly lowered crop prices; operating the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective as the
margins for food processing and farm equipment busi- labor market improved further in an environment of
nesses have been narrowing, putting stress on some pro- well-anchored inflation expectations. Survey-based
ducers. measures of longer-term inflation expectations remained
stable, although market-based measures of inflation
In their discussion of the foreign economic outlook, par-
compensation over the next five years, as well as over
ticipants noted that the implications of the drop in crude
the five-year period beginning five years ahead, moved
oil prices would differ across regions, especially if the
down further over the intermeeting period. Participants
price declines affected inflation expectations and finan-
discussed various explanations for the decline in market-
cial markets; a few participants said that the effect on
based measures, including a fall in expected future infla-
overseas employment and output as a whole was likely
tion, reductions in inflation risk premiums, and higher
to be positive. While some participants had lowered
liquidity and other premiums that might be influencing
their assessments of the prospects for global economic
the prices of Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities and
growth, several noted that the likelihood of further re-
inflation derivatives. Model-based decompositions of
sponses by policymakers abroad had increased. Several
inflation compensation seemed to support the message
participants indicated that they expected slower eco-
from surveys that longer-term inflation expectations had
nomic growth abroad to negatively affect the U.S. econ-
remained stable, although it was observed that these re-
omy, principally through lower net exports, but the net
sults were sensitive to the assumptions underlying the
effect of lower oil prices on U.S. economic activity was
particular models used. It was noted that even if the de-
anticipated to be positive.
clines in inflation compensation reflected lower inflation
Participants saw broad-based improvement in labor risk premiums rather than a reduction in expected infla-
market conditions over the intermeeting period, includ- tion, policymakers might still want to take them into ac-
ing solid gains in payroll employment, a slight reduction count because such changes could reflect increased con-
in the unemployment rate, and increases in the rates of cerns on the part of investors about adverse outcomes
hiring and quits. Positive signals were also seen in the in which low inflation was accompanied by weak eco-
decline in the share of workers employed part time for nomic activity. In the end, participants generally agreed
economic reasons and in the increase in the labor force that it would take more time and analysis to draw defin-
participation rate. These favorable trends notwithstand- itive conclusions regarding the recent behavior of infla-
ing, the levels of these measures suggested to some par- tion compensation.
ticipants that there remained more labor market slack
In their discussion of financial market developments,
than was indicated by the unemployment rate alone.
participants observed that movements in asset prices
However, a few others continued to view the unemploy-
over the intermeeting period appeared to have been im-
ment rate as a reliable indicator of overall labor market
portantly influenced by concerns about prospects for
conditions and saw a narrower degree of labor underuti-
foreign economic growth and by associated expectations
lization remaining. Although a few participants sug-
of monetary policy actions in Europe and Japan. A cou-
gested that the recent uptick in the employment cost in-
ple of participants remarked on the apparent disparity
dex or average hourly earnings could be a tentative sign
between market-based measures of expected future U.S.
of an upturn in wage growth, most participants saw no
short-term interest rates and projections for short-term
clear evidence of a broad-based acceleration in wages. A
rates based on surveys or based on the median of federal
couple of participants, however, pointing to the weak
funds rate projections in the SEP. One participant noted
statistical relationship between wage inflation and labor
that very low term premiums in market-based measures
market conditions, suggested that the pace of wage in-
might explain at least some portion of this gap. Another
flation was providing relatively little information about
possibility was that market-based measures might be as-
the degree of labor underutilization.
signing considerable weight to less favorable outcomes
Participants generally anticipated that inflation was likely for the U.S. economy in which the federal funds rate
to decline further in the near term, reflecting the reduc- would remain low for quite some time or fall back to
tion in oil prices and the effects of the rise in the foreign very low levels in the future, whereas the projections in
the SEP report the paths for the federal funds rate that

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
participants see as appropriate given their views of the participants regarded the revised language as risking an
most likely evolution of inflation and real activity. unwarranted concentration of market expectations for
the timing of the initial increase in the federal funds rate
Participants discussed a number of risks to the economic
target on a narrow range of dates around mid-2015, and
outlook. Many participants regarded the international
as not adequately allowing for the possibility that eco-
situation as an important source of downside risks to do-
nomic conditions might evolve in a way that could call
mestic real activity and employment, particularly if de-
for either an earlier or a later liftoff date. A few partici-
clines in oil prices and the persistence of weak economic
pants suggested that the statement should focus on the
growth abroad had a substantial negative effect on global
economic conditions that would likely accompany the
financial markets or if foreign policy responses were in-
decision to raise rates. Participants generally stressed the
sufficient. However, the downside risks were seen as
need to communicate that the timing of the first increase
nearly balanced by risks to the upside. Several partici-
in the federal funds rate would depend on the incoming
pants, pointing to indicators of consumer and business
data and their implications for the Committee’s assess-
confidence as well as to the solid record of payroll em-
ment of progress toward its objectives of maximum em-
ployment gains in 2014, suggested that the real economy
ployment and inflation of 2 percent. With lower energy
may end up showing more momentum than anticipated,
prices and the stronger dollar likely to keep inflation be-
while a few others thought that the boost to domestic
low target for some time, it was noted that the Commit-
spending coming from lower energy prices could turn
tee might begin normalization at a time when core infla-
out to be quite large. With regard to inflation, a number
tion was near current levels, although in that circum-
of participants saw a risk that it could run persistently
stance participants would want to be reasonably confi-
below their 2 percent objective, with some expressing
dent that inflation will move back toward 2 percent over
concern that such an outcome could undermine the
time.
credibility of the Committee’s commitment to that ob-
jective. Some participants were worried that the recent A few participants spoke of the importance of explaining
substantial fall in energy prices could lead to a reduction to the public how economic and financial conditions
in longer-term inflation expectations, while others were would influence the Committee’s decisions regarding the
concerned that the decline in market-based measures of appropriate path for the federal funds rate after normal-
inflation compensation might reflect, in part, that such a ization begins. It was noted that to the extent that such
decline had already begun. However, a couple of others guidance can be effectively communicated, the precise
noted that if the unemployment rate continued to de- date of liftoff becomes less important for economic out-
cline quickly, wage and price inflation could rise more comes. In this regard, some participants emphasized
than generally anticipated. that policy will still be highly accommodative for a time
after the first increase in the federal funds rate target,
In their discussion of communications regarding the
given the difference between the current setting of the
path of the federal funds rate over the medium term,
federal funds rate target range and the Committee’s view
most participants concluded that updating the Commit-
of the longer-run normal rate as well as the Federal Re-
tee’s forward guidance would be appropriate in light of
serve’s elevated holdings of longer-term securities.
the conclusion of the asset purchase program in October
and the further progress that the economy had made to- Committee Policy Action
ward the Committee’s objectives. Most participants In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
agreed that it would be useful to state that the Commit- ahead, members judged that information received since
tee judges that it can be patient in beginning to normalize the FOMC met in October indicated that economic ac-
the stance of monetary policy; they noted that such lan- tivity was expanding at a moderate pace. Labor market
guage would provide more flexibility to adjust policy in conditions had improved further, with solid job gains
response to incoming information than the previous lan- and a lower unemployment rate; taken as a whole, labor
guage, which had tied the beginning of normalization to market indicators suggested that the underutilization of
the end of the asset purchase program. This approach labor resources was continuing to diminish. Household
was seen as consistent, given the Committee’s assess- spending was rising moderately and business fixed in-
ment of the economic outlook at the current meeting, vestment was advancing, while the recovery in the hous-
with the Committee’s previous statement. Most partici- ing sector remained slow. Inflation had continued to run
pants thought the reference to patience indicated that below the Committee’s longer-run objective, in part re-
the Committee was unlikely to begin the normalization flecting declines in energy prices. Market-based
process for at least the next couple of meetings. Some

--- Page 9 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r _1_6_–_1_7_, _2_0_14_______________________P_a_g_e_ _9
measures of inflation compensation had declined some- that had been made toward the Committee’s objectives,
what further, but survey-based measures of longer-term while one wanted to strengthen the forward guidance in
inflation expectations had remained stable. The Com- order to underscore the Committee’s commitment to its
mittee expected that, with appropriate monetary policy 2 percent inflation objective. Members agreed that their
accommodation, economic activity would continue to policy decisions would remain data dependent, and they
expand at a moderate pace, with labor market indicators continued to include wording in the statement noting
moving toward levels the Committee judges consistent that if incoming information indicates faster progress
with its dual mandate. The Committee also expected toward the Committee’s employment and inflation
that inflation would rise gradually toward 2 percent as objectives than the Committee now expects, then
the labor market improves further and the transitory ef- increases in the target range for the federal funds rate
fects of lower energy prices and other factors dissipate. would likely occur sooner than currently anticipated,
and, similarly, that if progress proves slower than
In their discussion of language for the postmeeting state-
expected, then increases in the target range would likely
ment, members generally agreed that they should
occur later than currently anticipated. The Committee
acknowledge the broad improvement in labor market
decided to maintain its policy of reinvesting principal
conditions over the intermeeting period as well as their
payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency
judgment that labor market slack continued to diminish.
mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
In addition, they decided that the statement should note
securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury
that the low level of inflation seen of late partly reflected
securities at auction. This policy, by keeping the
the recent decline in energy prices. The Committee
Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities at sizable
modified the previous statement language to make clear
levels, should help maintain accommodative financial
that it expects that inflation will rise gradually toward
conditions. Finally, the Committee also decided to
2 percent as the labor market improves further and the
reiterate its expectation that, even after employment and
transitory effects of lower energy prices and other fac-
inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic
tors dissipate. Given the uncertainties about the outlook
conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the
for inflation, members decided that it would be appro-
target federal funds rate below levels the Committee
priate to indicate that the Committee continues to mon-
views as normal in the longer run. At the conclusion of
itor inflation developments closely.
the discussion, the Committee voted to authorize and
The Committee agreed to maintain the target range for direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until it
the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and to reaffirm was instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the
the indication in the statement that the Committee’s SOMA in accordance with the following domestic policy
decision about how long to maintain the current target directive:
range for the federal funds rate would depend on its
“Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
assessment of actual and expected progress toward its
Federal Open Market Committee seeks
objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent
monetary and financial conditions that will
inflation. Most members agreed to update the
foster maximum employment and price
Committee’s forward guidance with language indicating
stability. In particular, the Committee seeks
that it judges that it can be patient in beginning to
conditions in reserve markets consistent with
normalize the stance of monetary policy. In order to
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to
avoid the misinterpretation that this new wording
¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk
reflected a change in the Committee’s policy intentions,
to undertake open market operations as
the statement included a sentence indicating that the
necessary to maintain such conditions. The
Committee sees this guidance as consistent with its
Committee directs the Desk to maintain its
previous statement that it likely will be appropriate to
policy of rolling over maturing Treasury
maintain the 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal
securities into new issues and its policy of
funds rate for a considerable time following the end of
reinvesting principal payments on all agency
its asset purchase program in October, especially if
debt and agency mortgage-backed securities
projected inflation continues to run below the
in agency mortgage-backed securities. The
Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and provided
Committee also directs the Desk to engage in
that longer-term inflation expectations remain well
dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
anchored. Two members thought that this forward
necessary to facilitate settlement of the
guidance did not take sufficient account of the progress

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed federal funds rate remains appropriate. In
securities transactions. The System Open determining how long to maintain this target
Market Account manager and the secretary range, the Committee will assess progress—
will keep the Committee informed of ongoing both realized and expected—toward its
developments regarding the System’s balance objectives of maximum employment and
sheet that could affect the attainment over 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take
time of the Committee’s objectives of into account a wide range of information,
maximum employment and price stability.” including measures of labor market
conditions, indicators of inflation pressures
The vote encompassed approval of the statement below
and inflation expectations, and readings on
to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
financial developments. Based on its current
“Information received since the Federal Open assessment, the Committee judges that it can
Market Committee met in October suggests be patient in beginning to normalize the
that economic activity is expanding at a stance of monetary policy. The Committee
moderate pace. Labor market conditions sees this guidance as consistent with its
improved further, with solid job gains and a previous statement that it likely will be
lower unemployment rate. On balance, a appropriate to maintain the 0 to ¼ percent
range of labor market indicators suggests that target range for the federal funds rate for a
underutilization of labor resources continues considerable time following the end of its
to diminish. Household spending is rising asset purchase program in October, especially
moderately and business fixed investment is if projected inflation continues to run below
advancing, while the recovery in the housing the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal,
sector remains slow. Inflation has continued and provided that longer-term inflation
to run below the Committee’s longer-run expectations remain well anchored. However,
objective, partly reflecting declines in energy if incoming information indicates faster
prices. Market-based measures of inflation progress toward the Committee’s
compensation have declined somewhat employment and inflation objectives than the
further; survey-based measures of longer- Committee now expects, then increases in the
term inflation expectations have remained target range for the federal funds rate are likely
stable. to occur sooner than currently anticipated.
Conversely, if progress proves slower than
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
expected, then increases in the target range are
Committee seeks to foster maximum
likely to occur later than currently anticipated.
employment and price stability. The
Committee expects that, with appropriate The Committee is maintaining its existing
policy accommodation, economic activity will policy of reinvesting principal payments from
expand at a moderate pace, with labor market its holdings of agency debt and agency
indicators moving toward levels the mortgage-backed securities in agency
Committee judges consistent with its dual mortgage-backed securities and of rolling
mandate. The Committee sees the risks to the over maturing Treasury securities at auction.
outlook for economic activity and the labor This policy, by keeping the Committee’s
market as nearly balanced. The Committee holdings of longer-term securities at sizable
expects inflation to rise gradually toward levels, should help maintain accommodative
2 percent as the labor market improves financial conditions.
further and the transitory effects of lower
When the Committee decides to begin to
energy prices and other factors dissipate. The
remove policy accommodation, it will take a
Committee continues to monitor inflation
balanced approach consistent with its longer-
developments closely.
run goals of maximum employment and
To support continued progress toward inflation of 2 percent. The Committee
maximum employment and price stability, the currently anticipates that, even after
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the employment and inflation are near mandate-
current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the consistent levels, economic conditions may,

--- Page 11 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r _1_6_–_1_7_, _2_0_14______________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
for some time, warrant keeping the target provement in economic conditions that has occurred
federal funds rate below levels the Committee over the course of the year was greater than anticipated,
views as normal in the longer run.” and he believed that the statement should communicate
that there is a measurable probability that liftoff may oc-
Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C.
cur in the first quarter of next year, even if the most likely
Dudley, Lael Brainard, Stanley Fischer, Loretta J. Mester,
scenario is for normalization to begin around midyear.
Jerome H. Powell, and Daniel K. Tarullo.
He further believed that waiting too long to raise rates
Voting against this action: Richard W. Fisher, could lead to the need for more-aggressive policy in the
Narayana Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser. future, which could potentially lead to unnecessary vol-
atility and instability.
Mr. Fisher agreed that the Committee should be patient
in beginning to normalize the stance of monetary pol- It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
icy. He dissented because he saw the improvement in would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, January 27–28,
the U.S. economic outlook since October as indicating 2015. The meeting adjourned at 11:00 a.m. on
that it likely will be appropriate to increase the federal December 17, 2014.
funds rate sooner than the Committee’s current state-
Notation Vote
ment envisions.
By notation vote completed on November 18, 2014, the
Mr. Kocherlakota dissented because he believed that the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
Committee’s decision and statement did not respond to Committee meeting held on October 28–29, 2014.
ongoing below-target inflation and falling market-based
measures of longer-term inflation expectations. In his
judgment, the credibility of the Committee’s 2 percent
inflation target was at risk, calling for a more accommo-
dative policy stance.
_____________________________
Mr. Plosser dissented for two reasons. He believed that
William B. English
the Committee’s policy guidance should be more data
Secretary
dependent and not focus on time. In his view, the im

--- Page 12 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________PP_aa_gg_ee_ _11
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- Overall, FOMC participants expected that, after a slow-
tee (FOMC) meeting held on December 16–17, 2014, down in the first half of 2014, economic growth under
meeting participants submitted their projections of the appropriate policy would be faster in the second half of
most likely outcomes for real output growth, the unem- 2014 and over 2015 and 2016 than their estimates of the
ployment rate, inflation, and the federal funds rate for U.S. economy’s longer-run normal growth rate. On bal-
each year from 2014 to 2017 and over the longer run.1 ance, participants then saw economic growth moving
Each participant’s projection was based on information back toward their assessments of its longer-run pace in
available at the time of the meeting plus his or her as- 2017 (table 1 and figure 1). Most participants projected
sessment of appropriate monetary policy and assump- that the unemployment rate will continue to decline in
tions about the factors likely to affect economic out- 2015 and 2016, and all participants projected that the un-
comes. The longer-run projections represent each par- employment rate will be at or below their individual
ticipant’s assessment of the value to which each variable judgments of its longer-run normal level by the end of
would be expected to converge, over time, under appro- 2016. All participants projected that inflation, as meas-
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further ured by the four-quarter change in the price index for
shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” personal consumption expenditures (PCE), would rise
is defined as the future path of policy that each partici- gradually, on balance, over the next few years. Most par-
pant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic ticipants saw inflation approaching the Committee’s
activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual 2 percent longer-run objective in 2016 and 2017. While
interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objectives of a few participants projected that inflation would rise
maximum employment and stable prices. temporarily above 2 percent during the forecast period,
many others expected inflation to remain low through
____________________________________________
2017.
1 As discussed in its Policy Normalization Principles and
Plans, released on September 17, 2014, the Committee intends Participants judged that it would be appropriate to begin
to target a range for the federal funds rate during normaliza-
raising the target range for the federal funds rate over
tion. Participants were asked to provide, in their contributions
the projection period as labor market indicators and in-
to the Summary of Economic Projections, either the midpoint
flation move back toward values the Committee judges
of the target range for the federal funds rate for any period
consistent with the attainment of its mandated objec-
when a range was anticipated or the target level for the federal
tives of maximum employment and stable prices. As
funds rate, as appropriate. In the lower panel of figure 2, these
values have been rounded to the nearest ⅛ percentage point.
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, December 2014
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer run 2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer run
Change in real GDP . . 2.3 to 2.4 2.6 to 3.0 2.5 to 3.0 2.3 to 2.5 2.0 to 2.3 2.3 to 2.5 2.1 to 3.2 2.1 to 3.0 2.0 to 2.7 1.8 to 2.7
September projection . 2.0 to 2.2 2.6 to 3.0 2.6 to 2.9 2.3 to 2.5 2.0 to 2.3 1.8 to 2.3 2.1 to 3.2 2.1 to 3.0 2.0 to 2.6 1.8 to 2.6
Unemployment rate . . 5.8 5.2 to 5.3 5.0 to 5.2 4.9 to 5.3 5.2 to 5.5 5.7 to 5.8 5.0 to 5.5 4.9 to 5.4 4.7 to 5.7 5.0 to 5.8
September projection . 5.9 to 6.0 5.4 to 5.6 5.1 to 5.4 4.9 to 5.3 5.2 to 5.5 5.7 to 6.1 5.2 to 5.7 4.9 to 5.6 4.7 to 5.8 5.0 to 6.0
PCE inflation . . . . . . . 1.2 to 1.3 1.0 to 1.6 1.7 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 2.0 1.2 to 1.6 1.0 to 2.2 1.6 to 2.1 1.8 to 2.2 2.0
September projection . 1.5 to 1.7 1.6 to 1.9 1.7 to 2.0 1.9 to 2.0 2.0 1.5 to 1.8 1.5 to 2.4 1.6 to 2.1 1.7 to 2.2 2.0
Core PCE inflation3 . . 1.5 to 1.6 1.5 to 1.8 1.7 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 1.5 to 1.6 1.5 to 2.2 1.6 to 2.1 1.8 to 2.2
September projection . 1.5 to 1.6 1.6 to 1.9 1.8 to 2.0 1.9 to 2.0 1.5 to 1.8 1.6 to 2.4 1.7 to 2.2 1.8 to 2.2
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are percent changes from the fourth
quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively,
the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are
for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of
appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge
under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The September projections were made in conjunction with the meeting
of the Federal Open Market Committee on September 16–17, 2014.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

--- Page 13 ---

_PP_aagg_ee_ _22_____________________________FF_ee_dd_ee_rr_aall_ OO__pp_ee_nn_ MM__aa_rrkk_ee_tt_ CC__oo_mm_mm__iitt_ttee_ee__________________________________
Figure1. Centraltendenciesandrangesofeconomicprojections,2014–17andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
Central tendency of projections 4
Range of projections
3
2
Actual 1
+
0
-
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesofthevariablesare
annual.

--- Page 14 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _16_–_1_7_,_ 2_0_1_4____________P_a_g_e_ _3
shown in figure 2, all but a couple of participants antici- pants projected that, by the end of that year, the unem-
pated that it would be appropriate to begin raising the ployment rate will be at or below their individual judg-
target range for the federal funds rate in 2015, with most ments of its longer-run normal level. The central
projecting that it will be appropriate to raise the target tendencies of participants’ forecasts for the unemploy-
federal funds rate fairly gradually. ment rate in the fourth quarter of each year were 5.8 per-
cent in 2014, 5.2 to 5.3 percent in 2015, 5.0 to 5.2 percent
Most participants viewed the uncertainty associated with
in 2016, and 4.9 to 5.3 percent in 2017. Almost all par-
their outlooks for economic growth and the unemploy-
ticipants’ projected paths for the unemployment rate
ment rate as broadly similar to the average level of the
shifted down slightly through 2015 compared with their
past 20 years. Most participants also judged the level of
projections in September; many participants noted that
uncertainty about inflation to be broadly similar to the
recent data pointing to improving labor market condi-
average level of the past 20 years, although a few partic-
tions were an important factor underlying the downward
ipants viewed it as higher. In addition, most participants
revisions in their unemployment rate forecasts. The cen-
continued to see the risks to the outlook for economic
tral tendency of participants’ estimates of the longer-run
growth and for the unemployment rate as broadly bal-
normal rate of unemployment that would prevail under
anced. A majority saw the risks to inflation as broadly
appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of fur-
balanced; however, a number of participants saw the
ther shocks to the economy was unchanged at 5.2 to
risks to inflation as weighted to the downside, while one
5.5 percent; the range of these estimates was 5.0 to
judged these risks as tilted to the upside.
5.8 percent, down slightly from 5.0 to 6.0 percent in Sep-
The Outlook for Economic Activity tember.
Participants projected that, conditional on their individ-
Figures 3.A and 3.B show that participants held a range
ual assumptions about appropriate monetary policy,
of views regarding the likely outcomes for real GDP
growth in real gross domestic product (GDP) would
growth and the unemployment rate through 2017. Some
pick up from its low level in the first half of 2014 and
of the diversity of views reflected their individual assess-
run above their estimates of its longer-run normal rate
ments of the effects of lower oil prices on consumer
in the second half of 2014 and over 2015 and 2016. Par-
spending and business investment, of the rate at which
ticipants pointed to a number of factors that they ex-
the forces that have been restraining the pace of the eco-
pected would contribute to stronger real output growth,
nomic recovery would continue to abate, of the trajec-
including improving labor market conditions, lower en-
tory for growth in consumption as labor market slack
ergy prices, rising household net worth, diminishing re-
diminishes, and of the appropriate path of monetary pol-
straint from fiscal policy, and highly accommodative
icy. Relative to September, the dispersion of partici-
monetary policy. On balance, participants saw real GDP
pants’ projections for real GDP growth was little
growth moving back toward, but remaining at or some-
changed from 2015 to 2017, while for the unemploy-
what above, its longer-run rate in 2017 as monetary pol-
ment rate, the dispersion was a bit narrower.
icy adjusts appropriately.
The Outlook for Inflation
In general, participants’ revisions to their forecasts for
Compared with September, the central tendencies of
real GDP growth relative to their projections for the
participants’ projections for PCE inflation under the as-
September meeting were modest. However, all partici-
sumption of appropriate monetary policy moved down
pants revised up their projections of real GDP growth
for 2014 and 2015 but were largely unchanged for 2016
somewhat for 2014, with a number of them noting that
and 2017. In commenting on the changes to their pro-
recent data releases regarding real economic activity had
jections, many participants indicated that the significant
been stronger than anticipated. The central tendencies
decline in energy prices and the appreciation of the dol-
of participants’ current projections for real GDP growth
lar since the Committee’s September meeting likely will
were 2.3 to 2.4 percent in 2014, 2.6 to 3.0 percent in
put temporary downward pressure on inflation. The
2015, 2.5 to 3.0 percent in 2016, and 2.3 to 2.5 percent
central tendencies of participants’ projections for core
in 2017. The central tendency of the projections of real
PCE inflation moved down somewhat for 2015 but were
GDP growth over the longer run was 2.0 to 2.3 percent,
mostly unchanged in other years. Almost all participants
unchanged from September.
projected that PCE inflation would rise gradually, on
All participants projected that the unemployment rate balance, over the period from 2015 to 2017, reaching a
will decline, on balance, through 2016, and all partici- level at or near the Committee’s 2 percent objective. A
few participants expected PCE inflation to rise slightly

--- Page 15 ---

_PP_aagg_ee_ _44_____________________________FF_ee_dd_ee_rr_aall_ OO__pp_ee_nn_ MM__aa_rrkk_ee_tt_ CC__oo_mm_mm__iitt_ttee_ee__________________________________
Figure2. OverviewofFOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy
Number of participants
Appropriate timing of policy firming
16
15
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
2
1
2015 2016
Percent
Appropriate pace of policy firming: Midpoint of target range or target level for the federal funds rate
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer run
Note: Intheupperpanel,theheightofeachbardenotesthenumberofFOMCparticipantswhojudgethat,under
appropriate monetary policy, the first increase in the target range for the federal funds rate from its current range of
0to1/4percentwilloccurinthespecifiedcalendaryear. InSeptember2014,thenumbersofFOMCparticipantswho
judgedthatthefirstincreaseinthetargetfederalfundsratewouldoccurin2014,2015,and2016were,respectively,1,
14, and 2. In the lower panel, each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of
an individual participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the
appropriatetargetlevelforthefederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun.

--- Page 16 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _16_–_1_7_,_ 2_0_1_4____________P_a_g_e_ _5
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2014–17andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
22
2014 20
December projections 18
16
September projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 - 2.0 - 2.2 - 2.4 - 2.6 - 2.8 - 3.0 - 3.2 -
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3
Percent range
Number of participants
22
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 - 2.0 - 2.2 - 2.4 - 2.6 - 2.8 - 3.0 - 3.2 -
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3
Percent range
Number of participants
22
2016 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 - 2.0 - 2.2 - 2.4 - 2.6 - 2.8 - 3.0 - 3.2 -
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3
Percent range
Number of participants
22
2017 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 - 2.0 - 2.2 - 2.4 - 2.6 - 2.8 - 3.0 - 3.2 -
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3
Percent range
Number of participants
22
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 - 2.0 - 2.2 - 2.4 - 2.6 - 2.8 - 3.0 - 3.2 -
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 17 ---

_PP_aagg_ee_ _66_____________________________FF_ee_dd_ee_rr_aall_ OO__pp_ee_nn_ MM__aa_rrkk_ee_tt_ CC__oo_mm_mm__iitt_ttee_ee__________________________________
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2014–17andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
22
2014 20
December projections 18
16
September projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.6 - 4.8 - 5.0 - 5.2 - 5.4 - 5.6 - 5.8 - 6.0 -
4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1
Percent range
Number of participants
22
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.6 - 4.8 - 5.0 - 5.2 - 5.4 - 5.6 - 5.8 - 6.0 -
4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1
Percent range
Number of participants
22
2016 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.6 - 4.8 - 5.0 - 5.2 - 5.4 - 5.6 - 5.8 - 6.0 -
4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1
Percent range
Number of participants
22
2017 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.6 - 4.8 - 5.0 - 5.2 - 5.4 - 5.6 - 5.8 - 6.0 -
4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1
Percent range
Number of participants
22
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.6 - 4.8 - 5.0 - 5.2 - 5.4 - 5.6 - 5.8 - 6.0 -
4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 18 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _16_–_1_7_,_ 2_0_1_4____________P_a_g_e_ _7
above 2 percent at some point during the forecast pe- all but one anticipated that inflation would be at or be-
riod, while many others expected inflation to remain be- low the Committee’s 2 percent goal at the end of that
low 2 percent for the entire period. The central tenden- year. Most participants projected that the unemploy-
cies for PCE inflation were 1.2 to 1.3 percent in 2014, ment rate would be at or somewhat above their estimates
1.0 to 1.6 percent in 2015, 1.7 to 2.0 percent in 2016, and of its longer-run normal level at that time.
1.8 to 2.0 percent in 2017. The central tendencies of the
Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’
forecasts for core inflation were higher than those for
judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target
the headline measure in 2014 and 2015, reflecting the ef-
federal funds rate, conditional on their assessments of
fects of lower oil prices. The central tendencies of the
the economic outlook, at the end of each calendar year
two measures were equal in 2016 and in 2017. Factors
from 2014 to 2017 and over the longer run. All partici-
cited by participants as likely to contribute to a gradual
pants judged that economic conditions would warrant
rise of inflation toward the Committee’s longer-run ob-
maintaining the current exceptionally low level of the
jective of 2 percent included stable longer-term inflation
federal funds rate into 2015. The median values of the
expectations, steadily diminishing resource slack, a
federal funds rate at the end of 2015 and 2016 fell
pickup in wage growth, waning effects of declines in oil
25 basis points and 38 basis points relative to September,
prices, and still-accommodative monetary policy.
to 1.13 percent and 2.50 percent, respectively, while the
Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the diver- mean values fell 15 basis points for both years, to
sity of participants’ views about the outlook for inflation. 1.13 percent in 2015 and 2.54 percent in 2016. The dis-
In addition to moving lower, the range of participants’ persion of the projections for the appropriate level of
projections for PCE inflation in 2015 widened some- the federal funds rate was narrower in 2014 and 2015
what relative to September, likely reflecting in part dif- and was little changed in 2016 and 2017. Most partici-
ferences in participants’ assessments of the effects of the pants judged that it would be appropriate to set the fed-
recent decline in energy prices on the outlook for infla- eral funds rate at or near its longer-run normal level in
tion. The ranges for core inflation narrowed in 2014 and 2017, although a number of them projected that the fed-
2015. In other years of the projection, the ranges of the eral funds rate would still need to be set appreciably be-
inflation projections were relatively little changed. The low its longer-run normal level at that time and one an-
range for both measures in 2017 continued to show a ticipated that it would be appropriate to target a level
very substantial concentration near the Committee’s noticeably above its longer-run normal level. Partici-
2 percent longer-run objective by that time. pants provided a number of reasons why they thought it
would be appropriate for the federal funds rate to remain
Appropriate Monetary Policy
below its longer-run normal level for some time after in-
Participants judged that it would be appropriate to begin
flation and the unemployment rate were near mandate-
raising the target range for the federal funds rate over
consistent levels. These reasons included an assessment
the projection period as labor market indicators and in-
that the headwinds that have been holding back the re-
flation move back toward values the Committee judges
covery will continue to exert some restraint on economic
consistent with the attainment of its mandated objec-
activity at that time, that residual slack in the labor mar-
tives of maximum employment and price stability. As
ket will still be evident in other measures of labor utili-
shown in figure 2, all but two participants anticipated
zation, and that the risks to the economic outlook are
that it would be appropriate to begin raising the target
asymmetric as a result of the constraints on monetary
range for the federal funds rate during 2015. However,
policy associated with the effective lower bound on the
most projected that the appropriate level of the federal
federal funds rate.
funds rate would remain considerably below its longer-
run normal level through 2016. Most participants ex- As in September, estimates of the longer-run level of the
pected the appropriate level of the federal funds rate federal funds rate ranged from 3.25 to 4.25 percent. All
would be near, or already would have reached, their in- participants judged that inflation over the longer run
dividual view of its longer-run normal level by the end would be equal to the Committee’s inflation objective of
of 2017. 2 percent, implying that their individual judgments re-
garding the appropriate longer-run level of the real fed-
All participants projected that the unemployment rate
eral funds rate in the absence of further shocks to the
would be at or below 5.5 percent at the end of the year
economy ranged from 1.25 to 2.25 percent.
in which they judged the initial increase in the target
range for the federal funds rate would be warranted, and

--- Page 19 ---

_PP_aagg_ee_ _88_____________________________FF_ee_dd_ee_rr_aall_ OO__pp_ee_nn_ MM__aa_rrkk_ee_tt_ CC__oo_mm_mm__iitt_ttee_ee__________________________________
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2014–17andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
22
2014 20
December projections 18
16
September projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.9 - 1.1 - 1.3 - 1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 -
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
22
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.9 - 1.1 - 1.3 - 1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 -
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
22
2016 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.9 - 1.1 - 1.3 - 1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 -
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
22
2017 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.9 - 1.1 - 1.3 - 1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 -
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
22
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.9 - 1.1 - 1.3 - 1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 -
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _16_–_1_7_,_ 2_0_1_4____________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2014–17
Number of participants
22
2014 20
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.5 - 1. 7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2. 3 -
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
22
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.5 - 1. 7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2. 3 -
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
22
2016 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.5 - 1. 7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2. 3 -
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
22
2017 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.5 - 1. 7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2. 3 -
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

_PP_aagg_ee_ _11_00____________________________FF_ee_dd_ee_rr_aall_ OO__pp_ee_nn_ MM__aa_rrkk_ee_tt_ CC__oo_mm_mm__iitt_ttee_ee__________________________________
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthetargetfederalfundsrate,2014–17andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2014 22
20
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 - 0.3 8 - 0.6 3 - 0.8 8 - 1.1 3 - 1.3 8 - 1.6 3 - 1.8 8 - 2.1 3 - 2.3 8 - 2.6 3 - 2.8 8 - 3.1 3 - 3.3 8 - 3.6 3 - 3.8 8 - 4.1 3 - 4.3 8 -
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 - 0.3 8 - 0.6 3 - 0.8 8 - 1.1 3 - 1.3 8 - 1.6 3 - 1.8 8 - 2.1 3 - 2.3 8 - 2.6 3 - 2.8 8 - 3.1 3 - 3.3 8 - 3.6 3 - 3.8 8 - 4.1 3 - 4.3 8 -
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2016 22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 - 0.3 8 - 0.6 3 - 0.8 8 - 1.1 3 - 1.3 8 - 1.6 3 - 1.8 8 - 2.1 3 - 2.3 8 - 2.6 3 - 2.8 8 - 3.1 3 - 3.3 8 - 3.6 3 - 3.8 8 - 4.1 3 - 4.3 8 -
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2017 22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 - 0.3 8 - 0.6 3 - 0.8 8 - 1.1 3 - 1.3 8 - 1.6 3 - 1.8 8 - 2.1 3 - 2.3 8 - 2.6 3 - 2.8 8 - 3.1 3 - 3.3 8 - 3.6 3 - 3.8 8 - 4.1 3 - 4.3 8 -
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 22
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 - 0.3 8 - 0.6 3 - 0.8 8 - 1.1 3 - 1.3 8 - 1.6 3 - 1.8 8 - 2.1 3 - 2.3 8 - 2.6 3 - 2.8 8 - 3.1 3 - 3.3 8 - 3.6 3 - 3.8 8 - 4.1 3 - 4.3 8 -
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Note: The target federal funds rate is measured as the level of the target rate at the end of the calendar year or
inthelongerrun.

--- Page 22 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _16_–_1_7_,_ 2_0_1_4___________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Participants’ views of the appropriate path for monetary saw the risks to those projections as broadly balanced.
policy were informed by their judgments about the state A number of participants, however, viewed the risks to
of the economy, including the values of the unemploy- their inflation forecasts as tilted to the downside; the rea-
ment rate and other labor market indicators that would sons discussed included the possibility that the recent
be consistent with maximum employment, the extent to low levels of inflation could prove more persistent than
which the economy was currently falling short of maxi- anticipated; the possibility that the upward pull on prices
mum employment, the prospects for inflation to return from inflation expectations might be weaker than as-
to the Committee’s longer-term objective of 2 percent, sumed; or the judgment that, in current circumstances,
the desire to minimize potential disruption in financial it would be difficult for the Committee to respond ef-
markets by avoiding unusually rapid increases in the fed- fectively to low-inflation outcomes. Conversely, one
eral funds rate, and the balance of risks around the out- participant saw upside risks to inflation, citing uncer-
look. Some participants also mentioned the prescrip- tainty about the timing and efficacy of the Committee’s
tions of various monetary policy rules as factors they withdrawal of monetary policy accommodation.
considered in judging the appropriate path for the fed-
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
eral funds rate.
Percentage points
Uncertainty and Risks Variable 2014 2015 2016 2017
Nearly all participants continued to judge the levels of Change in real GDP1 . . . . . ±0.9 ±1.8 ±2.1 ±2.1
uncertainty attending their projections for real GDP
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . ±0.2 ±0.8 ±1.4 ±1.8
growth and the unemployment rate as broadly similar to
Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.2 ±0.9 ±1.0 ±1.0
the norms during the previous 20 years (figure 4). Most
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the
participants continued to see the risks to their outlooks
root mean squared error of projections for 1994 through 2013 that
for real GDP growth as broadly balanced. A few partic- were released in the winter by various private and government fore-
ipants viewed the risks to real GDP growth as weighted casters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain
assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual out-
to the downside; one viewed the risks as weighted to the comes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in
upside. Those participants who viewed the risks as ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the
past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip
weighted to the downside cited, for example, concern
(2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from His-
about the limited ability of monetary policy at the effec- torical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series
tive lower bound to respond to further negative shocks 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, November), available at www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/
to the economy or about the trajectory for economic
2007/200760/200760abs.html; and Board of Governors of the Fed-
growth abroad. As in September, nearly all participants eral Reserve System, Division of Research and Statistics (2014), “Up-
judged the risks to the outlook for the unemployment dated Historical Forecast Errors,” memorandum, April 9, www.feder-
alreserve.gov/foia/files/20140409-historical-forecast-errors.pdf.
rate to be broadly balanced. 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
As in September, participants generally agreed that the that has been most widely used in government and private economic
levels of uncertainty associated with their inflation fore- forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.
casts were broadly similar to historical norms, and most
 Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for the
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con-
sumer price inflation over the period from 1994 through 2013.
At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty”
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess
the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projec-
tions.

--- Page 23 ---

_PP_aagg_ee_ _11_22____________________________FF_ee_dd_ee_rr_aall_ OO__pp_ee_nn_ MM__aa_rrkk_ee_tt_ CC__oo_mm_mm__iitt_ttee_ee__________________________________
Figure4. Uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth 22 Risks to GDP growth 22
December projections 20 December projections 20
September projections 18 September projections 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate 22 Risks to the unemployment rate 22
20 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation 22 Risks to PCE inflation 22
20 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation 22 Risks to core PCE inflation 22
20 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”Defini-
tionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 24 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _16_–_1_7_,_ 2_0_1_4___________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the current year, 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the second
members of the Board of Governors and the year, and 0.9 to 5.1 percent in the third and
presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform fourth years. The corresponding 70 percent
discussions of monetary policy among policy- confidence intervals for overall inflation would
makers and can aid public understanding of the be 1.8 to 2.2 percent in the current year, 1.1 to
basis for policy actions. Considerable uncer- 2.9 percent in the second year, and 1.0 to 3.0 per-
tainty attends these projections, however. The cent in the third and fourth years.
economic and statistical models and relation- Because current conditions may differ from
ships used to help produce economic forecasts those that prevailed, on average, over history,
are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the participants provide judgments as to whether
real world, and the future path of the economy the uncertainty attached to their projections of
can be affected by myriad unforeseen develop- each variable is greater than, smaller than, or
ments and events. Thus, in setting the stance broadly similar to typical levels of forecast un-
of monetary policy, participants consider not certainty in the past, as shown in table 2. Partic-
only what appears to be the most likely eco- ipants also provide judgments as to whether the
nomic outcome as embodied in their projec- risks to their projections are weighted to the up-
tions, but also the range of alternative possibil- side, are weighted to the downside, or are
ities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the broadly balanced. That is, participants judge
potential costs to the economy should they oc- whether each variable is more likely to be above
cur. or below their projections of the most likely out-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical come. These judgments about the uncertainty
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including and the risks attending each participant’s projec-
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports tions are distinct from the diversity of partici-
and those prepared by the Federal Reserve pants’ views about the most likely outcomes.
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Forecast uncertainty is concerned with the risks
Federal Open Market Committee. The projec- associated with a particular projection rather
tion error ranges shown in the table illustrate than with divergences across a number of differ-
the considerable uncertainty associated with ent projections.
economic forecasts. For example, suppose a As with real activity and inflation, the out-
participant projects that real gross domestic look for the future path of the federal funds rate
product (GDP) and total consumer prices will is subject to considerable uncertainty. This un-
rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, certainty arises primarily because each partici-
3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- pant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of
tending those projections is similar to that ex- monetary policy depends importantly on the
perienced in the past and the risks around the evolution of real activity and inflation over time.
projections are broadly balanced, the numbers If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected
reported in table 2 would imply a probability of manner, then assessments of the appropriate
about 70 percent that actual GDP would ex- setting of the federal funds rate would change
pand within a range of 2.1 to 3.9 percent in the from that point forward.

# Tables

## Page_3_Table_1


| “The Federal Open Market Committee                 |
|----------------------------------------------------|
| (FOMC) authorizes the Federal Reserve Bank         |
| of New York to conduct a series of overnight       |
| reverse repurchase operations involving U.S.       |
| government securities for the purpose of fur-      |
| ther assessing the appropriate structure of        |
| such operations in supporting the implemen-        |
| tation of monetary policy during normaliza-        |
| tion. The reverse repurchase operations au-        |
| thorized by this resolution shall be (i) con-      |
| ducted at an offering rate that may vary from      |
| zero to five basis points; (ii) for an overnight   |
| term or such longer term as is warranted to        |
| accommodate weekend, holiday, and similar          |
| trading conventions; (iii) subject to a per-       |
| counterparty limit of up to $30 billion per day;   |
| (iv) subject to an overall size limit of up to     |
| $300 billion per day; and (v) awarded to all       |
| submitters (A) at the specified offering rate if   |
| the sum of the bids received is less than or       |
| equal to the overall size limit, or (B) at the     |
| stop-out rate, determined by evaluating bids       |
| in ascending order by submitted rate up to the     |
| point at which the total quantity of bids equals   |
| the overall size limit, with all bids below this   |
| rate awarded in full at the stop-out rate and all  |
| bids at the stop-out rate awarded on a pro rata    |
| basis, if the sum of the counterparty offers re-   |
| ceived is greater than the overall size limit.     |
| The Chair must approve any change in the of-       |
| fering rate within the range specified in (i) and  |
| any changes to the per-counterparty and over-      |
| all size limits subject to the limits specified in |
| (iii) and (iv). The System Open Market Ac-         |
| count manager will notify the FOMC in ad-          |
| vance about any changes to the offering rate,      |
| per-counterparty limit, or overall size limit ap-  |
| plied to operations. These operations shall be     |
| authorized for one additional year beyond the      |
| previously authorized end date—that is,            |
| through January 29, 2016.”                         |


## Page_12_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |      |      |      |                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |      |      |      |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|------|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|------|
| 2014                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | 2015 | 2016 | 2017 | Longer run                                          | 2014                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | 2015 | 2016 | 2017 |
| 2.3 to 2.4 2.6 to 3.0 2.5 to 3.0 2.3 to 2.5
2.0 to 2.2 2.6 to 3.0 2.6 to 2.9 2.3 to 2.5
5.8 5.2 to 5.3 5.0 to 5.2 4.9 to 5.3
5.9 to 6.0 5.4 to 5.6 5.1 to 5.4 4.9 to 5.3
1.2 to 1.3 1.0 to 1.6 1.7 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0
1.5 to 1.7 1.6 to 1.9 1.7 to 2.0 1.9 to 2.0
1.5 to 1.6 1.5 to 1.8 1.7 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0
1.5 to 1.6 1.6 to 1.9 1.8 to 2.0 1.9 to 2.0 |      |      |      | 2.0 to 2.3
2.0 to 2.3
5.2 to 5.5
5.2 to 5.5
2.0
2.0 | 2.3 to 2.5 2.1 to 3.2 2.1 to 3.0 2.0 to 2.7
1.8 to 2.3 2.1 to 3.2 2.1 to 3.0 2.0 to 2.6
5.7 to 5.8 5.0 to 5.5 4.9 to 5.4 4.7 to 5.7
5.7 to 6.1 5.2 to 5.7 4.9 to 5.6 4.7 to 5.8
1.2 to 1.6 1.0 to 2.2 1.6 to 2.1 1.8 to 2.2
1.5 to 1.8 1.5 to 2.4 1.6 to 2.1 1.7 to 2.2
1.5 to 1.6 1.5 to 2.2 1.6 to 2.1 1.8 to 2.2
1.5 to 1.8 1.6 to 2.4 1.7 to 2.2 1.8 to 2.2 |      |      |      |