# 20121023_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:36:54*
*Pages: 10, Tables: 0*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
October 23–24, 2012
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Mone-
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the tary Affairs, Board of Governors
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on
Tuesday, October 23, 2012, at 1:00 p.m. and continued Andreas Lehnert, Deputy Director, Office of Financial
on Wednesday, October 24, 2012, at 9:00 a.m. Stability Policy and Research, Board of Governors
PRESENT: Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Ben Bernanke, Chairman Board Members, Board of Governors
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman
Elizabeth Duke Thomas Laubach, Senior Adviser, Division of Research
Jeffrey M. Lacker and Statistics, Board of Governors; Ellen E.
Dennis P. Lockhart Meade, Stephen A. Meyer, and Joyce K. Zickler,
Sandra Pianalto Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Jerome H. Powell Board of Governors
Sarah Bloom Raskin
Jeremy C. Stein Eric M. Engen, Michael T. Kiley, and Michael G. Pa-
Daniel K. Tarullo lumbo, Associate Directors, Division of Research
John C. Williams and Statistics, Board of Governors
Janet L. Yellen
Joshua Gallin, Deputy Associate Director, Division of
James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, and Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Eric Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal
Open Market Committee Marnie Gillis DeBoer, Assistant Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and
Charles I. Plosser, Presidents of the Federal Re- David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Mone-
serve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadel- tary Affairs, Board of Governors
phia, respectively
Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Economist, Division of Re-
William B. English, Secretary and Economist search and Statistics, Board of Governors
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary Helen E. Holcomb, First Vice President, Federal Re-
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary serve Bank of Dallas
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Jeff Fuhrer and Loretta J. Mester, Executive Vice Pres-
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel idents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and Phil-
Steven B. Kamin, Economist adelphia, respectively
David W. Wilcox, Economist
Troy Davig, Spencer Krane, and Kevin Stiroh, Senior
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas
William Nelson, David Reifschneider, Mark S. Sni- City, Chicago, and New York, respectively
derman, and William Wascher, Associate Econo-
mists William Gavin, Evan F. Koenig, Lorie K. Logan, and
Paolo A. Pesenti, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Banks of St. Louis, Dallas, New York, and New
York, respectively
Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking Su-
pervision and Regulation, Board of Governors

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Thomas D. Tallarini, Jr., Assistant Vice President, Fed- range of information. Some other participants worried
eral Reserve Bank of Minneapolis that the public might mistakenly interpret quantitative
thresholds as equivalent to the Committee’s longer-run
Andreas L. Hornstein, Senior Advisor, Federal Reserve objectives or as triggers that, when reached, would
Bank of Richmond prompt an immediate rate increase; but it was noted
that the Chairman’s postmeeting press conference and
Eric T. Swanson, Senior Research Advisor, Federal other venues could be used to explain the distinction
Reserve Bank of San Francisco between thresholds and these other concepts.
Participants generally agreed that the Committee would
need to resolve a number of practical issues before de-
Thresholds and Forward Guidance
ciding whether to adopt quantitative thresholds to
A staff presentation focused on the potential effects of
communicate its thinking about the timing of the initial
using specific threshold values of inflation and the un-
increase in the federal funds rate. These issues in-
employment rate to provide forward guidance regard-
cluded whether to specify such thresholds in terms of
ing the timing of the initial increase in the federal funds
realized or projected values of inflation and the unem-
rate. The presentation reviewed simulations from a
ployment rate and, in either case, what values for those
staff macroeconomic model to illustrate the implica-
thresholds would best balance the Committee’s objec-
tions for policy and the economy of announcing vari-
tives of promoting maximum employment and price
ous threshold values that would need to be attained
stability. Another open question was whether to sup-
before the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)
plement thresholds expressed in terms of the unem-
would consider increasing its target for the federal
ployment rate and inflation with additional indicators
funds rate. Meeting participants discussed whether
of economic and financial conditions that might signal
such thresholds might usefully replace or perhaps aug-
a need either to raise the federal funds rate before a
ment the date-based guidance that had been provided
threshold is crossed or to delay until well afterward. A
in the policy statements since August 2011. Partici-
final question was whether the statement should also
pants generally favored the use of economic variables,
provide forward guidance about the likely path of the
in place of or in conjunction with a calendar date, in
federal funds rate after the initial increase. It was noted
the Committee’s forward guidance, but they offered
that such guidance could have significant effects on
different views on whether quantitative or qualitative
financial conditions and the economy. At the conclu-
thresholds would be most effective. Many participants
sion of the discussion, the Chairman asked the staff to
were of the view that adopting quantitative thresholds
provide additional background material, taking into
could, under the right conditions, help the Committee
account the range of participants’ views.
more clearly communicate its thinking about how the
likely timing of an eventual increase in the federal funds Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
rate would shift in response to unanticipated changes in eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
economic conditions and the outlook. Accordingly, The Manager of the System Open Market Account
thresholds could increase the probability that market (SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and
reactions to economic developments would move foreign financial markets during the period since the
longer-term interest rates in a manner consistent with FOMC met on September 12–13, 2012. The Manager
the Committee’s view regarding the likely future path also reported on System open market operations over
of short-term rates. A number of other participants the intermeeting period, focusing on the ongoing rein-
judged that communicating a careful qualitative de- vestment into agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed se-
scription of the indicators influencing the Committee’s curities (MBS) of principal payments received on
thinking about current and future monetary policy, or SOMA holdings of agency debt and agency-guaranteed
providing more information about the Committee’s MBS and the purchases of MBS authorized at the Sep-
policy reaction function, would be more informative tember FOMC meeting. By unanimous vote, the
than either quantitative thresholds or date-based for- Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions
ward guidance. Several participants were concerned over the intermeeting period. There were no interven-
that quantitative thresholds could confuse the public by tion operations in foreign currencies for the System’s
giving the impression that the FOMC focuses on a account over the intermeeting period.
small number of economic variables in setting mone-
tary policy, when the Committee in fact uses a wide

--- Page 3 ---

____________________________M__in__ut_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ O__c_to_b_e_r_ 2_3_–_2_4_, _2_0_1_2_______________________P_a_g_e_ _3
Staff Review of the Economic Situation to expand, on balance, in recent months, but new
The information reviewed at the October 23–24 meet- home sales were flat.
ing suggested that economic activity continued to in-
Real business expenditures on equipment and software
crease at a moderate pace in recent months. The un-
appeared to edge down in the third quarter. Nominal
employment rate declined but was still elevated. Con-
shipments for nondefense capital goods excluding air-
sumer price inflation picked up, reflecting higher con-
craft continued to decrease in August; the backlog of
sumer energy costs, but longer-run inflation expecta-
unfilled orders for these capital goods also declined.
tions remained stable.
Other forward-looking indicators, such as subdued
Private nonfarm employment expanded modestly in readings from surveys of business conditions and capi-
September, and government employment increased. tal spending plans, also pointed toward roughly flat real
The unemployment rate fell to 7.8 percent, and the expenditures for business equipment in the near term.
labor force participation rate rose slightly. The share of Nominal business spending for new nonresidential
workers employed part time for economic reasons in- construction decreased further in August. Meanwhile,
creased somewhat and continued to be elevated, while inventories in most industries were about in line with
the rate of long-duration unemployment edged down sales. In the farm sector, however, drought conditions
further but remained high. Other indicators of labor likely reduced inventory accumulation last quarter and
market conditions, such as surveys of firms’ job open- subtracted from overall economic growth.
ings and hiring plans and initial claims for unemploy-
Real federal government purchases appeared to edge
ment insurance, did not show decided improvement
up in the third quarter, as data for nominal federal
over the intermeeting period.
spending in August and September pointed to a slight
Manufacturing production declined in the third quarter, increase in real defense expenditures. Real state and
and the rate of manufacturing capacity utilization edged local government purchases likely moved essentially
down. Automakers’ schedules pointed to a similar rate sideways in the third quarter. State and local govern-
of motor vehicle assemblies in the fourth quarter as in ment payrolls expanded, but nominal construction
the third quarter. Broader indicators of factory produc- spending continued to decline in recent months.
tion, such as the diffusion indexes of new orders from
The U.S. international trade deficit widened in August,
the national and regional manufacturing surveys, re-
as imports fell less than exports. Imports edged down,
mained subdued in recent months at levels consistent
on net, with higher purchases of services and petro-
with only tepid increases in manufacturing output in
leum products more than offset by declines in all of the
the near term.
other major categories. Across export categories, ex-
Real personal consumption expenditures rose at a solid ports of industrial supplies posted a particularly large
pace in August. In September, nominal retail sales, decline, as the volume of petroleum product exports
excluding purchases at motor vehicle and parts outlets, dropped sharply.
increased considerably. Light motor vehicle sales also
Consumer prices picked up in August and September,
expanded. Recent data on factors that tend to support
primarily reflecting sharp increases in retail gasoline
household spending were mixed. Real disposable in-
prices. However, survey data indicated that retail gaso-
come declined in August, largely reflecting the effect of
line prices were about flat in early October. Consumer
higher consumer energy prices. In contrast, consumer
food prices rose modestly in recent months. The
sentiment rose in September and early October, and
somewhat better-than-expected crop harvest caused
continued modest increases in house prices added to
spot and futures prices of farm commodities to retrace
households’ net worth.
some of their rise during the summer; however, farm
Housing market conditions improved more generally in commodity prices remained elevated and continued to
recent months. Starts and permits of both new single- point toward some temporary upward pressures on
family homes and multifamily units picked up in Au- retail food prices later this year. Increases in consumer
gust and September. However, construction activity prices excluding food and energy were subdued in Au-
remained at a relatively low level, reflecting the restraint gust and September. Near-term inflation expectations
imposed by tight credit standards for mortgage borrow- from the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan
ing and by the large inventory of foreclosed and dis- Surveys of Consumers declined in September and early
tressed properties. Sales of existing homes continued October, while longer-term inflation expectations in

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
the survey moved down to near the lower end of the Indicators of the condition of domestic financial insti-
narrow range where they have remained for some time. tutions were mixed over the intermeeting period. In-
dexes of equity prices for those institutions were mod-
Available measures of labor compensation indicated
estly lower. But spreads on credit default swaps for
that increases in nominal wages stayed relatively mod-
large financial institutions declined in recent months,
est. The gains in average hourly earnings for all em-
and third-quarter earnings of large bank holding com-
ployees in the third quarter were subdued.
panies that had reported by the time of the FOMC
Foreign economic growth remained sluggish, restrained meeting were generally in line with expectations.
by weak activity in Europe and the associated spillov-
Conditions in unsecured dollar funding markets ap-
ers—including through trade—to the rest of the world.
peared to improve some. In secured funding markets,
Euro-area production indicators signaled continued
rates on repurchase agreements spiked around quarter-
contraction, and the area’s unemployment rate in Au-
end but subsequently more than retraced that move,
gust stayed at a historical high. In Japan, exports and
ending the intermeeting period down slightly.
output declined in the summer months, and growth of
real gross domestic product (GDP) for the first half of Broad equity price indexes were a little lower, on bal-
the year was revised down significantly. Data for ex- ance, as gains following the September FOMC meeting
ports from emerging market economies, especially in and generally better-than-expected economic data re-
Asia, showed a drop, although recently released data leases were more than offset by concerns about corpo-
for China indicated a pickup in economic activity in the rate profitability. Option-implied volatility for the S&P
third quarter. Foreign inflation rose slightly in some 500 index fell noticeably following the September
emerging market economies in response to higher food FOMC meeting but increased, on net, over the inter-
prices but was still generally well contained. Monetary meeting period.
policy remained accommodative in most advanced and
Yields on investment-grade corporate bonds reached a
emerging market economies.
record low level, and their spreads to yields on compa-
Staff Review of the Financial Situation rable-maturity Treasury securities narrowed on net.
Market participants reportedly read the September Yields and spreads on speculative-grade corporate
FOMC statement as pointing to a significant increase in bonds also decreased.
monetary policy accommodation. As a result, financial
The pace of investment- and speculative-grade bond
conditions generally eased appreciably early in the in-
issuance by nonfinancial firms picked up significantly in
termeeting period. However, toward the end of the
September from the already robust pace in previous
period investor sentiment deteriorated somewhat, in
months. In the syndicated leveraged loan market, is-
part because of concerns about corporate profitability.
suance through the first three quarters of 2012 lagged
Short- and medium-term nominal Treasury yields that of the same period in 2011 but nonetheless re-
ended the intermeeting period up slightly, and long- mained solid. The pace of gross public equity issuance
term yields were about unchanged on net. At the same by nonfinancial firms moved up some in September
time, real yields on Treasury inflation-protected securi- from the subdued levels observed in prior months, but
ties (TIPS) decreased somewhat, leaving inflation com- overall issuance in the third quarter stayed low com-
pensation higher. In part, the rise in inflation compen- pared with the first half of 2012.
sation may have reflected upward pressure on nominal
Financial conditions in the commercial real estate sec-
Treasury yields associated with some unwinding of
tor remained weak amid elevated vacancy and delin-
safe-haven demands.
quency rates. However, some indicators pointed to
The expected path of the federal funds rate based on modest improvement in this sector, and issuance of
money market futures was little changed between the commercial mortgage-backed securities was solid in the
September and October FOMC meetings. Market- third quarter.
based measures of uncertainty about the path of the
Residential mortgage rates declined over the intermeet-
federal funds rate over medium-to-long horizons de-
ing period. The decline in mortgage rates reflected a
clined over the period. The survey of primary dealers
sizable drop in MBS yields following the September
conducted prior to the October meeting showed that
FOMC statement. Refinancing activity increased fur-
the expected size of the SOMA at the end of 2013 had
ther in September and early October. House prices
risen significantly.
continued to rise, and some indicators of credit quality

--- Page 5 ---

____________________________M__in__ut_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ O__c_to_b_e_r_ 2_3_–_2_4_, _2_0_1_2_______________________P_a_g_e_ _5
on residential real estate loans improved. The fraction Staff Economic Outlook
of seriously delinquent existing mortgages remained In the economic forecast prepared by the staff for the
elevated, but the rate at which mortgages entered de- October FOMC meeting, real GDP growth in the near
linquency continued to trend down in July. term was revised up relative to the previous projection.
The upward revision to the near-term forecast primarily
Consumer credit expanded briskly in August. Nonre-
reflected better-than-expected incoming information
volving credit continued to increase at a robust pace,
for consumer spending, residential construction, and
mainly reflecting growth in student and auto loans.
labor market conditions that more than offset the re-
Revolving credit also rose in August but was little
cent data for business fixed investment and industrial
changed, on balance, over the past few months. Delin-
production that were weaker than anticipated. The
quency rates for consumer credit remained low, and
staff’s medium-term projection for real GDP growth
issuance of consumer asset-backed securities was
also was revised up, mostly reflecting the monetary
strong in the third quarter, close to the pace seen earlier
policy actions announced by the FOMC after the Sep-
this year.
tember meeting and the resulting improved outlook for
Bank credit continued to expand at a moderate rate in financial conditions. Nonetheless, with fiscal policy
the third quarter, with further growth in loans aug- assumed to be tighter next year than this year, the staff
mented by larger gains in securities holdings. Results anticipated that real GDP growth would not materially
from the October Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey exceed increases in potential output in 2013. In 2014,
on Bank Lending Practices indicated that modest frac- economic activity was projected to accelerate gradually,
tions of domestic banks, on net, continued to report supported by a lessening in fiscal policy restraint, gains
having eased their lending standards on some catego- in consumer and business confidence, further im-
ries of business and household loans. In addition, for provements in financial conditions and credit availabili-
the second straight quarter, reports of stronger demand ty, and accommodative monetary policy. Progress in
were relatively widespread for many types of loans. reducing unemployment over the projection period was
expected to be relatively slow.
M2 growth picked up somewhat in September, as
strong growth in liquid deposits and currency offset The staff’s near-term forecast for inflation was little
ongoing declines in small time deposits and retail mon- changed, on balance, from the projection prepared for
ey market funds. the September FOMC meeting, notwithstanding recent
increases in consumer energy prices. The staff’s pro-
The staff’s broad nominal index of the foreign ex-
jection for inflation over the medium term was also
change value of the dollar was little changed, on net,
essentially unchanged. Crude oil prices were antic-
over the intermeeting period. The dollar rose against
ipated to decline slowly from their current levels, the
the currencies of most advanced economies but de-
boost to retail food prices from the drought was ex-
clined against the euro and most Asian emerging mar-
pected to be only temporary and relatively small, long-
ket currencies. Of note, the Chinese renminbi appre-
run inflation expectations were assumed to remain sta-
ciated further against the dollar. A number of central
ble, and significant resource slack was projected to
banks eased monetary policy during the period, includ-
persist over the projection period. As a result, the staff
ing those of Australia, Brazil, Japan, Korea, and Thai-
continued to forecast that inflation would be subdued
land. Foreign equity indexes, which generally rose fol-
through 2014.
lowing the September FOMC statement, ended the
intermeeting period higher in most markets, although Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
stock prices in the euro area were down on net. Ten- Economic Outlook
year sovereign yields in Germany and the United King- In their discussion of the economic situation and the
dom moved down just a few basis points. After declin- outlook, meeting participants viewed the information
ing significantly between late July and early September, received since the Committee met in September as in-
the yield spread of 10-year sovereign debt in Italy over dicating that economic activity continued to expand at
comparable German bunds declined only slightly fur- a moderate pace. Employment was still rising slowly,
ther over the intermeeting period, and the Spanish sov- and the unemployment rate remained elevated.
ereign spread edged up. Household spending advanced more quickly in recent
months than during the spring, and housing activity
showed further signs of improvement. However, busi-
ness fixed investment slowed noticeably. Inflation re-

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
cently picked up somewhat, reflecting higher energy in house prices, sales, and construction in many areas.
prices, while longer-run inflation expectations remained Most saw the low levels of mortgage interest rates as an
stable. important factor contributing to increased housing de-
mand. Although the recovery in the housing sector
Participants generally saw the economic outlook as lit-
appeared to be taking hold, several participants cited
tle changed, on balance, from their projections pre-
obstacles to more rapid improvement. For example,
pared for the September Summary of Economic Pro-
several participants reported that lenders’ capacity for
jections (SEP), agreeing that the pace of the economic
processing home-purchase mortgages was tight and
recovery was likely to stay moderate over coming quar-
backlogs were long, in part due to the current heavy
ters. The recent news on household spending, con-
pace of refinancings. These participants also noted that
sumer sentiment, and the housing market was encour-
underwriting standards remained quite tight, particular-
aging, and most participants expected that highly ac-
ly for borrowers with lower credit quality.
commodative monetary policy would provide support
for the recovery in the period ahead. However, many In contrast to the more favorable news on consumer
participants saw the uncertainty attending the unre- spending and housing, contacts generally reported
solved U.S. fiscal situation and the ongoing fiscal and slower activity in the business sector. Some partici-
financial strains in the euro area as factors likely to re- pants expressed concern about weaker manufacturing
strain the pace of economic growth in coming months. output and new orders in recent months, particularly in
Moreover, many participants cited significant downside capital goods industries, although several pointed out
risks to the outlook that might arise from more wide- that manufacturers’ expectations for future orders and
spread weakness in global economic activity or an in- production were more positive. A few participants
tensification of strains in global financial markets. Re- noted that shipping activity was down, and one partici-
garding inflation, the recent run-up in consumer energy pant added that energy production had decelerated. In
prices was expected to subside over the next few contrast, a few participants had received reports of a
months, while the effects of the drought were likely to pickup in nonresidential construction, and one indi-
show through to retail food prices. Over the medium cated that high-tech firms were expecting gains in busi-
term, most participants anticipated that inflation would ness going forward. In many instances, participants’
run at or below the Committee’s 2 percent objective. business contacts stated that they were delaying or cut-
ting back on hiring and capital spending because of the
Concerning developments in the household sector,
uncertain outlook for government spending, taxes, or
participants observed that the recent news on consum-
regulatory policies. One participant, however, reported
er spending and confidence had been positive, with
that contacts said that insufficient demand remained
surveys reporting that households had become noticea-
their principal concern. Several participants mentioned
bly more optimistic about the outlook for unemploy-
that the cautious posture of businesses was apparent in
ment and income. Sales of motor vehicles remained an
national and regional surveys of plans of both large and
area of strength, in part due to favorable credit condi-
small firms. Some participants noted that the outlook
tions. The increase in consumer spending appeared to
for business spending would likely be difficult to assess
be relatively broadly based across the country, although
until the direction of U.S. fiscal policy becomes clearer.
retailers in a few areas reported that they had seen
A few suggested the possibility that a near-term resolu-
slower sales recently and expressed concerns about the
tion of the fiscal situation might lead to a significant
near-term outlook. Among the factors mentioned that
increase in spending as projects now being deferred
might support consumer confidence and a continuation
were undertaken; another worried that the uncertainty
of the somewhat stronger pace of spending were an
attending the outlook for fiscal policy might weigh on
expected decline in retail energy prices and continued
business planning for some time. In addition to the
gradual improvement in labor market conditions. In
uncertainty about the fiscal outlook, manufacturing
addition, lower mortgage rates had spurred a rise in
contacts attributed the weakness in orders and produc-
refinancing activity, which, along with the increases in
tion to softer export demand; one participant added
household wealth attributable to higher home values
that agricultural exports had also softened. Several par-
and equity prices, would provide support for consumer
ticipants noted that their contacts were concerned not
spending going forward.
only about the economic slowdown in Europe, but also
Participants generally agreed that a recovery in housing about whether the recent slowing in economic activity
activity now appeared to be under way, citing increases in Asia might persist.

--- Page 7 ---

____________________________M__in__ut_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ O__c_to_b_e_r_ 2_3_–_2_4_, _2_0_1_2_______________________P_a_g_e_ _7
In their comments on labor market developments, par- the situation in the euro area and uncertain U.S. fiscal
ticipants generally viewed the recent decline in the un- prospects, but a couple noted that measures of financial
employment rate and continued modest gains in payroll market uncertainty were still relatively low. Several
employment, taken together, as consistent with a grad- participants pointed out that recent policy announce-
ually improving job market. However, with economic ments by the European Central Bank were received
growth anticipated to stay moderate, some participants favorably in markets. A number of participants men-
expressed concern that the pace of job creation would tioned other signs of greater optimism in financial mar-
generate only a slow decline in joblessness. Several kets, including a rise in merger and acquisition activity
pointed to a steep drop in the index of hiring plans by and a moderation in pressures on large U.S. financial
small businesses. A couple of participants mentioned institutions. A few participants observed that low in-
that some firms planned to increase their use of part- terest rates had increased demand for riskier financial
time or temporary workers rather than full-time per- products, and a couple of participants saw a risk that
manent employees, at least partly in order to limit holding interest rates low for a prolonged period could
health insurance costs. lead to financial imbalances and imprudent risk-taking.
One participant, however, commented that risk aver-
Participants saw recent price developments as consis-
sion still seemed quite high, citing the very low yields
tent with inflation remaining at or below the Commit-
on longer-term TIPS and a large estimated risk pre-
tee’s 2 percent objective over the medium run. Al-
mium in equity markets.
though energy prices had risen sharply in recent
months, reflecting earlier increases in crude oil costs Participants also discussed the efficacy and potential
and supply disruptions, gasoline prices were anticipated costs of the Committee’s asset purchases. A number of
to move back down in coming months as those pres- participants offered the assessment that the Commit-
sures eased. Similarly, effects of the drought were ex- tee’s policy actions, to date, had been effective in mak-
pected to show through to retail food prices over the ing financial conditions more accommodative and that
next few quarters but then subside. By various esti- lower interest rates were providing support to aggregate
mates, underlying inflation trends remained subdued, spending, most notably in areas such as housing, autos,
and indicators of longer-term inflation expectations and other consumer durables. In particular, some
were generally viewed as stable. pointed out that the favorable developments in mort-
gage markets over the intermeeting period suggested
In their discussion of financial developments over the
that the MBS purchases were likely to reinforce the
intermeeting period, participants commented on the
nascent recovery in the housing market. Several added
effects of the policy actions taken at the September
that, based on the experience with earlier asset pur-
meeting to strengthen the Committee’s forward guid-
chases, the broader effects on economic activity from
ance and to purchase additional MBS. The initial ef-
more-accommodative financial conditions were likely
fects were generally viewed as consistent with a marked
to accrue over time. Looking ahead, a number of par-
easing in financial conditions. For example, yields on
ticipants indicated that additional asset purchases
MBS dropped noticeably, leading to a decline in mort-
would likely be appropriate next year after the conclu-
gage interest rates, and corporate bond yields generally
sion of the maturity extension program in order to
moved lower. Yields on nominal Treasury securities
achieve a substantial improvement in the labor market.
were little changed. Some participants suggested that
In that regard, a couple of participants noted the likely
more time would be required to assess the ultimate ef-
usefulness of clarifying the range of indicators that
fects of the additional MBS purchases on primary
would be evaluated in assessing the outlook for the
mortgage rates and on financial conditions more broad-
labor market. Participants generally agreed that in de-
ly. The stability in nominal Treasury yields, paired with
termining the appropriate size, pace, and composition
a decline in TIPS yields, implied a modest increase in
of further purchases, they would need to carefully as-
inflation compensation, on net, over the intermeeting
sess the efficacy of asset purchases in fostering stronger
period. A couple of participants saw this increase as a
economic activity and consider the potential risks and
sign that the open-ended asset purchases posed a risk
costs of such purchases. Several participants ques-
to the stability of longer-term inflation expectations.
tioned the effectiveness of the current purchases or
However, others saw the effect on expected inflation as
whether a continuation of them would be warranted if
relatively muted or likely the result of reduced risks of
the recent moderate pace of economic recovery were
undesirably low inflation. Participants remained con-
sustained. In addition, several participants expressed
cerned about risks to financial markets associated with

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
concerns that sizable asset purchases might eventually the calendar-date-based forward guidance for the fed-
have adverse consequences for the functioning of asset eral funds rate. With respect to the statement to be
markets or that they might complicate the Committee’s released following the meeting, members made only
ability to remove policy accommodation at the appro- relatively small modifications to update the description
priate time and normalize the size and composition of of recent developments in consumer and business
the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. A couple of par- spending and in inflation. With the economic outlook
ticipants noted that an extended period of policy ac- little changed, they agreed that the remainder of the
commodation posed an upside risk to inflation. statement would reiterate the policy actions and inten-
tions adopted at the September meeting.
Committee Policy Action
Members viewed the information on U.S. economic At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
activity received over the intermeeting period as sug- voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
gesting that the economy was, on balance, expanding of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
moderately, with a pickup in household spending and ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance
further improvement in housing markets offset to with the following domestic policy directive:
some extent by a slowdown in the business sector.
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
Although the unemployment rate declined in recent
monetary and financial conditions that will fos-
months, monthly gains in nonfarm payroll jobs re-
ter price stability and promote sustainable
mained modest, and many members noted that, with-
growth in output. To further its long-run ob-
out sufficient policy accommodation, economic growth
jectives, the Committee seeks conditions in re-
might not be strong enough to generate sustained im-
serve markets consistent with federal funds
provement in the labor market. Inflation rose recently
trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The
because of a temporary run-up in energy prices. How-
Committee directs the Desk to continue the
ever, longer-term inflation expectations were stable,
maturity extension program it announced in
and over the medium run, inflation was anticipated to
June to purchase Treasury securities with re-
run at or below the Committee’s 2 percent objective.
maining maturities of 6 years to 30 years with a
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period total face value of about $267 billion by the
ahead, Committee members generally agreed that their end of December 2012, and to sell or redeem
overall assessments of the economic outlook were little Treasury securities with remaining maturities
changed since their previous meeting. Accordingly, all of approximately 3 years or less with a total
but one member judged that maintaining the current, face value of about $267 billion. For the dura-
highly accommodative stance of monetary policy was tion of this program, the Committee directs
warranted in order to foster a stronger economic re- the Desk to suspend its policy of rolling over
covery in a context of price stability. The Committee maturing Treasury securities into new issues.
judged that continuing both the purchases of MBS at a The Committee directs the Desk to maintain
pace of $40 billion per month and the existing program its existing policy of reinvesting principal pay-
to extend the average maturity of its Treasury securities ments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-
holdings remained appropriate. The Committee also backed securities in the System Open Market
agreed to maintain its policy of reinvesting principal Account in agency mortgage-backed securities.
payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency The Desk is also directed to continue purchas-
MBS into agency MBS. One member opposed further ing agency mortgage-backed securities at a
asset purchases because he viewed them as unlikely to pace of about $40 billion per month. The
help the Committee achieve its goals and because he Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar
thought that purchases of MBS represented inappro- roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary
priate credit allocation. Many members saw the ad- to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s
justments in the Committee’s forward guidance at the agency MBS transactions. The System Open
September meeting as having been effective in com- Market Account Manager and the Secretary
municating its intention to maintain a highly accom- will keep the Committee informed of ongoing
modative stance of monetary policy for a considerable developments regarding the System’s balance
time after the economic recovery strengthens and sheet that could affect the attainment over
judged that the guidance remained appropriate at this time of the Committee’s objectives of maxi-
meeting. However, one member continued to object to mum employment and price stability.”

--- Page 9 ---

____________________________M__in__ut_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ O__c_to_b_e_r_ 2_3_–_2_4_, _2_0_1_2_______________________P_a_g_e_ _9
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be- The Committee will closely monitor incoming
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: information on economic and financial devel-
opments in coming months. If the outlook for
“Information received since the Federal Open
the labor market does not improve substantial-
Market Committee met in September suggests
ly, the Committee will continue its purchases
that economic activity has continued to expand
of agency mortgage-backed securities, under-
at a moderate pace in recent months. Growth
take additional asset purchases, and employ its
in employment has been slow, and the unem-
other policy tools as appropriate until such im-
ployment rate remains elevated. Household
provement is achieved in a context of price
spending has advanced a bit more quickly, but
stability. In determining the size, pace, and
growth in business fixed investment has
composition of its asset purchases, the Com-
slowed. The housing sector has shown some
mittee will, as always, take appropriate account
further signs of improvement, albeit from a
of the likely efficacy and costs of such pur-
depressed level. Inflation recently picked up
chases.
somewhat, reflecting higher energy prices.
Longer-term inflation expectations have re- To support continued progress toward maxi-
mained stable. mum employment and price stability, the
Committee expects that a highly accommoda-
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
tive stance of monetary policy will remain ap-
Committee seeks to foster maximum employ-
propriate for a considerable time after the eco-
ment and price stability. The Committee re-
nomic recovery strengthens. In particular, the
mains concerned that, without sufficient policy
Committee also decided today to keep the tar-
accommodation, economic growth might not
get range for the federal funds rate at 0 to
be strong enough to generate sustained im-
¼ percent and currently anticipates that excep-
provement in labor market conditions. Fur-
tionally low levels for the federal funds rate are
thermore, strains in global financial markets
likely to be warranted at least through mid-
continue to pose significant downside risks to
2015.”
the economic outlook. The Committee also
anticipates that inflation over the medium term Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C.
likely would run at or below its 2 percent ob- Dudley, Elizabeth Duke, Dennis P. Lockhart, Sandra
jective. Pianalto, Jerome H. Powell, Sarah Bloom Raskin, Jere-
my C. Stein, Daniel K. Tarullo, John C. Williams, and
To support a stronger economic recovery and
Janet L. Yellen.
to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at
the rate most consistent with its dual mandate, Voting against this action: Jeffrey M. Lacker.
the Committee will continue purchasing addi-
Mr. Lacker dissented for the same reasons he had cited
tional agency mortgage-backed securities at a
at the September FOMC meeting, including his view of
pace of $40 billion per month. The Commit-
the likely ineffectiveness of asset purchases and their
tee also will continue through the end of the
potential inflationary effects, as well as the inappro-
year its program to extend the average maturity
priateness of credit allocation inherent in purchasing
of its holdings of Treasury securities, and it is
MBS. He also continued to disagree with the descrip-
maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting
tion of the time period over which a highly accommo-
principal payments from its holdings of agency
dative stance of monetary policy would remain appro-
debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in
priate and exceptionally low levels for the federal funds
agency mortgage-backed securities. These ac-
rate were likely to be warranted.
tions, which together will increase the Com-
mittee’s holdings of longer-term securities by Discussion of Communications regarding Eco-
about $85 billion each month through the end nomic Projections
of the year, should put downward pressure on A staff presentation reviewed the results of the consen-
longer-term interest rates, support mortgage sus forecast experiments that the Committee con-
markets, and help to make broader financial ducted in conjunction with its August and September
conditions more accommodative. meetings. The briefing highlighted the important role
of the assumed path for monetary policy in construct-

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
ing a consensus forecast and reviewed several alterna- the subcommittee on communications to explore po-
tive approaches for setting such a path. As a possible tential approaches to providing more information
alternative to a consensus forecast, the staff presenta- about the Committee’s collective judgment regarding
tion also discussed potential enhancements to the SEP. the economic outlook and appropriate monetary policy
In their discussion, participants agreed that FOMC through the SEP.
communications could be enhanced by clarifying the
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
linkage between participants’ economic forecasts, in-
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, December 11–
cluding the underlying policy assumptions, and the
12, 2012. The meeting adjourned at 12:50 p.m. on Oc-
Committee’s policy decision as expressed in the post-
tober 24, 2012.
meeting statement. However, most participants judged
that, given the diversity of their views about the econ- Notation Vote
omy’s structure and dynamics, it would be difficult for By notation vote completed on October 3, 2012, the
the Committee to agree on a fully specified longer-term Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
path for monetary policy to incorporate into a quantita- FOMC meeting held on September 12–13, 2012.
tive consensus forecast in a timely manner, especially
under present conditions in which the policy decision
comprises several elements. Participants agreed to con-
tinue to explore ways to increase transparency and clar-
_____________________________
ity in the Committee’s policy communications, and they
William B. English
indicated a willingness to look into modifications to the
Secretary
SEP. At the end of the discussion, the Chairman asked