# 20120313_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:36:40*
*Pages: 9, Tables: 2*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
March 13, 2012
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Policy and Research, Board of Governors
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues-
day, March 13, 2012, at 8:30 a.m. Jon W. Faust and Andrew T. Levin, Special Advi-
sors to the Board, Office of Board Members,
PRESENT: Board of Governors
Ben Bernanke, Chairman
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of
Elizabeth Duke Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Jeffrey M. Lacker
Dennis P. Lockhart Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Sandra Pianalto Board Members, Board of Governors
Sarah Bloom Raskin
Daniel K. Tarullo Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Director, Divi-
John C. Williams sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Janet L. Yellen
Thomas Laubach, Senior Adviser, Division of Re-
James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Charles L. search and Statistics, Board of Governors; El-
Evans, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, len E. Meade, Stephen A. Meyer, and Joyce K.
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Mar- Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary
ket Committee Affairs, Board of Governors
Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Eric M. Engen, Michael T. Kiley, and Michael G.
Charles I. Plosser, Presidents of the Federal Palumbo, Associate Directors, Division of Re-
Reserve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and search and Statistics, Board of Governors
Philadelphia, respectively
Edward Nelson, Section Chief, Division of Mone-
William B. English, Secretary and Economist tary Affairs, Board of Governors
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary Harvey Rosenblum and Daniel G. Sullivan, Execu-
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary tive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Dallas and Chicago, respectively
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Craig S. Hakkio, Geoffrey Tootell, and Kei-Mu Yi,
Steven B. Kamin, Economist Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
David W. Wilcox, Economist of Kansas City, Boston, and Minneapolis, re-
spectively
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Michael P.
Leahy, David Reifschneider, Glenn D. Rude- Michael Dotsey, Joseph G. Haubrich, Lorie K. Lo-
busch, William Wascher, and John A. Wein- gan, and David C. Wheelock, Vice Presidents,
berg, Associate Economists Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Cleve-
land, New York, and St. Louis, respectively
Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Ac-
count Marc Giannoni, Senior Economist, Federal Re-
serve Bank of New York
Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking
Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover-
nors

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed- levels suggesting moderate increases in factory produc-
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet tion in the coming months.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account
Households’ real disposable income increased, on bal-
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and
ance, in December and January as labor earnings rose
foreign financial markets during the period since the
solidly. Moreover, households’ net worth grew in the
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) met on Jan-
fourth quarter of last year and likely was boosted fur-
uary 24–25, 2012. He also reported on System open
ther by gains in equity values thus far this year. Never-
market operations, including the ongoing reinvestment
theless, real personal consumption expenditures (PCE)
into agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities
were reported to have been flat in December and Janu-
(MBS) of principal payments received on SOMA hold-
ary. Although households’ purchases of motor vehicles
ings of agency debt and agency-guaranteed MBS as well
rose briskly, spending for other consumer goods and
as the operations related to the maturity extension pro-
services was weak. In February, nominal retail sales
gram authorized at the September 20–21, 2011, FOMC
excluding purchases at motor vehicle and parts outlets
meeting. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified
increased moderately, while motor vehicle sales contin-
the Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeeting
ued to climb. Consumer sentiment was little changed
period. There were no intervention operations in for-
in February, and households remained downbeat about
eign currencies for the System’s account over the in-
both the economic outlook and their own income and
termeeting period.
finances.
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
Housing market activity improved somewhat in recent
The information reviewed at the March 13 meeting
months but continued to be restrained by the substan-
suggested that economic activity was expanding mod-
tial inventory of foreclosed and distressed properties,
erately. Labor market conditions continued to improve
tight credit conditions for mortgage loans, and uncer-
and the unemployment rate declined further, although
tainty about the economic outlook and future home
it remained elevated. Overall consumer price inflation
prices. After increasing in December, starts of new
was relatively subdued in recent months. More recent-
single-family homes remained at that higher level in
ly, prices of crude oil and gasoline increased substan-
January, likely boosted in part by unseasonably warm
tially. Measures of long-run inflation expectations re-
weather; in both months, starts ran above permit is-
mained stable.
suance. Sales of new and existing homes stepped up
Private nonfarm employment rose at an appreciably further in recent months, though they still remained at
faster average pace in January and February than in the quite low levels. Home prices were flat, on balance, in
fourth quarter of last year, and declines in total gov- December and January.
ernment employment slowed in recent months. The
Real business expenditures on equipment and software
unemployment rate decreased to 8.3 percent in January
rose at a notably slower pace in the fourth quarter of
and stayed at that level in February. Both the rate of
last year than earlier in the year. Moreover, nominal
long-duration unemployment and the share of workers
orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods de-
employed part time for economic reasons continued to
clined in January. However, a number of forward-
be high. Initial claims for unemployment insurance
looking indicators of firms’ equipment spending im-
trended lower over the intermeeting period and were at
proved, including some survey measures of business
a level consistent with further moderate job gains.
conditions and capital spending plans. Nominal busi-
Manufacturing production increased considerably in ness spending for nonresidential construction firmed,
January, and the rate of manufacturing capacity utiliza- on net, in December and January, but the level of
tion stepped up. Factory output was boosted by a siz- spending was still subdued, in part reflecting high va-
able expansion in the production of motor vehicles, but cancy rates and tight credit conditions for construction
there also were solid and widespread gains in other in- loans. Inventories in most industries looked to be rea-
dustries. In February, motor vehicle assemblies re- sonably well aligned with sales in recent months, al-
mained near the strong pace recorded in January; they though stocks of motor vehicles continued to be lean.
were scheduled to edge up, on net, through the second
Data for federal government spending in January and
quarter. Broader indicators of manufacturing activity,
February indicated that real defense expenditures con-
such as the diffusion indexes of new orders from the
tinued to step down after decreasing significantly in the
national and regional manufacturing surveys, were at
fourth quarter. Real state and local government pur-

--- Page 3 ---

_______________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_3_, _2_0_1_2_________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
chases looked to be declining at a slower pace than last economic activity in Thailand recovered sharply around
year, as those governments’ payrolls edged up in Janu- year-end, and manufacturing PMIs moved up across
ary and February and their nominal construction Asia through February. Higher prices for energy and
spending rose a little in January. food put upward pressure on headline inflation in for-
eign economies, but measures of core inflation re-
The U.S. international trade deficit widened in Decem-
mained subdued.
ber and January, as imports increased more than ex-
ports. The expansion of imports was spread across Staff Review of the Financial Situation
most categories, with petroleum products and automo- On balance, U.S. financial conditions became some-
tive products posting strong gains in January. The rise what more supportive of growth over the intermeeting
in exports was supported by shipments of capital goods period, and strains in global financial markets eased, as
and automotive products, while exports of consumer domestic and foreign economic data were generally
goods and industrial supplies declined on average. Da- better than market participants had expected and inves-
ta through December indicated that net exports made a tors appeared to see diminished downside risks asso-
moderate negative contribution to the rate of growth in ciated with the situation in Europe.
real gross domestic product (GDP) in the fourth quar-
Measures of the expected path for the federal funds
ter of last year.
rate derived from overnight index swap (OIS) rates
Overall U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE suggested that the near-term portion of the expected
price index, increased at a modest rate in December policy rate path was about unchanged, on balance,
and January. Consumer energy prices rose in January since the January FOMC meeting, but the path beyond
after decreasing markedly in December, and survey the middle of 2014 shifted down a bit, reportedly re-
data indicated that gasoline prices moved up consider- flecting in part the change in the forward rate guidance
ably in February and early March. Meanwhile, increas- in the Committee’s January statement. On balance,
es in consumer food prices slowed in recent months. yields on Treasury securities were little changed over
Consumer prices excluding food and energy also rose the intermeeting period. Indicators of inflation com-
modestly in December and January. Near-term infla- pensation over the next five years edged up, while
tion expectations from the Thomson Reu- changes in measures of longer-term inflation compen-
ters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers sation were mixed.
were unchanged in February, and longer-term inflation
Conditions in unsecured short-term dollar funding
expectations in the survey remained in their recent
markets improved over the period, especially for finan-
range.
cial institutions with European parents. The spread of
Measures of labor compensation generally indicated the three-month London interbank offered rate
that nominal wage gains continued to be subdued. In- (LIBOR) over the OIS rate narrowed. In addition,
creases in compensation per hour in the nonfarm busi- spreads of rates on asset-backed commercial paper over
ness sector picked up somewhat over the four quarters those on AA-rated nonfinancial paper decreased signif-
of 2011. However, the employment cost index in- icantly, and the amounts outstanding from programs
creased at a more modest pace than the compensation with European sponsors remained stable. Moreover,
per hour measure over the past year, and the 12-month the average maturity of unsecured U.S. commercial
change in average hourly earnings for all employees paper issued by European banks lengthened somewhat
remained muted in January and February. over the intermeeting period.
Recent indicators suggested some improvement in for- Responses to the March 2012 Senior Credit Officer
eign economic activity early this year after a significant Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms indicated
slowing in the fourth quarter of last year. Aggregate little change, on balance, over the past three months in
output in the euro area contracted in the fourth quarter, credit terms for important classes of counterparties.
but manufacturing purchasing managers indexes Demand for securities financing was reported to have
(PMIs) improved in January and February relative to risen somewhat across asset types, but dealers indicated
their low fourth-quarter readings, and consumer and that the risk appetite of most clients had changed rela-
business confidence edged up. Floods caused steep tively little over the previous three months.
production declines in the fourth quarter in Thailand
Broad U.S. equity price indexes rose significantly over
and also had negative effects on output in other coun-
the intermeeting period; equity prices of large banking
tries linked through Thai supply chains. However,

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
organizations increased about in line with the broader securities holdings and C&I loans. Commercial real
market. Aggregate earnings per share for firms in the estate loans held by banks continued to decline, while
Standard & Poor’s 500 index declined in the fourth noncore loans—a category that includes lending to
quarter, but profit margins for large corporations re- nonbank financial institutions—grew at a slower pace
mained wide by historical standards. Reflecting a nar- than in previous months. The aggregate credit quality
rowing of spreads over yields on comparable-maturity of loans on banks’ books continued to improve across
Treasury securities, yields on investment- and specula- most asset classes in the fourth quarter.
tive-grade corporate bonds continued to decline over
M2 advanced at a rapid pace in January, apparently re-
the period, moving toward the low end of their histori-
flecting year-end effects, but its growth slowed in Feb-
cal ranges. Prices in the secondary market for syndi-
ruary. The rise in M2 was mainly attributable to con-
cated leveraged loans moved up further, supported by
tinued strength in liquid deposits, reflecting investors’
continued strong demand from institutional investors.
preferences for safe and liquid assets as well as very low
The spreads of yields on A2/P2-rated unsecured com-
yields on short-term instruments outside M2. Currency
mercial paper issued by nonfinancial firms over yields
expanded robustly, and the monetary base also grew
on A1/P1-rated issues narrowed slightly on balance.
significantly over January and February.
Bond issuance by financial firms was strong in January
Foreign equity markets ended the period higher, partic-
and February, likely reflecting in part the refinancing of
ularly in Japan, and benchmark sovereign bond yields
maturing debt that had been issued during the financial
declined. Spreads of yields on euro-area peripheral
crisis under the Federal Deposit Insurance Corpora-
sovereign debt over those on German bunds generally
tion’s Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program. The
continued to narrow, and foreign corporate credit
issuance of bonds by domestic nonfinancial firms was
spreads also declined further. The staff’s broad nomin-
solid in recent months, and indicators of credit quality
al index of the foreign exchange value of the dollar
remained firm. Growth of commercial and industrial
moved down modestly over the intermeeting period.
(C&I) loans continued to be substantial and was wide-
spread across domestic banks, though holdings of such Funding conditions for euro-area banks eased over the
loans at U.S. branches and agencies of European banks period, as the European Central Bank (ECB) con-
decreased further. Financing conditions in the com- ducted its second three-year refinancing operation and
mercial real estate sector continued to be tight, and widened the pool of eligible collateral for refinancing
issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities operations. Spreads of three-month euro LIBOR over
remained low in the fourth quarter of last year. Gross the OIS rate narrowed, on balance, and European
public equity issuance by nonfinancial firms was still banks’ issuance of unsecured senior debt and covered
solid in January and February, boosted by continued bonds increased. Dollar funding pressures continued
strength in initial public offerings. Share repurchases to diminish, and the implied cost of dollar funding
and cash-financed mergers by nonfinancial firms main- through the foreign exchange swap market fell mod-
tained their strength in the fourth quarter, leading to a erately further. Reflecting the improved conditions in
sharp decline in net equity issuance. funding markets, demand for dollars at ECB lending
operations declined and the outstanding amounts
Although mortgage rates remained near their historical
drawn under the Federal Reserve’s dollar liquidity swap
lows, conditions in residential mortgage markets gener-
lines with other foreign central banks remained small.
ally remained depressed. Consumer credit rose in re-
Several other central banks in advanced and emerging
cent months, with the growth in nonrevolving credit
market economies eased policy further. In particular,
led by continued rapid expansion of government-
the Bank of England increased the size of its existing
originated student loans. Issuance of consumer credit
gilt purchase program in February, and the Bank of
asset-backed securities remained at moderate levels in
Japan scaled up its Asset Purchase Program. The Bank
the fourth quarter of 2011 and in early 2012.
of Japan also introduced a 1 percent inflation goal.
Gross long-term issuance of municipal bonds was sub-
Staff Economic Outlook
dued in the first two months of this year. Meanwhile,
In the economic projection prepared for the March
spreads on credit default swaps for debt issued by
FOMC meeting, the staff revised up its near-term fore-
states were roughly flat over the intermeeting period.
cast for real GDP growth a little. Although the recent
Bank credit rose at a modest pace, on average, in Janu- data on aggregate spending were, on balance, about in
ary and February, mainly reflecting strong increases in line with the staff’s expectations at the time of the pre-

--- Page 5 ---

_______________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_3_, _2_0_1_2_________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
vious forecast, indicators of labor market conditions months, although prices of crude oil and gasoline had
and production improved somewhat more than the increased of late. Longer-term inflation expectations
staff had anticipated. In addition, the decline in the had remained stable, and most meeting participants saw
unemployment rate over the past year was larger than little evidence of cost pressures.
what seemed consistent with the modest reported rate
With respect to the economic outlook, participants
of real GDP growth. Against this backdrop, the staff
generally saw the intermeeting news as suggesting that
reduced its estimate of the level of potential output,
economic growth over coming quarters would continue
yielding a measure of the current output gap that was a
to be moderate and that the unemployment rate would
little narrower and better aligned with the staff’s esti-
decline gradually toward levels that the Committee
mate of labor market slack. In its March forecast, the
judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. While a
staff’s projection for real GDP growth over the me-
few participants indicated that their expectations for
dium term was somewhat higher than the one pre-
real GDP growth for 2012 had risen somewhat, most
sented in January, mostly reflecting an improved out-
participants did not interpret the recent economic and
look for economic activity abroad, a lower foreign ex-
financial information as pointing to a material revision
change value for the dollar, and a higher projected path
to the outlook for 2013 and 2014. Financial conditions
of equity prices. Nevertheless, the staff continued to
had improved notably since the January meeting: Equi-
forecast that real GDP growth would pick up only
ty prices were higher and risk spreads had declined.
gradually in 2012 and 2013, supported by accommoda-
Nonetheless, a number of factors continued to be seen
tive monetary policy, easing credit conditions, and im-
as likely to restrain the pace of economic expansion;
provements in consumer and business sentiment. The
these included slower growth in some foreign econo-
wide margin of slack in product and labor markets was
mies, prospective fiscal tightening in the United States,
expected to decrease gradually over the projection pe-
the weak housing market, further household deleverag-
riod, but the unemployment rate was expected to re-
ing, and high levels of uncertainty among households
main elevated at the end of 2013.
and businesses. Participants continued to expect most
The staff also revised up its forecast for inflation a bit of the factors restraining economic expansion to ease
compared with the projection prepared for the January over time and so anticipated that the recovery would
FOMC meeting, reflecting recent data indicating higher gradually gain strength. In addition, participants noted
paths for the prices of oil, other commodities, and im- that recent policy actions in the euro area had helped
ports, along with a somewhat narrower margin of eco- reduce financial stresses and lower downside risks in
nomic slack in the March forecast. However, with the short term; however, increased volatility in financial
energy prices expected to level out in the second half of markets remained a possibility if measures to address
this year, substantial resource slack persisting over the the longer-term fiscal and banking issues in the euro
forecast period, and stable long-run inflation expecta- area were not put in place in a timely fashion. Inflation
tions, the staff continued to project that inflation would had been subdued of late, although the recent increase
be subdued in 2012 and 2013. in crude oil and gasoline prices would push up inflation
temporarily. With unemployment expected to remain
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
elevated, and with longer-term inflation expectations
Economic Outlook
stable, most participants expected that inflation subse-
In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
quently would run at or below the 2 percent rate that
look, meeting participants agreed that the information
the Committee judges most consistent with its statutory
received since the Committee’s previous meeting, while
mandate over the longer run.
mixed, had been positive, on balance, and suggested
that the economy had been expanding moderately. In discussing the household sector, meeting partici-
Labor market conditions had improved further: Pay- pants generally commented that consumer spending
roll employment had continued to expand, and the un- had increased moderately of late. While a few partici-
employment rate had declined notably in recent pants suggested that recent improvements in labor
months. Still, unemployment remained elevated. market conditions and the easing in financial conditions
Household spending and business fixed investment had could help lay the groundwork for a strengthening in
continued to advance. Despite signs of improvement the pace of household spending, several other partici-
or stabilization in some local housing markets, most pants pointed to factors that would likely restrain con-
participants agreed that the housing sector remained sumption: Growth in real disposable income was still
depressed. Inflation had been subdued in recent sluggish, and consumer sentiment, despite some im-

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
provement since last summer, remained weak. A num- solid gains in employment going forward. One partici-
ber of participants viewed the recent run-up in petro- pant pointed to inflation readings and a high rate of
leum prices as likely to limit gains in consumer spend- long-duration unemployment as signs that the current
ing on non-energy items for a time; a couple of partici- level of output may be much closer to potential than
pants noted, however, that the unseasonably warm had been thought, and a few others cited a weaker path
weather and the declining price of natural gas had of potential output as a characteristic of the present
helped cushion the effect of higher oil and gasoline expansion. However, a number of participants judged
prices on consumers’ overall energy bills. Most partici- that the labor market currently featured substantial
pants agreed that, while recent housing-sector data had slack. In support of that view, various indicators were
shown some tentative indications of upward move- cited, including aggregate hours, which during the re-
ment, the level of activity in that sector remained de- cession had exhibited a decline that was particularly
pressed and was likely to recover only slowly over time. severe by historical standards and remained well below
One participant, while agreeing that the housing market the series’ pre-recession peak; the high number of per-
had not yet turned the corner, was more optimistic sons working part time for economic reasons; and low
about the potential for a stronger recovery in the mar- ratios of job openings to unemployment and of em-
ket in light of signs of reduced inventory overhang and ployment to population.
stronger demand in some regions.
Most participants noted that the incoming information
Reports from business contacts indicated that activity on components of final spending had exhibited less
in the manufacturing, energy, and agriculture sectors strength than the indicators of employment and pro-
continued to advance in recent months. In the retail duction. Some participants expressed the view that the
sector, sales of new autos had strengthened, but reports recent increases in payrolls likely reflected, in part, a
from other retailers were mixed. A number of busi- reversal of the sharp cuts in employment during the
nesses had indicated that they were seeing some im- recession, a scenario consistent with the weak readings
provement in demand and that they had become on productivity growth of late. In this view, the recent
somewhat more optimistic of late, with some reporting pace of employment gains might not be sustained if the
that they were adding to capacity. But most firms re- growth rate of spending did not pick up. Several par-
portedly remained fairly cautious—particularly on hir- ticipants noted that the unseasonably warm weather of
ing decisions—and continued to be uncertain about the recent months added one more element of uncertainty
strength of the recovery. to the interpretation of incoming data, and that this
factor might account for a portion of the recent im-
Participants touched on the outlook for fiscal policy
provement in indicators of employment and housing.
and the export sector. Assessments of the outlook for
In a contrasting view, the improvements registered in
government revenues and expenditures were mixed.
labor market indicators could be seen as raising the
State and local government spending had recently
likelihood that GDP data for the recent period would
shown modest growth, following a lengthy period of
undergo a significant upward revision.
contraction, and declines in public-sector employment
appeared to have abated of late. However, it was noted Many participants noted that strains in global financial
that if agreement was not reached on a longer-term markets had eased somewhat, and that financial condi-
plan for the federal budget, an abrupt and sharp fiscal tions were more supportive of economic growth than
tightening would occur at the start of 2013. A number at the time of the January meeting. Among the evi-
of participants observed that exports continued to be a dence cited were higher equity prices and better condi-
positive factor for U.S. growth, while noting risks to tions in corporate credit markets, especially the markets
the export picture from economic weakness in Europe for high-yield bonds and leveraged loans. Banking con-
or a greater-than-expected slowdown in China and tacts were reporting steady, though modest, growth in
emerging Asia. C&I loans. Many meeting participants believed that
policy actions in the euro area, notably the Greek debt
Participants generally observed the continued im-
swap and the ECB’s longer-term refinancing opera-
provement in labor market conditions since the January
tions, had helped to ease strains in financial markets
meeting. A couple of participants stated that the
and reduced the downside risks to the U.S. and global
progress suggested by the payroll numbers was also
economic outlook. Nonetheless, a number of partici-
apparent in a broad array of labor market indicators,
pants noted that a longer-term solution to the banking
and others noted survey measures suggesting further
and fiscal problems in the euro area would require sub-

--- Page 7 ---

_______________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_3_, _2_0_1_2_________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
stantial further adjustment in the banking and public pose significant downside risks to economic activity.
sectors. Participants saw the possibility of disruptions Recent monthly readings on inflation had been sub-
in global financial markets as continuing to pose a risk dued, and longer-term inflation expectations remained
to growth. stable. Against that backdrop, members generally an-
ticipated that the recent increase in oil and gasoline
While the recent readings on consumer price inflation
prices would push up inflation temporarily, but that
had been subdued, participants agreed that inflation in
subsequently inflation would run at or below the rate
the near term would be pushed up by rising oil and
that the Committee judges most consistent with its
gasoline prices. A few participants noted that the crude
mandate.
oil price increases in the latter half of 2010 and the ear-
ly part of 2011 had been part of a broad-based rise in In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
commodity prices; in contrast, non-energy commodity ahead, members agreed that it would be appropriate to
prices had been more stable of late, which suggested maintain the existing highly accommodative stance of
that the recent upward pressure on oil prices was prin- monetary policy. In particular, they agreed to keep the
cipally due to geopolitical concerns rather than global target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent,
economic growth. A couple of participants noted that to continue the program of extending the average ma-
recent readings on unit labor costs had shown a larger turity of the Federal Reserve’s holdings of securities as
increase than earlier, but other participants pointed to announced in September, and to retain the existing pol-
other measures of labor compensation that continued icies regarding the reinvestment of principal payments
to show modest increases. With longer-run inflation from Federal Reserve holdings of securities.
expectations still well anchored, most participants an-
With respect to the statement to be released following
ticipated that after the temporary effect of the rise in oil
the meeting, members agreed that only relatively small
and gasoline prices had run its course, inflation would
modifications to the first two paragraphs were needed
be at or below the 2 percent rate that they judge most
to reflect the incoming economic data, the improve-
consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate. Indeed,
ment in financial conditions, and the modest changes
a few participants were concerned that, with the persis-
to the economic outlook. With the economic outlook
tence of considerable resource slack, inflation might be
over the medium term not greatly changed, almost all
below the mandate-consistent rate for some time.
members again agreed to indicate that the Committee
Other participants, however, were worried that infla-
expects to maintain a highly accommodative stance for
tion pressures could increase as the expansion contin-
monetary policy and currently anticipates that econom-
ued; these participants argued that, particularly in light
ic conditions—including low rates of resource utiliza-
of the recent rise in oil and gasoline prices, maintaining
tion and a subdued outlook for inflation over the me-
the current highly accommodative stance of monetary
dium run—are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels
policy over the medium run could erode the stability of
for the federal funds rate at least through late 2014.
inflation expectations and risk higher inflation.
Several members continued to anticipate, as in January,
Committee Policy Action that the unemployment rate would still be well above
Members viewed the information on U.S. economic their estimates of its longer-term normal level, and in-
activity received over the intermeeting period as sug- flation would be at or below the Committee’s longer-
gesting that the economy had been expanding mod- run objective, in late 2014. It was noted that the
erately and generally agreed that the economic outlook, Committee’s forward guidance is conditional on eco-
while a bit stronger overall, was broadly similar to that nomic developments, and members concurred that the
at the time of their January meeting. Labor market date given in the statement would be subject to revision
conditions had continued to improve and unemploy- in response to significant changes in the economic out-
ment had declined in recent months, but almost all look. While recent employment data had been encour-
members saw the unemployment rate as still elevated aging, a number of members perceived a nonnegligible
relative to levels that they viewed as consistent with the risk that improvements in employment could diminish
Committee’s mandate over the longer run. With the as the year progressed, as had occurred in 2010 and
economy facing continuing headwinds, members gen- 2011, and saw this risk as reinforcing the case for leav-
erally expected a moderate pace of economic growth ing the forward guidance unchanged at this meeting.
over coming quarters, with gradual further declines in In contrast, one member judged that maintaining the
the unemployment rate. Strains in global financial current degree of policy accommodation much beyond
markets, while having eased since January, continued to this year would likely be inappropriate; that member

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
anticipated that a tightening of monetary policy would objectives of maximum employment and
be necessary well before the end of 2014 in order to price stability.”
keep inflation close to the Committee’s 2 percent ob-
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
jective.
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.:
The Committee also stated that it is prepared to adjust
“Information received since the Federal
the size and composition of its securities holdings as
Open Market Committee met in January
appropriate to promote a stronger economic recovery
suggests that the economy has been expand-
in a context of price stability. A couple of members
ing moderately. Labor market conditions
indicated that the initiation of additional stimulus could
have improved further; the unemployment
become necessary if the economy lost momentum or if
rate has declined notably in recent months
inflation seemed likely to remain below its mandate-
but remains elevated. Household spending
consistent rate of 2 percent over the medium run.
and business fixed investment have contin-
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee ued to advance. The housing sector remains
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank depressed. Inflation has been subdued in re-
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex- cent months, although prices of crude oil
ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance and gasoline have increased lately. Longer-
with the following domestic policy directive: term inflation expectations have remained
stable.
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
monetary and financial conditions that will Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
foster price stability and promote sustainable Committee seeks to foster maximum em-
growth in output. To further its long-run ployment and price stability. The Committee
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions expects moderate economic growth over
in reserve markets consistent with federal coming quarters and consequently anticipates
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. that the unemployment rate will decline
The Committee directs the Desk to continue gradually toward levels that the Committee
the maturity extension program it began in judges to be consistent with its dual mandate.
September to purchase, by the end of June Strains in global financial markets have
2012, Treasury securities with remaining ma- eased, though they continue to pose signifi-
turities of approximately 6 years to 30 years cant downside risks to the economic out-
with a total face value of $400 billion, and to look. The recent increase in oil and gasoline
sell Treasury securities with remaining matur- prices will push up inflation temporarily, but
ities of 3 years or less with a total face value the Committee anticipates that subsequently
of $400 billion. The Committee also directs inflation will run at or below the rate that it
the Desk to maintain its existing policies of judges most consistent with its dual mandate.
rolling over maturing Treasury securities into
To support a stronger economic recovery
new issues and of reinvesting principal pay-
and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
ments on all agency debt and agency mort-
is at the rate most consistent with its dual
gage-backed securities in the System Open
mandate, the Committee expects to maintain
Market Account in agency mortgage-backed
a highly accommodative stance for monetary
securities in order to maintain the total face
policy. In particular, the Committee decided
value of domestic securities at approximately
today to keep the target range for the federal
$2.6 trillion. The Committee directs the
funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently
Desk to engage in dollar roll transactions as
anticipates that economic conditions—
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Fed-
including low rates of resource utilization
eral Reserve’s agency MBS transactions. The
and a subdued outlook for inflation over the
System Open Market Account Manager and
medium run—are likely to warrant excep-
the Secretary will keep the Committee in-
tionally low levels for the federal funds rate
formed of ongoing developments regarding
at least through late 2014.
the System’s balance sheet that could affect
the attainment over time of the Committee’s

--- Page 9 ---

_______________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_3_, _2_0_1_2_________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
The Committee also decided to continue its purpose of the discussion was to explore potentially
program to extend the average maturity of its promising approaches for further enhancing FOMC
holdings of securities as announced in Sep- communications; no decisions on this topic were
tember. The Committee is maintaining its planned for this meeting and none were taken.
existing policies of reinvesting principal
Participants discussed ways in which the Committee
payments from its holdings of agency debt
might include, in its postmeeting statements, additional
and agency mortgage-backed securities in
qualitative or quantitative information that could con-
agency mortgage-backed securities and of
vey a sense of how the Committee might adjust policy
rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
in response to changes in the economic outlook. Par-
auction. The Committee will regularly re-
ticipants also discussed whether modifications to the
view the size and composition of its securi-
SEP that the Committee releases four times per year
ties holdings and is prepared to adjust those
could be helpful in clarifying the linkages between the
holdings as appropriate to promote a strong-
economic outlook and the Committee’s monetary poli-
er economic recovery in a context of price
cy decisions. In addition, several participants suggested
stability.”
that it could be helpful to discuss at a future meeting
Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C. some alternative economic scenarios and the monetary
Dudley, Elizabeth Duke, Dennis P. Lockhart, Sandra policy responses that might be seen as appropriate un-
Pianalto, Sarah Bloom Raskin, Daniel K. Tarullo, John der each one, in order to clarify the Committee’s likely
C. Williams, and Janet L. Yellen. behavior in different contingencies. Finally, partici-
pants observed that the Committee introduced several
Voting against this action: Jeffrey M. Lacker.
important enhancements to its policy communications
Mr. Lacker dissented because he did not agree that over the past year or so; these included the Chairman’s
economic conditions were likely to warrant exception- postmeeting press conferences as well as changes to the
ally low levels of the federal funds rate at least through FOMC statement and the SEP. Against this backdrop,
late 2014. In his view, with inflation close to the some participants noted that additional experience with
Committee’s objective of 2 percent, the economy ex- the changes implemented to date could be helpful in
panding at a moderate pace, and downside risks some- evaluating potential further enhancements.
what diminished, the federal funds rate will most likely
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
need to rise considerably sooner to prevent the emer-
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, April 24–25,
gence of inflationary pressures. Mr. Lacker continues
2012. The meeting adjourned at 4:10 p.m. on
to prefer to provide forward guidance regarding future
March 13, 2012.
Committee policy actions through the inclusion of
FOMC participants’ projections of the federal funds Notation Vote
rate in the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP). By notation vote completed on February 14, 2012, the
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
Monetary Policy Communications
FOMC meeting held on January 24–25, 2012.
As it noted in its statement of principles regarding
longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy released
in January, the Committee seeks to explain its monetary
policy decisions to the public as clearly as possible.
With that goal in mind, participants discussed a range
of additional steps that the Committee might take to
_____________________________
help the public better understand the linkages between
William B. English
the evolving economic outlook and the Federal Re-
Secretary
serve’s monetary policy decisions, and thus the condi-
tionality in the Committee’s forward guidance. The

# Tables

## Page_9_Table_1


| Voting against this action: Jeffrey M. Lacker.             |
|------------------------------------------------------------|
| Mr. Lacker dissented because he did not agree that         |
| economic conditions were likely to warrant exception-      |
| ally low levels of the federal funds rate at least through |
| late 2014. In his view, with inflation close to the        |
| Committee’s objective of 2 percent, the economy ex-        |
| panding at a moderate pace, and downside risks some-       |
| what diminished, the federal funds rate will most likely   |
| need to rise considerably sooner to prevent the emer-      |
| gence of inflationary pressures. Mr. Lacker continues      |
| to prefer to provide forward guidance regarding future     |
| Committee policy actions through the inclusion of          |
| FOMC participants’ projections of the federal funds        |
| rate in the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP).         |


## Page_9_Table_2


| It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee   |
|--------------------------------------------------------|
| would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, April 24–25,       |
| 2012. The meeting adjourned at 4:10 p.m. on            |
| March 13, 2012.                                        |
| Notation Vote                                          |
| By notation vote completed on February 14, 2012, the   |
| Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the      |
| FOMC meeting held on January 24–25, 2012.              |