# 20121212_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:37:05*
*Pages: 25, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
December 11–12, 2012
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was James A. Clouse and Stephen A. Meyer, Deputy Direc-
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the tors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gov-
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues- ernors; Maryann F. Hunter, Deputy Director, Divi-
day, December 11, 2012, at 11:00 a.m. and continued sion of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board
on Wednesday, December 12, 2012, at 8:30 a.m. of Governors
PRESENT: Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Ben Bernanke, Chairman Board Members, Board of Governors
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman
Elizabeth Duke Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers,
Jeffrey M. Lacker Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Dennis P. Lockhart
Sandra Pianalto Eric M. Engen, Thomas Laubach, and David E. Le-
Jerome H. Powell bow, Associate Directors, Division of Research
Sarah Bloom Raskin and Statistics, Board of Governors; Michael T. Ki-
Jeremy C. Stein ley,¹ Associate Director, Office of Financial Stabil-
Daniel K. Tarullo ity Policy and Research, Board of Governors
John C. Williams
Janet L. Yellen Joshua Gallin, Deputy Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Jane
James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, E. Ihrig, Deputy Associate Director, Division of
Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Alternate Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Beth Anne
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Wilson, Deputy Associate Director, Division of In-
ternational Finance, Board of Governors
Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and
Charles I. Plosser, Presidents of the Federal Re- David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Mone-
serve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadel- tary Affairs, Board of Governors
phia, respectively
Jennifer E. Roush, Senior Economist, Division of
William B. English, Secretary and Economist Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary Marie Gooding, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Bank of Atlanta
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel
Steven B. Kamin, Economist Loretta J. Mester and Daniel G. Sullivan, Executive
David W. Wilcox, Economist Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Phila-
delphia and Chicago, respectively
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy,
William Nelson, David Reifschneider, and William Troy Davig, Mark E. Schweitzer, Geoffrey Tootell,
Wascher, Associate Economists Christopher J. Waller, and Kei-Mu Yi, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Cleveland, Boston, St. Louis, and Minneapolis, re-
spectively
Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Pol-
icy and Research, Board of Governors Mary Daly, Group Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco
Jon W. Faust, Special Advisor to the Board, Office of _______________________
Board Members, Board of Governors ¹ Attended Tuesday’s session only.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Mr. Lacker dissented because of his opposition to ar-
Evan F. Koenig, Lorie K. Logan, Julie Ann Remache, rangements that support Federal Reserve lending in
Alexander L. Wolman, and Nathaniel Wuerffel, foreign currencies, which he viewed as amounting to
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, fiscal policy.
New York, New York, Richmond, and New York,
Options for the Continuation of Asset Purchases
respectively
The staff reviewed several options for purchasing long-
er-term securities after the planned completion at the
Argia M. Sbordone, Assistant Vice President, Federal
end of the month of the maturity extension program.
Reserve Bank of New York
The presentation focused on the potential effects for
the U.S. economy, based in part on simulations of a
staff macroeconomic model, and for the Federal Re-
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
serve’s balance sheet and income of continuing to buy
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
MBS and longer-term Treasury securities over various
The Manager of the System Open Market Account
time frames. In their discussion of the staff presenta-
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and
tion, some participants asked about the possible conse-
foreign financial markets during the period since the
quences of the alternative purchase programs for the
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) met on Oc-
expected path of Federal Reserve remittances to the
tober 23–24, 2012. He also reported on System open
Treasury Department, and a few indicated the need for
market operations over the intermeeting period, includ-
additional consideration of the implications of such
ing the ongoing reinvestment into agency-guaranteed
purchases for the eventual normalization of the stance
mortgage-backed securities (MBS) of principal pay-
of monetary policy and the size and composition of the
ments received on SOMA holdings of agency debt and
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.
agency-guaranteed MBS; the operations related to the
maturity extension program authorized at the June 19– Staff Review of the Economic Situation
20, 2012, FOMC meeting; and the purchases of MBS The information reviewed at the December 11–12
authorized at the September 12–13, 2012, FOMC meeting indicated that economic activity continued to
meeting. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified increase at a moderate pace in recent months. Em-
the Open Market Desk’s domestic transactions over ployment expanded further, and the unemployment
the intermeeting period. There were no intervention rate declined slightly, on balance, from September to
operations in foreign currencies for the System’s ac- November but was still elevated. Consumer price infla-
count over the intermeeting period. tion slowed as consumer energy costs fell, while
measures of longer-run inflation expectations remained
The Committee considered a proposal to extend its
stable.
liquidity swap arrangements with foreign central banks
past February 1, 2013. All but one member approved Private nonfarm employment increased at a slightly
the following resolution: faster rate in October and November than in the third
quarter, but government employment decreased some-
“The Federal Open Market Committee di-
what. The unemployment rate declined to 7.7 percent
rects the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
in November, and the labor force participation rate in
to extend the existing temporary dollar li-
that month was at the same level as in the third quarter.
quidity swap arrangements with the Bank of
The relatively large share of workers employed part
Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank of
time for economic reasons trended up a bit, on net,
Japan, the European Central Bank, and the
while the share of long-duration unemployment in total
Swiss National Bank through February 1,
unemployment was essentially flat and remained elevat-
2014. In addition, the Federal Open Market
ed. Indicators of firms’ job openings and hiring plans
Committee directs the Federal Reserve Bank
were little changed on balance. Initial claims for un-
of New York to extend the existing tempo-
employment insurance were boosted in early Novem-
rary foreign currency liquidity swap arrange-
ber by the effects of Hurricane Sandy but returned
ments with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of
within weeks to a level that was about the same as be-
England, the Bank of Japan, the European
fore the hurricane.
Central Bank, and the Swiss National Bank
through February 1, 2014.” Manufacturing production declined in October, as out-
put was held down at the end of the month by the dis-

--- Page 3 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r _1_1_–_1_2_, _2_0_12_______________________P_a_g_e_ _3
ruptions and damage caused by Hurricane Sandy; the Real federal government purchases increased markedly
rate of manufacturing capacity utilization also declined. in the third quarter, led by a sharp rise in defense
Automakers’ schedules indicated that the pace of mo- spending. However, data for nominal federal spending
tor vehicle assemblies would rise somewhat in the com- in October pointed toward a decline in real defense
ing months. Broader indicators of factory output, such expenditures in the fourth quarter. Real state and local
as the diffusion indexes of new orders from the nation- government purchases were little changed in the third
al and regional manufacturing surveys, continued to be quarter. State and local government payrolls decreased
subdued at levels consistent with only small gains in on net over October and November, and nominal con-
production in the near term. struction spending by these governments edged lower
in October.
Real personal consumption expenditures rose at a
modest pace in the third quarter, but spending declined The U.S. international trade deficit widened in October,
in October, likely in response in part to some disrup- and both exports and imports fell sharply from the
tions caused by the hurricane. Probably reflecting previous month. The decrease in exports was wide-
those disruptions, sales of light motor vehicles fell in spread across categories, while the reduction in imports
October but then increased notably in November. importantly reflected lower purchases of consumer
Some factors that tend to influence household spend- goods and non-oil industrial supplies, although petrole-
ing became less supportive: Real disposable personal um imports increased.
income moved up only slightly in the third quarter and
Consumer prices moved up more slowly in October
declined in October. Moreover, consumer sentiment
than in the preceding few months, primarily because of
fell back in early December to about its level during the
a small decline in energy prices after several months of
summer. In contrast, household net worth increased in
large gains. Moreover, survey data indicated that retail
the third quarter, partially a result of higher equity and
gasoline prices decreased further in November. Con-
home values.
sumer food prices rose a little faster in October, as the
Conditions in the housing market continued to im- effects of last summer’s drought started to show
prove gradually, but construction activity was still at a through at the retail level. Increases in consumer prices
low level, restrained by the considerable inventory of excluding food and energy remained subdued. Near-
foreclosed and distressed homes and the tight credit term inflation expectations from the Thomson Reu-
standards for mortgages. Starts and permits of new ters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers
single-family homes were essentially flat in October edged up, on balance, in November and early Decem-
after rising significantly in the preceding month. Starts ber, while longer-term inflation expectations in the sur-
of new multifamily units rose in October, although vey were little changed and continued to run within the
permits declined somewhat following their brisk in- relatively narrow range that has prevailed for some
crease in the previous month. Meanwhile, home prices time.
advanced further and sales of existing homes continued
Measures of labor compensation indicated that gains in
to expand, but new home sales were little changed.
nominal wages remained slow. Compensation per hour
Real business expenditures on equipment and software in the nonfarm business sector increased slightly over
decreased in the third quarter. In October, nominal the year ending in the third quarter, and with a moder-
new orders for nondefense capital goods excluding ate rise in productivity, unit labor costs were essentially
aircraft moved up a little, but shipments of these capital unchanged. The employment cost index rose only a bit
goods edged down and the level of orders remained faster than the measure of compensation per hour over
below that of shipments. In addition, other forward- the same period. In October and November, increases
looking indicators of equipment investment by firms, in average hourly earnings for all employees were small.
such as surveys of business conditions and capital
Economic activity abroad remained subdued, especially
spending plans, were still subdued. Real business ex-
in the advanced foreign economies. The euro-area
penditures for nonresidential structures also decreased
economy contracted further in the third quarter, and
in the third quarter, although nominal construction
consumer and business confidence remained low.
spending by firms increased in October. Inventories in
Economic activity in Japan also declined in the third
most industries appeared to be roughly aligned with
quarter, and a sharp drop in exports restrained eco-
sales in recent months.
nomic growth in Canada. In emerging market econo-
mies, by contrast, recent data on exports and manufac-

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
turing improved somewhat. In most countries, infla- greater demand for funding of various types of securiti-
tion was still well contained, and monetary policy zation products.
abroad generally remained accommodative.
Broad U.S. equity price indexes edged up, on net, over
Staff Review of the Financial Situation the intermeeting period, while equity prices of large
U.S. financial conditions were little changed, on bal- domestic banks decreased a little. Nevertheless, the
ance, over the intermeeting period. In early November, credit default swap spreads of most large domestic
market concerns about the fiscal outlook and ongoing bank holding companies continued to move lower.
federal budget negotiations seemed to intensify, Option-implied volatility for the S&P 500 index over
prompting a notable reduction in equity prices and the next month declined moderately, on balance, while
yields on Treasury securities. But these concerns re- measures of equity market volatility for longer maturi-
portedly eased somewhat over subsequent weeks, and ties remained above their historical averages, excluding
the initial move in equity prices was reversed. In con- the financial crisis period.
trast, yields on intermediate- and long-term nominal
Yields on investment-grade corporate bonds were little
Treasury securities declined, on net, perhaps reflecting
changed over the intermeeting period, and their spreads
some increase in safe-haven demand associated with
over yields on comparable-maturity Treasury securities
concerns about the potential economic effects of a sub-
widened modestly. Yields on speculative-grade corpo-
stantial tightening in fiscal policy. Indicators of infla-
rate bonds fell to historical lows, and their spreads de-
tion compensation derived from nominal and inflation-
creased slightly.
protected Treasury securities showed mixed changes
and remained within the ranges observed over recent The pace of bond issuance by nonfinancial firms in-
years. creased further in October and November after rising
robustly in the third quarter, as some firms reportedly
The expected path of the federal funds rate derived
sought to issue new debt before the end of the year.
from overnight index swap rates flattened somewhat,
Commercial and industrial (C&I) loans outstanding
on balance, over the intermeeting period, as longer-
also expanded notably in October and November.
dated rates declined. Market-based measures of uncer-
Nonfinancial commercial paper outstanding increased
tainty about the path of the federal funds rate beyond
somewhat in November following a small decline in
the near term also declined. The survey of primary
October. In the syndicated leveraged loan market, in-
dealers conducted prior to the December meeting
stitutional issuance surged in October before subsiding
showed that they expected the FOMC to maintain pur-
somewhat in November, although it remained at a still-
chases of longer-term securities after year-end at about
robust level.
the current pace of $85 billion per month.
Financial conditions in the commercial real estate
Conditions in unsecured and secured short-term dollar
(CRE) sector were still generally strained amid elevated
funding markets remained stable, on net, over the in-
vacancy and delinquency rates. However, prices for
termeeting period, with reports of only limited disrup-
CRE properties continued to increase in the third quar-
tions to trading or operations following Hurricane
ter, and issuance of commercial mortgage-backed secu-
Sandy. Yields on Treasury bills maturing beyond the
rities remained at a solid pace in the current quarter.
year-end were noticeably lower than those on shorter-
term bills; market participants pointed to the anticipat- Residential mortgage rates declined modestly over the
ed ending of the Federal Reserve’s maturity extension intermeeting period, largely in line with the decline in
program and the expiration of the Federal Deposit In- MBS yields. Refinancing expanded a bit further in Oc-
surance Corporation’s unlimited insurance of noninter- tober and November. House prices continued to in-
est-bearing transaction deposits at the end of the year crease despite a rise in the proportion of properties
as factors contributing to this pattern of yields. sold through foreclosures or short sales. The share of
existing mortgages that were seriously delinquent fell in
In the December Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey
the third quarter but remained elevated.
on Dealer Financing Terms, respondents reported little
change in credit terms over the past three months for Consumer credit continued to expand briskly in Sep-
important classes of dealer counterparties. While re- tember, led by sizable increases in auto and student
spondents reported that the use of leverage by coun- loans. Revolving credit decreased in September but
terparties had remained basically unchanged, they noted was little changed, on net, over the previous few
months. Issuance of consumer asset-backed securities

--- Page 5 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r _1_1_–_1_2_, _2_0_12_______________________P_a_g_e_ _5
continued to rise at a strong pace. Delinquency rates toring for possible adverse effects of the current envi-
on consumer credit generally remained low, with the ronment of low interest rates, the staff surveyed a wide
notable exception of student loans. range of asset markets and financial institutions for
signs of excessive valuations, leverage, or risk-taking
Bank credit was about flat, on balance, over October
that could pose systemic risks. Valuations for broad
and November. Growth in C&I loans and consumer
asset classes did not appear stretched, or supported by
loans was offset by a decline in banks’ residential real
excessive leverage. Indicators of risk-taking and lever-
estate loans. The November Survey of Terms of Busi-
age had moderately increased, on balance, over the past
ness Lending indicated some easing in loan pricing and
couple of years but remained notably below their levels
terms.
before the financial crisis.
M2 growth was rapid in October but slowed in No-
Staff Economic Outlook
vember. Liquid deposits continued to grow at a strong
In the economic projection prepared by the staff for
pace, as yields available on alternative money market
the December FOMC meeting, real gross domestic
instruments remained low. Reserves increased over the
product (GDP) growth in the near term was revised
intermeeting period, in part because of the settlement
down slightly relative to the previous forecast. This
of the ongoing MBS purchases announced at the Sep-
downward revision primarily reflected weaker-than-
tember FOMC meeting.
expected data for consumer spending and household
In many foreign financial markets, asset prices fluctuat- income that more than offset the somewhat better-
ed as sentiment regarding negotiations over both the than-anticipated news regarding employment and busi-
U.S. fiscal situation and official support for vulnerable ness equipment investment. The staff’s medium-term
euro-area countries shifted during the period. Spreads forecast for real GDP growth also was revised down a
on Greek sovereign bonds over comparable German little, as some of the recent weakness in household
bunds fell, on balance, reflecting in part the agreement spending and income was carried forward in the projec-
by European officials and the International Monetary tion. In addition, financial conditions were anticipated
Fund to grant further aid to Greece. However, spreads to be a little less supportive than expected in the staff’s
on Italian and Spanish bonds were little changed on previous forecast. With federal fiscal policy assumed to
balance over the period. On net, foreign equity prices be tighter next year than this year, the staff expected
rose slightly. The foreign exchange value of the dollar that the increase in real GDP would not materially ex-
edged lower on balance. However, the dollar appreci- ceed the growth rate of potential output in 2013. In
ated against the Brazilian real and the Japanese yen, 2014 and 2015, economic activity was projected to ac-
which were held down by weak economic data and, in celerate slowly, supported by a lessening in fiscal policy
the case of the yen, by market reaction to statements restraint, gains in consumer and business confidence,
suggesting that the country’s likely next government further improvements in financial conditions and credit
would urge the Bank of Japan to seek a higher rate of availability, and accommodative monetary policy. The
inflation. Yields on foreign benchmark sovereign expansion in economic activity was anticipated to result
bonds declined, as central banks maintained or extend- in only a gradual decline in slack in labor and product
ed monetary accommodation. The Bank of Japan ex- markets over the forecast period, and progress in re-
panded its asset purchase program and announced a ducing unemployment was expected to be relatively
new lending scheme. The Bank of England announced slow.
that it would transfer cash holdings from its asset pur-
The staff’s projection for inflation in both the near
chase fund to the U.K. Treasury, a measure that may
term and the medium term was essentially unchanged
exert some further downward pressure on gilt yields to
from the forecast prepared for the previous FOMC
the extent that gilt issuance by the government is re-
meeting. With crude oil prices expected to continue to
duced. The Reserve Bank of Australia and several
decrease slowly, the boost to retail food prices from
emerging market central banks also eased monetary
last summer’s drought anticipated to be only temporary
policy.
and fairly small, long-run inflation expectations as-
The staff also reported on potential risks to financial sumed to remain stable, and considerable resource
stability, including those associated with a disorderly slack persisting over the forecast period, the staff pro-
resolution of the so-called fiscal cliff, a delayed increase jected that inflation would be subdued through 2015.
in the federal debt ceiling, or a future deterioration of
financial conditions in Europe. In addition, in moni-

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
The staff viewed the uncertainty around the projection ipants’ forecasts, which generally were conditioned on
for economic activity as somewhat elevated and the the view that it would be appropriate to maintain a
risks as skewed to the downside, largely reflecting the highly accommodative monetary policy for a consider-
possibility of a more severe tightening in U.S. fiscal able time, included an outlook for a continued gradual
policy than expected, along with continued concerns decline in the unemployment rate toward levels judged
about the economic and financial situation in Europe. to be consistent with the Committee’s mandate over
Although the staff saw the outlook for inflation as un- the longer run, with inflation running near the Commit-
certain, the risks were viewed as balanced and not unu- tee’s 2 percent longer-run goal.
sually high.
Participants observed that growth in economic activity
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the continued to be restrained by several persistent head-
Economic Outlook winds, including ongoing deleveraging on the part of
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, meeting par- households and still-tight credit conditions for some
ticipants—the 7 members of the Board of Governors borrowers, and that a major headwind facing the econ-
and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks, all omy at present appeared to be uncertainty about U.S.
of whom participate in the deliberations of the fiscal policy and the outcome of the ongoing negotia-
FOMC—submitted their assessments of real output tions on federal spending and taxes. While participants
growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the tar- generally saw it as likely that the Congress and the Ad-
get federal funds rate for each year from 2012 through ministration would avert the full force of the tax in-
2015 and over the longer run, under each participant’s creases and spending cuts scheduled to occur in 2013,
judgment of appropriate monetary policy. The longer- almost all indicated that heightened uncertainty about
run projections represent each participant’s assessment fiscal policy probably was affecting economic activity
of the rate to which each variable would be expected to adversely. For example, it likely had reduced house-
converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy hold and business confidence and led firms to defer
and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. hiring and investment spending. Some participants
These economic projections and policy assessments are noted that an early and constructive resolution to fiscal
described in the Summary of Economic Projections, policy negotiations had the potential to release pent-up
which is attached as an addendum to these minutes. demand and therefore be followed by a boost to spend-
ing, investment, and employment; however, a few
In their discussion of the economic situation, partici-
pointed out that an extended breakdown of negotia-
pants regarded the information received during the in-
tions could have significant adverse effects on econom-
termeeting period as indicating that economic activity
ic growth. Other factors weighing on the economic
and employment continued to expand at a moderate
outlook included the slowdown in global economic
pace, apart from weather-related disruptions. The un-
growth and continued uncertainty regarding the Euro-
employment rate had declined somewhat since the
pean fiscal and banking situation.
summer but remained elevated. Although household
spending had continued to advance, growth in business In their discussion of the household sector, many par-
fixed investment had slowed. The housing sector had ticipants noted a recent drop in consumer sentiment
shown further signs of improvement. Consumer price and a softening in consumer spending. Some partici-
inflation had been running somewhat below the Com- pants thought this reflected uncertainty about fiscal
mittee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent, apart from policy, including the prospect of higher taxes, and sev-
temporary variations that largely reflected fluctuations eral noted that growth of households’ real disposable
in energy prices, and longer-term inflation expectations income remained weak despite recent gains in employ-
had remained stable. ment. While indicators of spending were mixed, pur-
chases of autos and other durables remained relatively
In their assessments of the economic outlook, many
strong. A couple of participants observed that busi-
participants thought that the pace of economic expan-
nesses in a few areas had reported strong holiday-
sion would remain moderate in 2013 before picking up
related activity. Many pointed out that reductions in
gradually in 2014 and 2015. This outlook was little
households’ debt, together with rising home prices, had
changed from their projections at recent meetings.
led to an improvement in household balance sheets; it
Hurricane Sandy was expected to weigh on economic
was noted that household net worth was approaching
growth in the current quarter, but rebuilding could
levels seen before the financial crisis.
provide some temporary impetus early in 2013. Partic-

--- Page 7 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r _1_1_–_1_2_, _2_0_12_______________________P_a_g_e_ _7
Business contacts in many parts of the country were firms were having a hard time finding suitable workers;
also said to be highly uncertain about the outlook for indeed, business contacts in a couple of regions had
U.S. fiscal policy, and participants noted that this un- reported difficulty in locating and retaining workers
certainty appeared to have weighed on investment and with requisite skills. However, one participant suggest-
hiring decisions. Although firms’ balance sheets were ed that employer−worker mismatch likely reflected
generally strong and liquidity was ample, some business longer-term problems and had probably not worsened
contacts reported that they had shifted toward a higher materially as a result of the recent deep recession and
proportion of part-time employees and postponed slow recovery.
plans to expand capacity. A number of participants
Incoming information pointed to stable, low inflation
suggested that the business sector was well positioned
that was running a little below the Committee’s longer-
to expand spending and hiring quickly upon a positive
run goal of 2 percent. Crude oil prices had moved
resolution of the fiscal cliff negotiations. In a few re-
down since the October meeting amid accumulating
gions, contacts reported concerns about the expense
inventories and market concerns about a weaker global
associated with new regulations, including those related
outlook. Despite some reports of labor shortages in
to health care, and in some cases indicated a shift to the
certain industries, compensation pressures had re-
hiring of part-time workers in order to avoid these
mained subdued, and unit labor costs were little
costs. There were reports of weaker manufacturing,
changed over the previous four quarters. Most partici-
particularly in the Northeast in the aftermath of Hurri-
pants saw the risks to the inflation outlook as broadly
cane Sandy, and a slackening in economic activity in the
balanced, and many noted that longer-term inflation
Southwest related in part to cutbacks in defense spend-
expectations were well anchored. One participant,
ing. Export orders had softened, reflecting the slow-
however, expressed concern that considerable uncer-
down in global growth. The energy sector continued to
tainty surrounded the relationship between unemploy-
expand. In the agricultural sector, farm incomes were
ment and inflation, raising questions about the extent
high, notwithstanding the drought, although elevated
to which resource slack would keep inflation restrained
grain prices were cutting into profits on livestock.
over the medium term.
Meeting participants generally agreed that the recovery
In their discussion of financial developments, a few
in the housing sector had continued. Many comment-
participants commented that recent steps taken by Eu-
ed that the headwinds facing the housing market ap-
ropean authorities had reduced volatility in sovereign
peared to have dissipated somewhat. The capacity con-
debt markets over the intermeeting period; however,
straints on the processing of new home-mortgage ap-
concerns remained about the fiscal and economic out-
plications appeared to be easing, and gradually rising
look in Europe. Many noted the ongoing deleveraging
home prices had reduced the proportion of households
in the private nonfinancial sector of the U.S. economy
with underwater mortgages. It was noted that the mix
and indicated that it was difficult to judge when that
of new home sales seemed to have shifted from homes
process would be complete. A few participants, ob-
already completed to homes not yet built.
serving that low interest rates had increased the de-
In discussing labor market developments, participants mand for riskier financial products, pointed to the pos-
generally viewed the recent data as having been some- sibility that holding interest rates low for a prolonged
what better than expected, with moderate gains in pay- period could lead to financial imbalances and impru-
roll employment and a decline in the unemployment dent risk-taking. One participant suggested that there
rate. However, the unemployment rate remained ele- were several historical episodes in the United States and
vated, and part of the decline in unemployment in No- other countries that might be used to build a better
vember was attributable to a drop in labor force partic- understanding of the financial strains that could devel-
ipation. A few participants noted that some exits from op from a long period of very low long-term interest
the labor force may have been related to the loss or rates. Pointing to a recent decision of the Financial
prospective loss of eligibility for emergency unem- Stability Oversight Council, one participant commented
ployment insurance benefits. Several pointed to indica- that further money market mutual fund reform would
tors suggesting that rates of hiring remained depressed help reduce risk in the financial system.
relative to those observed before the financial crisis. A
Participants exchanged views on the likely benefits and
couple of participants noted that vacancies remained at
costs of additional asset purchases in the context of an
a high level in terms of their historical relationship to
assessment of the ongoing purchases of MBS and pos-
the rate of unemployment, suggesting that at least some

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
sible additional purchases of longer-term Treasury se- cent for projected inflation between one and two years
curities to follow the conclusion of the maturity exten- ahead. Most participants favored replacing the calen-
sion program. Regarding the benefits, it was noted that dar-date forward guidance with economic thresholds,
asset purchases provide support to the economic re- and several noted that the consistency between the
covery by putting downward pressure on longer-term “mid-2015” reference in the Committee’s October
interest rates and promoting more-accommodative fi- statement and the specific quantitative thresholds being
nancial conditions. Participants discussed the effec- considered at the current meeting provided an oppor-
tiveness of purchasing different types of assets and the tunity for a smooth transition. However, possible ad-
potential for the effects on yields from purchases in the vantages of waiting a while to introduce the change to
market for one class of securities to spill over to other the Committee’s forward guidance were also men-
markets. If these spillovers are significant, then pur- tioned, including that a delay might simplify communi-
chases of longer-term Treasury securities might be pre- cations by keeping the introduction of thresholds sepa-
ferred, in light of the depth and liquidity of that market. rate from the announcement of additional asset pur-
However, if markets are more segmented, purchases of chases. Among the benefits of quantitative thresholds
MBS might be preferred because they would provide that were cited was that they could help the public
more support to real activity through the housing sec- more readily understand how the likely timing of an
tor. One participant commented that the best ap- eventual increase in the federal funds rate would shift
proach would be to continue purchases in both the in response to unanticipated changes in economic con-
Treasury and MBS markets, given the uncertainty about ditions and the outlook. Accordingly, thresholds could
the precise channels through which asset purchases increase the probability that market reactions to eco-
operated. Others emphasized the advantages of MBS nomic developments would move longer-term interest
purchases, including by noting the apparent effective- rates in a manner consistent with the Committee’s view
ness of recent MBS purchases on the housing market, regarding the likely future path of short-term interest
while another participant objected and thought that rates. A few participants expressed a preference for
Federal Reserve purchases should not direct credit to a using a qualitative description of the economic indica-
specific sector. With regard to the possible costs and tors influencing the Committee’s thinking about cur-
risks of purchases, a number of participants expressed rent and future monetary policy rather than quantitative
the concern that additional purchases could complicate guidance because they felt that qualitative guidance
the Committee’s efforts to eventually withdraw mone- would be at least as effective as numerical thresholds
tary policy accommodation, for example, by potentially while avoiding some potential disadvantages, including
causing inflation expectations to rise or by impairing the possibility that the numerical thresholds would be
the future implementation of monetary policy. Partici- mistakenly interpreted as the Committee’s longer-run
pants also discussed the implications of continued asset objectives. A few participants commented that the
purchases for the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance quantitative thresholds might be interpreted as triggers
sheet. Depending on the path for the balance sheet that, when reached, would prompt an immediate in-
and interest rates, the Federal Reserve’s net income and crease in short-term rates. However, a number of par-
its remittances to the Treasury could be significantly ticipants indicated that the Chairman’s press confer-
affected during the period of policy normalization. ence and other avenues of communication could be
Participants noted that the Committee would need to used to emphasize, for example, the distinction be-
continue to assess whether large purchases were having tween thresholds and the longer-run objectives as well
adverse effects on market functioning and financial as between thresholds and triggers. Participants also
stability. They expressed a range of views on the ap- discussed the importance of clarifying that the thresh-
propriate pace of purchases, both now and as the out- olds would not be followed mechanically and that a
look evolved. It was agreed that both the efficacy and variety of indicators of labor market conditions and
the costs would need to be carefully monitored and inflation pressures, as well as financial developments,
taken into account in determining the size, pace, and would be taken into account in setting policy.
composition of asset purchases.
Committee Policy Action
Meeting participants discussed the possibility of replac- Committee members viewed the information received
ing the calendar date in the forward guidance for the over the intermeeting period as suggesting that eco-
federal funds rate with specific quantitative thresholds nomic activity and employment continued to expand at
of 6½ percent for the unemployment rate and 2½ per- a moderate pace in recent months, abstracting from

--- Page 9 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r _1_1_–_1_2_, _2_0_12_______________________P_a_g_e_ _9
weather-related disruptions. Household spending had the need for considerable policy accommodation but
continued to advance and the housing sector had did not state a specific time frame or total for purchas-
shown further signs of improvement, but growth in the es. Several others thought that it would probably be
business sector had slowed. Anecdotal evidence indi- appropriate to slow or to stop purchases well before
cated that uncertainty about U.S. fiscal policy weighed the end of 2013, citing concerns about financial stabil-
heavily on sentiment in the household and business ity or the size of the balance sheet. One member
sectors. Although the unemployment rate had declined viewed any additional purchases as unwarranted.
somewhat since the summer, it was still elevated rela-
With regard to its forward guidance about the federal
tive to levels that members viewed as normal in the
funds rate, the Committee decided to indicate in the
longer run. Members generally agreed that the eco-
statement language that it expects the highly accom-
nomic outlook was little changed since the previous
modative stance of monetary policy to remain appro-
meeting and judged that, without sufficient policy ac-
priate for a considerable time after the asset purchase
commodation, economic growth might not be strong
program ends and the economic recovery strengthens.
enough to generate sustained improvement in labor
In addition, all but one member agreed to replace the
market conditions. Furthermore, strains in global fi-
date-based guidance with economic thresholds indicat-
nancial markets continued to pose significant downside
ing that the exceptionally low range for the federal
risks to the economic outlook. Inflation had been sub-
funds rate would remain appropriate at least as long as
dued, apart from some temporary variations that largely
the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent,
reflected fluctuations in energy prices. With longer-
inflation between one and two years ahead is projected
term inflation expectations stable, inflation over the
to be no more than a half percentage point above the
medium term was anticipated to run at or below the
Committee’s longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation
Committee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent.
expectations continue to be well anchored. The Com-
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period mittee thought it would be helpful to indicate in the
ahead, all members but one judged that continued pro- statement that it viewed the economic thresholds as
vision of monetary accommodation was warranted in consistent with its earlier, date-based guidance. The
order to support further progress toward the Commit- new language noted that the Committee would also
tee’s goals of maximum employment and price stability. consider other information when determining how
The Committee judged that such accommodation long to maintain the highly accommodative stance of
should be provided in part by continuing to purchase monetary policy, including additional measures of labor
MBS at a pace of $40 billion per month and by pur- market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and
chasing longer-term Treasury securities, initially at a inflation expectations, and readings on financial devel-
pace of $45 billion per month, following the comple- opments. One member dissented from the policy deci-
tion of the maturity extension program at the end of sion, opposing the new economic threshold language in
the year. The Committee also maintained its existing the forward guidance, as well as the additional asset
policy of reinvesting principal payments from its hold- purchases and continued intervention in the MBS mar-
ings of agency debt and agency MBS into agency MBS ket.
and decided that, starting in January, it will resume roll-
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
ing over maturing Treasury securities at auction. While
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
almost all members thought that the asset purchase
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
program begun in September had been effective and
cute transactions in the System Account in accordance
supportive of growth, they also generally saw that the
with the following domestic policy directive:
benefits of ongoing purchases were uncertain and that
the potential costs could rise as the size of the balance “The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
sheet increased. Various members stressed the im- monetary and financial conditions that will
portance of a continuing assessment of labor market foster price stability and promote sustainable
developments and reviews of the program’s efficacy growth in output. To further its long-run
and costs at upcoming FOMC meetings. In consider- objectives, the Committee seeks conditions
ing the outlook for the labor market and the broader in reserve markets consistent with federal
economy, a few members expressed the view that on- funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.
going asset purchases would likely be warranted until The Committee directs the Desk to complete
about the end of 2013, while a few others emphasized the maturity extension program it announced

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
in June to purchase Treasury securities with energy prices. Longer-term inflation expec-
remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years tations have remained stable.
with a total face value of about $267 billion
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
by the end of December 2012, and to sell or
Committee seeks to foster maximum em-
redeem Treasury securities with remaining
ployment and price stability. The Committee
maturities of approximately 3 years or less
remains concerned that, without sufficient
with a total face value of about $267 billion.
policy accommodation, economic growth
Following the completion of this program,
might not be strong enough to generate sus-
the Committee directs the Desk to resume its
tained improvement in labor market condi-
policy of rolling over maturing Treasury se-
tions. Furthermore, strains in global finan-
curities into new issues. From the beginning
cial markets continue to pose significant
of January, the Desk is directed to purchase
downside risks to the economic outlook.
longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of
The Committee also anticipates that inflation
about $45 billion per month. The Commit-
over the medium term likely will run at or
tee directs the Desk to maintain its existing
below its 2 percent objective.
policy of reinvesting principal payments on
all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed To support a stronger economic recovery
securities in the System Open Market Ac- and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
count in agency mortgage-backed securities. is at the rate most consistent with its dual
The Desk is also directed to continue pur- mandate, the Committee will continue pur-
chasing agency mortgage-backed securities at chasing additional agency mortgage-backed
a pace of about $40 billion per month. The securities at a pace of $40 billion per month.
Committee directs the Desk to engage in The Committee also will purchase longer-
dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as term Treasury securities after its program to
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Fed- extend the average maturity of its holdings of
eral Reserve’s agency MBS transactions. The Treasury securities is completed at the end of
System Open Market Account Manager and the year, initially at a pace of $45 billion per
the Secretary will keep the Committee in- month. The Committee is maintaining its
formed of ongoing developments regarding existing policy of reinvesting principal pay-
the System’s balance sheet that could affect ments from its holdings of agency debt and
the attainment over time of the Committee’s agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
objectives of maximum employment and mortgage-backed securities and, in January,
price stability.” will resume rolling over maturing Treasury
securities at auction. Taken together, these
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
actions should maintain downward pressure
low to be released at 12:30 p.m.:
on longer-term interest rates, support mort-
“Information received since the Federal gage markets, and help to make broader fi-
Open Market Committee met in October nancial conditions more accommodative.
suggests that economic activity and employ-
The Committee will closely monitor incom-
ment have continued to expand at a moder-
ing information on economic and financial
ate pace in recent months, apart from weath-
developments in coming months. If the out-
er-related disruptions. Although the unem-
look for the labor market does not improve
ployment rate has declined somewhat since
substantially, the Committee will continue its
the summer, it remains elevated. Household
purchases of Treasury and agency mortgage-
spending has continued to advance, and the
backed securities, and employ its other policy
housing sector has shown further signs of
tools as appropriate, until such improvement
improvement, but growth in business fixed
is achieved in a context of price stability. In
investment has slowed. Inflation has been
determining the size, pace, and composition
running somewhat below the Committee’s
of its asset purchases, the Committee will, as
longer-run objective, apart from temporary
always, take appropriate account of the likely
variations that largely reflect fluctuations in
efficacy and costs of such purchases.

--- Page 11 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r _1_1_–_1_2_, _2_0_12______________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
To support continued progress toward max- Pianalto, Jerome H. Powell, Sarah Bloom Raskin, Jere-
imum employment and price stability, the my C. Stein, Daniel K. Tarullo, John C. Williams, and
Committee expects that a highly accommo- Janet L. Yellen.
dative stance of monetary policy will remain
Voting against this action: Jeffrey M. Lacker.
appropriate for a considerable time after the
asset purchase program ends and the eco- Mr. Lacker dissented because he objected to the asset
nomic recovery strengthens. In particular, purchases and to the characterization of the conditions
the Committee decided to keep the target under which an exceptionally low range for the federal
range for the federal funds rate at 0 to funds rate would remain appropriate. He continued to
¼ percent and currently anticipates that this view asset purchases as unlikely to add to economic
exceptionally low range for the federal funds growth without unacceptably increasing the risk of fu-
rate will be appropriate at least as long as the ture inflation, and to see purchases of MBS as inappro-
unemployment rate remains above 6½ per- priate credit allocation. With regard to the funds rate,
cent, inflation between one and two years Mr. Lacker was concerned that linking the forward
ahead is projected to be no more than a half guidance to a specific numerical level of the unem-
percentage point above the Committee’s ployment rate would inhibit the effectiveness of the
2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term Committee’s communications and increase the poten-
inflation expectations continue to be well an- tial for inflationary policy errors; he preferred qualita-
chored. The Committee views these thresh- tive guidance instead.
olds as consistent with its earlier date-based
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
guidance. In determining how long to main-
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, January 29–30,
tain a highly accommodative stance of mone-
2013. The meeting adjourned at 11:25 a.m. on Decem-
tary policy, the Committee will also consider
ber 12, 2012.
other information, including additional
measures of labor market conditions, indica- Notation Vote
tors of inflation pressures and inflation ex- By notation vote completed on November 9, 2012, the
pectations, and readings on financial devel- Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
opments. When the Committee decides to FOMC meeting held on October 23–24, 2012.
begin to remove policy accommodation, it
will take a balanced approach consistent with
its longer-run goals of maximum employ-
ment and inflation of 2 percent.”
_____________________________
Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C. William B. English
Dudley, Elizabeth Duke, Dennis P. Lockhart, Sandra Secretary

--- Page 12 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the December 11–12, 2012, Feder- period and inflation would remain subdued (table 1 and
al Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, meeting figure 1). Participants anticipated that the growth rate
participants—the 7 members of the Board of Gover- of real gross domestic product (GDP) would increase
nors and the 12 presidents of the Federal Reserve somewhat in 2013 and again in 2014, and that econom-
Banks, all of whom participate in the deliberations of ic growth in 2014 and 2015 would exceed their esti-
the FOMC—submitted their assessments of real out- mates of the longer-run sustainable rate of growth,
put growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the while the unemployment rate would decline gradually
target federal funds rate for each year from 2012 through 2015. Participants projected that each year’s
through 2015 and over the longer run. Each partici- inflation, as measured by the annual change in the price
pant’s assessment was based on information available index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE),
at the time of the meeting plus his or her judgment of would run close to or below the FOMC’s longer-run
appropriate monetary policy and assumptions about the inflation objective of 2 percent.
factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The long-
As shown in figure 2, most participants judged that
er-run projections represent each participant’s judg-
highly accommodative monetary policy was likely to be
ment of the value to which each variable would be ex-
warranted over the next few years. In particular,
pected to converge, over time, under appropriate mon-
14 participants thought that it would be appropriate for
etary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the
the first increase in the target federal funds rate to oc-
economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as
cur during 2015 or later. Most participants judged that
the future path of policy that each participant deems
appropriate monetary policy would include purchasing
most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity
agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and longer-
and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual in-
term Treasury securities after the completion of the
terpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objectives of max-
maturity extension program at the end of 2012.
imum employment and stable prices.
As in September, participants judged the uncertainty
Overall, the assessments submitted in December indi-
associated with the outlook for real activity and the
cated that FOMC participants projected that, under
unemployment rate to be unusually high compared
appropriate monetary policy, the pace of economic
with historical norms, with the risks weighted mainly
recovery would gradually pick up over the 2012–15
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, December 2012
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer run 2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer run
Change in real GDP . . 1.7 to 1.8 2.3 to 3.0 3.0 to 3.5 3.0 to 3.7 2.3 to 2.5 1.6 to 2.0 2.0 to 3.2 2.8 to 4.0 2.5 to 4.2 2.2 to 3.0
September projection . 1.7 to 2.0 2.5 to 3.0 3.0 to 3.8 3.0 to 3.8 2.3 to 2.5 1.6 to 2.0 2.3 to 3.5 2.7 to 4.1 2.5 to 4.2 2.2 to 3.0
Unemployment rate. . . 7.8 to 7.9 7.4 to 7.7 6.8 to 7.3 6.0 to 6.6 5.2 to 6.0 7.7 to 8.0 6.9 to 7.8 6.1 to 7.4 5.7 to 6.8 5.0 to 6.0
September projection . 8.0 to 8.2 7.6 to 7.9 6.7 to 7.3 6.0 to 6.8 5.2 to 6.0 8.0 to 8.3 7.0 to 8.0 6.3 to 7.5 5.7 to 6.9 5.0 to 6.3
PCE inflation. . . . . . . . 1.6 to 1.7 1.3 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 2.0 1.6 to 1.8 1.3 to 2.0 1.4 to 2.2 1.5 to 2.2 2.0
September projection . 1.7 to 1.8 1.6 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 2.0 1.5 to 1.9 1.5 to 2.1 1.6 to 2.2 1.8 to 2.3 2.0
Core PCE inflation3. . 1.6 to 1.7 1.6 to 1.9 1.6 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 1.6 to 1.8 1.5 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.2
September projection . 1.7 to 1.9 1.7 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 1.9 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.2 1.8 to 2.3
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the pre-
vious year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for
personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average
civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary
policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The September projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal
Open Market Committee on September 12–13, 2012.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

--- Page 13 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure1. Centraltendenciesandrangesofeconomicprojections,2012–15andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
5
Central tendency of projections
4
Range of projections
3
2
1
+
Actual 0
-
1
2
3
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesofthevariablesare
annual.

--- Page 14 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _11_–_1_2_,_ 2_0_1_2____________P_a_g_e_ _3
Figure2. OverviewofFOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy,December2012
Number of participants
Appropriate timing of policy firming 13
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
2013 2014 2015 2016
Appropriate pace of policy firming Percent
Target federal funds rate at year end
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer run
Note: Intheupperpanel,theheightofeachbardenotesthenumberofFOMCparticipantswhojudgethat,under
appropriatemonetarypolicy,thefirstincreaseinthetargetfederalfundsratefromitscurrentrangeof0to1/4percent
willoccurinthespecifiedcalendaryear. InSeptember2012,thenumbersofFOMCparticipantswhojudgedthatthe
first increase in the target federal funds rate would occur in 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2016 were, respectively, 1, 3,
2,12,and1. Inthelowerpanel,eachshadedcircleindicatesthevalue(roundedtothenearest1/4percentagepoint)of
anindividualparticipant’sjudgmentoftheappropriatelevelofthetargetfederalfundsrateattheendofthespecified
calendaryearoroverthelongerrun.

--- Page 15 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
toward slower economic growth and a higher unem- end of 2014, and 6.0 to 6.6 percent at the end of 2015.
ployment rate. While a number of participants viewed The central tendency of participants’ estimates of the
the uncertainty surrounding their projections for infla- longer-run normal rate of unemployment that would
tion to be unusually high, more saw the level of uncer- prevail under appropriate monetary policy and in the
tainty to be broadly similar to historical norms; most absence of further shocks to the economy was 5.2 to
considered the risks to inflation to be roughly balanced. 6.0 percent, unchanged from September. Most partici-
pants projected that the unemployment rate would
The Outlook for Economic Activity
converge to their estimates of its longer-run normal
Participants judged that the economy grew at a moder-
rate in five or six years, while a few judged that less
ate pace over the second half of 2012 and projected
time would be needed.
that, conditional on their individual assumptions about
appropriate monetary policy, the economy would grow Figures 3.A and 3.B provide details on the diversity of
at a somewhat faster pace in 2013 before expanding in participants’ views regarding the likely outcomes for
2014 and 2015 at a rate above what participants saw as real GDP growth and the unemployment rate over the
the longer-run rate of output growth. The central ten- next three years and over the longer run. The disper-
dency of their projections for the change in real GDP sion in these projections reflects differences in partici-
in 2012 was 1.7 to 1.8 percent, slightly lower than in pants’ assessments of many factors, including appropri-
September. A number of participants mentioned that ate monetary policy and its effects on the economy, the
last summer’s drought and the effects of Hurricane rate of improvement in the housing sector, the spillover
Sandy likely had held down economic activity in the effects of the fiscal and financial situation in Europe,
second half of this year. Many participants also noted the prospective path for U.S. fiscal policy, the extent of
that, while conditions in the housing and labor markets structural dislocations in the labor market, the likely
appeared to have improved recently, uncertainty about evolution of credit and financial market conditions, and
fiscal policy appeared to be holding back business and longer-term trends in productivity and the labor force.
household spending. Participants’ projections for 2013 With the data for much of 2012 now in hand, the dis-
through 2015 were generally little changed relative to persion of participants’ projections of real GDP growth
their September projections. The central tendency of and the unemployment rate this year narrowed com-
participants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2013 pared with their September submissions. Meanwhile,
was 2.3 to 3.0 percent, followed by a central tendency the distribution of participants’ forecasts for the change
of 3.0 to 3.5 percent for 2014 and one of 3.0 to in real GDP in 2013 shifted down a bit, and that for
3.7 percent for 2015. The central tendency for the 2014 narrowed slightly. However, the range of projec-
longer-run rate of increase of real GDP remained 2.3 to tions for real GDP growth in 2015 was little changed
2.5 percent, unchanged from September. Most partici- from September. The distributions of the unemploy-
pants noted that the high degree of monetary policy ment rate projections at the end of 2012, 2013, and
accommodation assumed in their projections would 2014 all shifted lower, while the range of projections
help promote the economic recovery over the forecast for the unemployment rate for 2015, at 5.7 to 6.8 per-
period; however, they also judged that several factors cent, remained close to its September level. The dis-
would likely hold back the pace of economic expan- persion of estimates for the longer-run rate of output
sion, including slower growth abroad, a still-weak hous- growth stayed fairly narrow, with all but one between
ing market, the difficult fiscal and financial situation in 2.2 and 2.5 percent. The range of participants’ esti-
Europe, and fiscal restraint in the United States. mates of the longer-run rate of unemployment, at
5.0 to 6.0 percent, narrowed relative to September.
Participants projected the unemployment rate for the
This range reflected different judgments among partic-
final quarter of 2012 to be close to its average level in
ipants about several factors, including the outlook for
October and November, implying a rate somewhat
labor force participation and the structure of the labor
below that projected in September. Participants antici-
market.
pated a gradual decline in the unemployment rate over
the forecast period; even so, they generally thought that The Outlook for Inflation
the unemployment rate at the end of 2015 would still Participants’ views on the broad outlook for inflation
be well above their individual estimates of its longer- under appropriate monetary policy were little changed
run normal level. The central tendencies of partici- from September. Most anticipated that inflation for
pants’ forecasts for the unemployment rate were 7.4 to 2012 as a whole would be close to 1.6 percent, some-
7.7 percent at the end of 2013, 6.8 to 7.3 percent at the what lower than projected in September. A number of

--- Page 16 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _11_–_1_2_,_ 2_0_1_2____________P_a_g_e_ _5
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2012–15andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2012 20
December projections 18
16
September projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2. 4 2. 6 2. 8 3. 0 3. 2 3. 4 3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2013 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2. 4 2. 6 2. 8 3. 0 3. 2 3. 4 3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2. 4 2. 6 2. 8 3. 0 3. 2 3. 4 3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2. 4 2. 6 2. 8 3. 0 3. 2 3. 4 3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2. 4 2. 6 2. 8 3. 0 3. 2 3. 4 3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 17 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2012–15andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2012 20
December projections 18
16
September projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2 6.4 6.6 6.8 7.0 7.2 7.4 7.6 7.8 8.0 8.2
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2013 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2 6.4 6.6 6.8 7.0 7.2 7.4 7.6 7.8 8.0 8.2
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2 6.4 6.6 6.8 7.0 7.2 7.4 7.6 7.8 8.0 8.2
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2 6.4 6.6 6.8 7.0 7.2 7.4 7.6 7.8 8.0 8.2
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2 6.4 6.6 6.8 7.0 7.2 7.4 7.6 7.8 8.0 8.2
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 18 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _11_–_1_2_,_ 2_0_1_2____________P_a_g_e_ _7
participants remarked that recent inflation readings had rate would range from ½ to 2¾ percent at the end of
come in below their expectations. Almost all of the 2014 and from 2 to 4½ percent at the end of 2015.
participants judged that both headline and core infla-
Among the participants who saw a later tightening of
tion would remain subdued over the 2013–15 period,
policy, a majority indicated that they believed it was
running at rates equal to or below the FOMC’s longer-
appropriate to maintain the current level of the federal
run objective of 2 percent. Specifically, the central ten-
funds rate until the unemployment rate is less than or
dency of participants’ projections for inflation, as
equal to 6½ percent. In contrast, a majority of those
measured by the PCE price index, moved down to
who favored an earlier tightening of policy pointed to
1.3 to 2.0 percent for 2013 and was little changed for
concerns about inflation as a primary reason for ex-
2014 and 2015 at 1.5 to 2.0 percent and 1.7 to 2.0 per-
pecting that it would be appropriate to tighten policy
cent, respectively. The central tendencies of the fore-
sooner. Participants were about evenly split between
casts for core inflation were broadly similar to those for
those who judged the appropriate path for the federal
the headline measure for 2013 through 2015. In dis-
funds rate to be unchanged relative to September and
cussing factors likely to sustain low inflation, several
those who saw the appropriate path as lower.
participants cited stable inflation expectations and ex-
pectations for continued sizable resource slack. Nearly all participants saw the appropriate target for
the federal funds rate at the end of 2015 as still well
Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information about the
below its expected longer-run value. Estimates of the
diversity of participants’ views about the outlook for
longer-run target federal funds rate ranged from 3 to
inflation. The range of participants’ projections for
4½ percent, reflecting the Committee’s inflation objec-
headline inflation for 2012 narrowed from 1.5 to
tive of 2 percent and participants’ judgments about the
1.9 percent in September to 1.6 to 1.8 percent in De-
longer-run equilibrium level of the real federal funds
cember; nearly all participants’ projections in December
rate.
were at 1.6 percent or 1.7 percent, broadly in line with
recent inflation readings. The distributions of partici- Participants also provided information on their views
pants’ projections for headline inflation in 2013 and regarding the appropriate path of the Federal Reserve’s
2014 shifted lower compared with the corresponding balance sheet. Most participants thought it was appro-
distributions for September, while the range of projec- priate for the Committee to continue purchasing MBS
tions for core inflation narrowed slightly for both years. and longer-term Treasury securities after completing
The distributions for core and overall inflation in 2015 the maturity extension program at the end of this year.
were concentrated near the Committee’s longer-run In their projections, taking into account the likely bene-
inflation objective of 2 percent, although somewhat less fits and costs of purchases as well as the expected evo-
so than in September. lution of the outlook, these participants were approxi-
mately evenly divided between those who judged that it
Appropriate Monetary Policy
would likely be appropriate for the Committee to com-
As indicated in figure 2, most participants judged that
plete its asset purchases sometime around the middle
exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate would
of 2013 and those who judged that it would likely be
remain appropriate for several more years. In particu-
appropriate for the asset purchases to continue beyond
lar, 13 participants thought that the first increase in the
that date. In contrast, several participants believed the
target federal funds rate would not be warranted until
Committee would best foster its dual objectives by end-
2015, and 1 judged that policy firming would likely not
ing its purchases of Treasury securities or all of its asset
be appropriate until 2016 (upper panel). The 13 partic-
purchases at the end of this year when the maturity
ipants who expected that the target federal funds rate
extension program was completed.
would not move above its effective lower bound until
2015 thought the federal funds rate would be 1¼ per- Key factors informing participants’ views of the eco-
cent or lower at the end of that year, while the 1 partic- nomic outlook and the appropriate setting for mone-
ipant who expected that policy firming would com- tary policy include their judgments regarding labor
mence in 2016 saw the federal funds rate target at market conditions that would be consistent with maxi-
50 basis points at the end of that year. Five partici- mum employment, the extent to which employment
pants judged that an earlier increase in the federal funds currently deviated from maximum employment, the
rate, in 2013 or 2014, would be most consistent with extent to which projected inflation over the medium
the Committee’s statutory mandate. Those participants term deviated from the Committee’s longer-term objec-
judged that the appropriate value for the federal funds tive of 2 percent, and participants’ projections of the

--- Page 19 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2012–15andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2012 20
December projections 18
16
September projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2013 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _11_–_1_2_,_ 2_0_1_2____________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2012–15
Number of participants
2012 20
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2013 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
likely time horizon necessary to return employment and Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
inflation to mandate-consistent levels. Many partici- Percentage points
Variable 2012 2013 2014 2015
pants mentioned economic thresholds based on the
unemployment rate and the inflation outlook that were
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . ±0.6 ±1.4 ±1.7 ±1.7
consistent with their judgments of when it would be Unemployment rate1 . . . . . ±0.2 ±0.9 ±1.5 ±1.9
appropriate to consider beginning to raise the federal
Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.5 ±0.9 ±1.1 ±1.0
funds rate. A couple of participants noted that their
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the
assessments of the appropriate path for the federal root mean squared error of projections for 1992 through 2011 that
funds rate took into account the likelihood that the were released in the fall by various private and government forecast-
ers. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain
neutral level of the federal funds rate was somewhat
assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual out-
below its historical norm. There was some concern comes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in
expressed that a protracted period of very accommoda- ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the
past. Further information may be found in David Reifschneider and
tive monetary policy could lead to imbalances in the
Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Out-
financial system. It was also noted that because the look from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics
Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the
appropriate stance of monetary policy is conditional on
Federal Reserve System, November).
the evolution of real activity and inflation over time, 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
assessments of the appropriate future path of the fed- 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price meas-
ure that has been most widely used in government and private eco-
eral funds rate and the balance sheet could change if
nomic forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the
economic conditions were to evolve in an unexpected previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.
manner.
ous 20 years (figure 4).1 Seven participants judged that
Figure 3.E details the distribution of participants’ the levels of uncertainty associated with their forecasts
judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target of total PCE inflation were higher as well, while anoth-
federal funds rate at the end of each calendar year from er 10 participants viewed uncertainty about inflation as
2012 to 2015 and over the longer run. As previously broadly similar to historical norms. The main factors
noted, most participants judged that economic condi- cited as contributing to the elevated uncertainty about
tions would warrant maintaining the current low level economic outcomes were the difficulties involved in
of the federal funds rate until 2015. Views on the ap- predicting fiscal policy in the United States, the contin-
propriate level of the federal funds rate by the end of uing potential for European developments to threaten
2015 varied, with 12 participants seeing the appropriate financial stability, and the possibility of a general slow-
level of the federal funds rate as 1 percent or lower and down in global economic growth. As in September,
4 of them seeing the appropriate level as 2½ percent or participants noted the challenges associated with fore-
higher. Generally, the participants who judged that a casting the path of the U.S. economic recovery follow-
longer period of very accommodative monetary policy ing a financial crisis and recession that differed marked-
would be appropriate were those who projected that a ly from recent historical experience. A number of par-
sizable gap between the unemployment rate and the ticipants also commented that in the aftermath of the
longer-run normal level of the unemployment rate financial crisis, they were more uncertain about the lev-
would persist until 2015 or later. In contrast, the ma- el of potential output and its rate of growth. It was
jority of the 5 participants who judged that policy firm- noted that some of the uncertainty about potential out-
ing should begin in 2013 or 2014 indicated that the put arose from the risk that a continuation of elevated
Committee would need to act relatively soon in order levels of long-term unemployment might impair the
to keep inflation near the FOMC’s longer-run objective skills of the affected individuals or cause some of them
of 2 percent and to prevent a rise in inflation expecta- to drop out of the labor force, thereby reducing poten-
tions. tial output in the medium term.
Uncertainty and Risks
Nearly all of the participants judged their current levels 1 Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for
of uncertainty about real GDP growth and unemploy- the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total
ment to be higher than was the norm during the previ- consumer price inflation over the period from 1992 through
2011. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncer-
tainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertain-
ty in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used
to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’
projections.

--- Page 22 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _11_–_1_2_,_ 2_0_1_2___________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthetargetfederalfundsrate,2012–15andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2012
December projections
September projections 1 2 8 0
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2013
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2014
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2015
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Note: The target federal funds rate is measured as the level of the target rate at the end of the calendar year or
inthelongerrun.

--- Page 23 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4. Uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth 20 Risks to GDP growth 20
December projections 18 December projections 18
September projections 16 September projections 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate 20 Risks to the unemployment rate 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation 20 Risks to PCE inflation 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation 20 Risks to core PCE inflation 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”Defini-
tionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 24 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _11_–_1_2_,_ 2_0_1_2___________P__ag_e_ _1_3
A majority of participants reported that they saw the flation expectations. However, three participants saw
risks to their forecasts of real GDP growth as weighted the risks to inflation as tilted to the downside, reflect-
toward the downside and, accordingly, the risks to their ing, for example, risks of disinflation that could arise
projections of the unemployment rate as tilted to the from adverse shocks to the economy that policy would
upside. The most frequently identified sources of risk have limited scope to offset. A couple of participants
were U.S. fiscal policy, which many participants saw the risks to inflation as weighted to the upside in
thought had the potential to slow economic activity light of concerns about U.S. fiscal imbalances, the cur-
significantly over the near term, and the situation in rent highly accommodative stance of monetary policy,
Europe. and uncertainty about the Committee’s ability to shift
to a less accommodative policy stance when it becomes
Most participants continued to judge the risks to their
appropriate to do so.
projections for inflation as broadly balanced, with sev-
eral highlighting the recent stability of longer-term in

--- Page 25 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_4____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by cent in the second year, and 1.3 to 4.7 percent
the members of the Board of Governors and in the third and fourth years. The correspond-
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks ing 70 percent confidence intervals for overall
inform discussions of monetary policy among inflation would be 1.5 to 2.5 percent in the cur-
policymakers and can aid public understand- rent year, 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the second year,
ing of the basis for policy actions. Consider- 0.9 to 3.1 percent in the third year, and 1.0 to
able uncertainty attends these projections, 3.0 percent in the fourth year.
however. The economic and statistical models Because current conditions may differ
and relationships used to help produce eco- from those that prevailed, on average, over his-
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de- tory, participants provide judgments as to
scriptions of the real world, and the future whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
path of the economy can be affected by myr- jections of each variable is greater than, smaller
iad unforeseen developments and events. than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, forecast uncertainty in the past, as shown in
participants consider not only what appears to table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
be the most likely economic outcome as em- to whether the risks to their projections are
bodied in their projections, but also the range weighted to the upside, are weighted to the
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
their occurring, and the potential costs to the participants judge whether each variable is
economy should they occur. more likely to be above or below their projec-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical tions of the most likely outcome. These judg-
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including ments about the uncertainty and the risks at-
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports tending each participant’s projections are dis-
and those prepared by the Federal Reserve tinct from the diversity of participants’ views
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the about the most likely outcomes. Forecast un-
Federal Open Market Committee. The pro- certainty is concerned with the risks associated
jection error ranges shown in the table il- with a particular projection rather than with
lustrate the considerable uncertainty associat- divergences across a number of different pro-
ed with economic forecasts. For example, jections.
suppose a participant projects that real gross As with real activity and inflation, the out-
domestic product (GDP) and total consumer look for the future path of the federal funds
prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, re- rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This
spectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty arises primarily because each partic-
uncertainty attending those projections is simi- ipant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of
lar to that experienced in the past and the risks monetary policy depends importantly on the
around the projections are broadly balanced, evolution of real activity and inflation over
the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a time. If economic conditions evolve in an un-
probability of about 70 percent that actual expected manner, then assessments of the ap-
GDP would expand within a range of 2.4 to propriate setting of the federal funds rate
3.6 percent in the current year, 1.6 to 4.4 per- would change from that point forward.

# Tables

## Page_12_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |      |      |      |            |      |      |      |      |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|------|------------|------|------|------|------|
| 2012                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | 2013 | 2014 | 2015 | Longer run | 2012 | 2013 | 2014 | 2015 |
| 1.7 to 1.8 2.3 to 3.0 3.0 to 3.5 3.0 to 3.7 2.3 to 2.5
1.7 to 2.0 2.5 to 3.0 3.0 to 3.8 3.0 to 3.8 2.3 to 2.5
7.8 to 7.9 7.4 to 7.7 6.8 to 7.3 6.0 to 6.6 5.2 to 6.0
8.0 to 8.2 7.6 to 7.9 6.7 to 7.3 6.0 to 6.8 5.2 to 6.0
1.6 to 1.7 1.3 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 2.0
1.7 to 1.8 1.6 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 2.0
1.6 to 1.7 1.6 to 1.9 1.6 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0
1.7 to 1.9 1.7 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 1.9 to 2.0 |      |      |      |            |      |      |      |      |