# 20120801_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:36:51*
*Pages: 10, Tables: 0*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
July 31–August 1, 2012
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Pol-
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the icy and Research, Board of Governors
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues-
day, July 31, 2012, at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Jon W. Faust and Andrew T. Levin, Special Advisors to
Wednesday, August 1, 2012, at 9:00 a.m. the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
Governors
PRESENT:
Ben Bernanke, Chairman James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Mone-
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman tary Affairs, Board of Governors
Elizabeth Duke
Jeffrey M. Lacker Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Dennis P. Lockhart Board Members, Board of Governors
Sandra Pianalto
Jerome H. Powell Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Director, Division
Sarah Bloom Raskin of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Jeremy C. Stein
Daniel K. Tarullo Thomas Laubach, Senior Adviser, Division of Research
John C. Williams and Statistics, Board of Governors; Joyce K. Zick-
Janet L. Yellen ler, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans,
Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Alternate Michael T. Kiley and David E. Lebow, Associate Di-
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee rectors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and
Charles I. Plosser, Presidents of the Federal Re- Karen M. Pence, Assistant Director, Division of Re-
serve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadel- search and Statistics, Board of Governors
phia, respectively
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Mone-
William B. English, Secretary and Economist tary Affairs, Board of Governors
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary Elizabeth Klee, Senior Economist, Division of Mone-
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary tary Affairs, Board of Governors; Robert J. Tetlow,
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Senior Economist, Division of Research and Statis-
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel tics, Board of Governors
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Steven B. Kamin, Economist David A. Sapenaro, First Vice President, Federal Re-
David W. Wilcox, Economist serve Bank of St. Louis
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy, Jeff Fuhrer and Daniel G. Sullivan, Executive Vice
James J. McAndrews, William Nelson, David Reif- Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and
schneider, William Wascher, Associate Economists Chicago, respectively
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Troy Davig and Christopher J. Waller, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City
Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking Su- and St. Louis, respectively
pervision and Regulation, Board of Governors

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Reuven Glick, Group Vice President, Federal Reserve tend to push up the federal funds rate prescription,
Bank of San Francisco while a number of participants indicated that other fac-
tors related to current circumstances may warrant
Todd E. Clark, Lorie K. Logan, Keith Sill, and Mark A. maintaining an accommodative stance of policy for
Wynne, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of longer than would be prescribed by standard rules.
Cleveland, New York, Philadelphia, and Dallas, re- With regard to the latter, some participants suggested
spectively that inertial policy rules—that is, rules under which any
movements in the stance of policy tend to be fairly per-
Robert L. Hetzel and Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl, Senior sistent—would be most appropriate in the current con-
Economists, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond text.
and Minneapolis, respectively
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
The Manager of the System Open Market Account
Simple Rules for Monetary Policy
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and
A staff presentation summarized research on the effi-
foreign financial markets during the period since the
cacy of alternative simple monetary policy rules in fos-
FOMC met on June 19–20, 2012. He also reported on
tering the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy objectives
System open market operations, including the ongoing
of maximum employment and price stability. The
reinvestment into agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed
presentation reviewed the characteristics of a variety of
securities (MBS) of principal payments received on
rules and noted a number of reasons why current con-
SOMA holdings of agency debt and agency-guaranteed
ditions might warrant deviating from the prescriptions
MBS as well as the operations related to the continua-
of simple rules designed for more normal times. The
tion of the maturity extension program authorized at
presentation also discussed how simple rules might be
the June 19–20, 2012, FOMC meeting. His report in-
used as part of a comprehensive policy framework to
cluded a summary of analysis prepared by the staff on
provide clear and transparent benchmarks for monetary
the potential implications of the size and composition
policy decisionmaking and the possibility that such
of the Federal Reserve’s securities portfolio for private-
rules could be helpful in communicating the connec-
sector holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS
tion between policy choices and the Federal Open
and for trading conditions in markets related to these
Market Committee’s (FOMC) objectives.
securities. The Manager also reported on recent devel-
Meeting participants expressed a range of views regard- opments in European money markets and implications
ing the appropriate role of policy rules in monetary for the yields on the euro-denominated assets that the
policy decisionmaking. A number of participants indi- Federal Reserve holds in its foreign exchange reserves.
cated that such rules have played a useful role in in- By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
forming the Committee’s monetary policy delibera- domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.
tions. However, several participants pointed to specific There were no intervention operations in foreign cur-
considerations—including the possible mismeasure- rencies for the System’s account over the intermeeting
ment of unobservable variables, such as potential out- period.
put, and uncertainty about the appropriate economic
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
models to use in estimating the magnitude of those
The information reviewed at the July 31–August 1
variables—that might limit the usefulness of simple
meeting indicated that economic activity increased at a
rules both internally and in public communications.
slower pace in the second quarter than earlier in the
Several participants saw value in examining the perfor-
year and that labor market conditions had improved
mance of rules across a range of economic models.
little in recent months. In addition, revised data for
Participants discussed the case for making adjustments
2009 through 2011 from the Bureau of Economic
to the prescriptions of simple policy rules in the current
Analysis indicated that the recession had been slightly
circumstances to take into account various considera-
less deep and the early part of the subsequent recovery
tions such as the effective lower bound for the federal
had been a bit more gradual than previously thought,
funds rate, the effects of the Committee’s balance sheet
leaving the level of real gross domestic product (GDP)
policies, and potential shifts in the dynamics of the
at the end of last year essentially the same as estimated
economy. Some participants noted that adjustment of
earlier. In the second quarter, consumer price inflation
standard policy rules for balance sheet policies would
was markedly lower than in the first quarter, mostly

--- Page 3 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_l_y _3_1_–_A_u_g_u_s_t _1_, _2_0_12_______________________P_a_g_e_ _3
reflecting substantial declines in consumer energy construction in the coming months. Home prices in-
prices, while measures of longer-run inflation expecta- creased in May for the fifth consecutive month. Sales
tions remained stable. of new homes in the second quarter were moderately
higher than in the first quarter, but existing home sales
Private nonfarm employment expanded in June at
decreased slightly.
about the same modest pace as in the second quarter as
a whole, and government employment decreased slight- Real business expenditures on equipment and software
ly. The unemployment rate was 8.2 percent in June, rose in the second quarter at a faster pace than in the
the same as its average during the first half of the year. first quarter. However, new orders for nondefense
The rate of long-duration unemployment stayed elevat- capital goods excluding aircraft decreased last quarter,
ed, and the share of workers employed part time for and the backlog of unfilled orders decelerated sharply.
economic reasons was still high. Indicators of job Other recent forward-looking indicators, such as sur-
openings and firms’ hiring plans were generally sub- veys of business conditions and capital spending plans,
dued. While initial claims for unemployment insurance also suggested that increases in outlays for business
trended down a bit over the intermeeting period, they equipment would slow in coming months. Real busi-
remained at a level consistent with continued modest ness spending for nonresidential construction increased
increases in employment in the coming months. somewhat in the second quarter but remained at a rela-
tively low level. Meanwhile, business inventories gen-
Manufacturing production decelerated significantly in
erally appeared to be relatively well aligned with sales.
the second quarter following a large gain in the first
quarter, while the rate of manufacturing capacity utili- Real federal government purchases decreased a little in
zation was unchanged on balance. The production of the second quarter, following a much sharper decline in
motor vehicles and parts increased considerably last the previous three quarters, as the continued contrac-
quarter, but factory output outside of the motor vehicle tion in defense spending eased. Real state and local
sector was essentially flat. Automakers’ schedules indi- government purchases continued to contract at a mod-
cated that the pace of motor vehicle assemblies in the erate rate last quarter.
third quarter would be about the same as in the second
The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in May, as
quarter. Broader indicators of manufacturing output,
exports edged up and imports declined. The increase
such as the diffusion indexes of new orders from the
in exports primarily reflected higher exports of services
national and regional manufacturing surveys, declined
and agricultural products. The decrease in imports was
in recent months and were at levels consistent with
the result of a decline in oil imports, as both the price
only muted increases in production in the near term.
and the quantity of oil imports fell. Imports of con-
Real personal consumption expenditures increased at a sumer goods and industrial supplies also moved down,
slower rate in the second quarter than in the first quar- but imports of capital goods and automotive products
ter, primarily reflecting a decrease in spending for mo- increased. Based on an estimate of the trade data for
tor vehicles. Meanwhile, real disposable personal in- June, the advance release of the national income and
come rose at a faster pace than consumer spending in product accounts showed that real net exports of goods
both the first and second quarters, boosted in part in and services made a small negative arithmetic contribu-
recent months by lower energy prices. Consumer sen- tion to the increase in U.S. real GDP in the second
timent as measured by the Thomson Reu- quarter.
ters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers
Overall U.S. consumer prices increased at a slower pace
(Michigan Survey) was more downbeat in June and July
in the second quarter than in the first. Consumer ener-
than earlier in the year.
gy prices declined significantly last quarter, and survey
Conditions in the housing market generally improved data indicated that gasoline prices fell somewhat further
further in recent months, but activity remained at a low in the first few weeks of July. Meanwhile, consumer
level against the backdrop of the large inventory of food prices posted only a small increase last quarter,
foreclosed and distressed properties and tight under- but the recent sizable run-up in spot and futures prices
writing standards for mortgage loans. Both starts and of farm commodities, reflecting the effects of the
permits of new single-family homes increased in the drought and hot weather in the midwestern part of the
second quarter. Starts of new multifamily units were United States, pointed to some temporary upward pres-
about the same last quarter as in the previous quarter, sures on retail food prices later this year. Consumer
but permits rose, which pointed to higher multifamily prices excluding food and energy increased more mod-

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
erately in the second quarter than in the first. Near- increased expectations that the Federal Reserve would
term inflation expectations from the Michigan Survey reduce the interest rate paid on reserve balances in
rose a little in June and July, while longer-term inflation coming months. Near-term indicators of inflation ex-
expectations in the survey continued to be stable. pectations derived from nominal and inflation-
protected Treasury securities fell modestly despite an
Available measures of labor compensation indicated
increase in some commodity prices; such indicators
that nominal wage gains remained restrained. The em-
changed little at longer horizons. The expected path
ployment cost index rose at a modest pace again in the
for the federal funds rate derived from money market
second quarter. Average hourly earnings for all em-
futures quotes shifted down.
ployees also increased at a relatively slow rate last quar-
ter. Conditions in short-term unsecured dollar funding
markets remained stable over the intermeeting period,
Foreign economic growth continued to be subdued, as
although most peripheral euro-area institutions contin-
fiscal retrenchment and financial stresses in the euro
ued to have little, if any, access to such markets. In
area continued to weigh on economic activity in Eu-
secured funding markets, Treasury general collateral
rope and elsewhere. Recent indicators of production
repurchase agreement rates rose slightly on balance.
and confidence in the euro area remained weak, and the
preliminary second-quarter estimate of real GDP in the Broad indexes of U.S. equity prices rose somewhat, on
United Kingdom showed a contraction. Real GDP in net, over the intermeeting period, with significant gains
China accelerated somewhat in the second quarter fol- prompted in part by comments from European offi-
lowing a relatively weak expansion in the first quarter, cials that apparently raised investor expectations for
and recent monthly data suggested some further im- near-term European policy actions. Option-implied
provement. However, data for other emerging market volatility on the S&P 500 index rose slightly. Stock
economies generally pointed to a deceleration in eco- prices for the large domestic bank holding companies
nomic activity last quarter. Foreign inflation eased in posted mixed changes over the period, and credit de-
the second quarter and remains well contained, as earli- fault swap (CDS) spreads for those firms generally
er declines in the prices of energy and other commodi- moved lower on net.
ties passed through to the retail level.
Yields on investment- and speculative-grade corporate
Staff Review of the Financial Situation bonds fell further over the intermeeting period, ap-
Several factors influenced developments in financial proaching record lows. Their spreads relative to com-
markets since the time of the June FOMC meeting. parable-maturity Treasury securities narrowed but were
Generally weaker-than-expected economic data in the still above their average levels prior to the financial cri-
United States, concerns about the fiscal and banking sis. Nonfinancial firms continued to issue debt at a
situation in the euro area, and the outlook for global strong pace over the period. Gross investment-grade
economic growth weighed on investor sentiment. corporate bond issuance remained robust in June and
However, the effects of these factors were offset to July, while the volume of nonfinancial commercial pa-
some extent by actual and expected easing of monetary per outstanding rose early in the second quarter but
policy in the United States and abroad and by better- decreased slightly in June. Commercial and industrial
than-anticipated profits at some S&P 500 firms. (C&I) loans advanced further over the intermeeting
period. Issuance in the syndicated leveraged loan mar-
Interest rates generally moved down, on net, over the
ket remained solid in the second quarter; terms and
intermeeting period. The yield on nominal 10-year
structures of new leveraged loan deals reportedly loos-
Treasury securities declined to a historically low level,
ened modestly on the margin. Gross public equity is-
partly due to a lower expected path of the federal funds
suance by nonfinancial firms was anemic in June and
rate, the continuation of the maturity extension pro-
July.
gram announced at the June FOMC meeting, and per-
ceptions of an increased likelihood that the Federal Financial conditions in the commercial real estate mar-
Reserve will ease monetary policy further. In addition, ket remained somewhat strained against a backdrop of
persistent concerns about euro-area developments were weak fundamentals and still-tight underwriting. That
reportedly associated with increased safe-haven de- said, issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securi-
mands that contributed to the decline in Treasury ties picked up in the second quarter.
yields. Anecdotal reports suggested that the decrease in
shorter-term yields may also have reflected somewhat

--- Page 5 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_l_y _3_1_–_A_u_g_u_s_t _1_, _2_0_12_______________________P_a_g_e_ _5
Despite new historical lows for residential mortgage gram and announced details on its new program de-
rates over the intermeeting period, refinancing activity signed to boost bank lending to the nonfinancial sector.
remained relatively muted. Evidence from the Senior The central banks of Brazil, China, and South Korea all
Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Prac- reduced official rates as well. Amid policy easing in the
tices (SLOOS) conducted in July indicated that mort- euro area and United Kingdom, yields on German and
gage underwriting standards at banks generally have not U.K. sovereign bonds declined, with two-year German
eased much from their tightest post-crisis levels. Con- sovereign bonds trading at yields below zero.
sumer credit expanded further in May as a result of
Staff Economic Outlook
rapid increases in student loans and, to a lesser extent,
In the economic forecast prepared by the staff for the
auto loans. Delinquency rates for consumer credit re-
July 31–August 1 FOMC meeting, the near-term pro-
mained low, likely in part because of a compositional
jection for real GDP growth was revised down some-
shift of credit supply over the past few years toward the
what. The revision primarily reflected a slower pace of
least-risky borrowers.
consumer spending than the staff expected at the time
Gross issuance of long-term municipal bonds was ro- of the previous projection, along with a deterioration in
bust in June and July. Net issuance of long-term bonds some forward-looking indicators. However, the staff’s
turned positive in the second quarter after staying in medium-term forecast for real GDP growth was little
negative territory for much of the past year. Yields on changed, as the slightly weaker underlying pace of eco-
long-term general obligation municipal bonds generally nomic activity suggested by the recent data was roughly
followed Treasury yields lower, while default rates re- offset by the anticipated effects of the continuation of
mained very low and CDS spreads for states were the maturity extension program announced following
roughly unchanged on net. the June FOMC meeting, which had not been incorpo-
rated in the previous projection. With the restraint
Bank credit and total loans continued to expand mod-
from fiscal policy assumed to increase next year, the
estly in the second quarter, largely because of the fur-
staff projected that increases in real GDP would not
ther robust increase in C&I loans. The gradual expan-
significantly exceed the growth rate of potential output
sion in total loans was broadly consistent with the July
in 2013. Thereafter, economic activity was expected to
SLOOS, in which domestic banks generally indicated
accelerate gradually, supported by an eventual easing in
that demand strengthened for many types of loans in
fiscal policy restraint, gains in consumer and business
the second quarter and that lending standards eased
sentiment, further improvements in credit conditions,
somewhat, on balance, across most major loan catego-
and continued accommodative monetary policy. The
ries.
expansion in economic activity was anticipated to re-
The staff’s broad nominal index for the foreign ex- duce the substantial margin of slack in labor and prod-
change value of the dollar changed little, on net, over uct markets only slowly over the projection period, and
the intermeeting period, although the dollar appreciated the unemployment rate was expected to remain elevat-
against the euro. Financial markets in the euro area ed at the end of 2014.
were volatile, as a deterioration in market sentiment
The staff’s forecast for inflation was little changed from
gave way to periods of optimism following the euro-
the projection prepared for the June FOMC meeting.
area summit in late June, the decision by the European
With crude oil prices expected to decline a bit from
Central Bank (ECB) to ease policy in early July, and
their current levels, the boost to retail food prices from
indications from the ECB later in July that the central
the current drought in the Midwest anticipated to be
bank might take further steps to support the monetary
only temporary and relatively small, longer-run inflation
union. On net, European stock markets finished the
expectations remaining stable, and substantial resource
period higher. Yield spreads on Spanish and Italian 10-
slack persisting over the forecast period, the staff con-
year bonds over their German equivalents, which rose
tinued to project that inflation would be subdued
sharply over most of July, fell back from their inter-
through 2014.
meeting peaks but remained elevated.
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
Several foreign central banks eased monetary policy
Economic Outlook
over the intermeeting period. The ECB cut its bench-
In their discussion of the economic situation and the
mark policy rate by 25 basis points and reduced the rate
outlook, meeting participants agreed that the infor-
on its overnight deposit facility to zero. The Bank of
mation received since the Committee met in June sug-
England increased the size of its asset purchase pro-

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
gested that economic activity had decelerated in recent Meeting participants again exchanged views on the ex-
months to a slower pace than they had anticipated. tent of slack in labor and product markets. A number
Although business investment had continued to ad- of participants expressed the view that structural
vance, consumer spending had slowed considerably changes in the labor market were not sufficient to ex-
since earlier in the year. Conditions in the housing sec- plain the high level of unemployment. Those partici-
tor appeared to have improved somewhat, but from a pants saw substantial slack in resource utilization and
very low level. Indicators of manufacturing activity had hence continued to judge that inflation was likely to
softened. Recent monthly gains in payroll employment remain subdued over the medium term as the economy
had continued to be small, and the unemployment rate continued to recover. However, several other partici-
in June remained at an elevated level. Consumer price pants interpreted the moderate pace of the recovery as
inflation had been low in recent months, as declines in pointing to a more substantial markdown in the trajec-
the costs of crude oil were passed through to retail en- tory of potential output. In particular, a couple of par-
ergy prices. Longer-term inflation expectations had ticipants noted that they would have expected inflation
remained stable. to have fallen more in recent years if the output gap
had been as substantial as some measures suggested.
Regarding the economic outlook, most participants
One participant posited that the sharp decline in net
agreed that economic growth was likely to remain
worth and reduced credit availability in recent years not
moderate over coming quarters and then pick up grad-
only weighed on aggregate demand, but also reduced
ually. However, some participants indicated that they
aggregate supply by hampering new business formation
had lowered their near-term forecasts for economic
and product innovation; another participant cited evi-
growth in light of the weaker-than-expected increases
dence that structural unemployment was elevated as a
in consumer spending and employment in recent
result of mismatches between the skills demanded by
months. In addition, some participants expressed con-
employers and those of the long-duration unemployed.
cern about the persistent headwinds restraining the
pace of the recovery, including the weak housing sec- In discussing developments in the household sector,
tor, still-tight borrowing conditions for some house- many participants noted the recent deceleration in
holds and firms, and fiscal restraint at all levels of gov- overall consumer spending, although a couple cited
ernment. Many participants judged that a high level of new autos and tourism as areas of relative strength.
uncertainty about possible spillovers from the fiscal Participants saw several factors as likely contributing to
and banking strains in the euro area and about the out- slower consumer spending, including the weakness in
look for U.S. fiscal or regulatory policies was holding earned income and a high level of uncertainty among
back household and business spending. And they saw households about the economic outlook. Several
the possibilities of an intensification of strains in the pointed out that while households had made consider-
euro area and of a sharper-than-anticipated U.S. fiscal able progress in reducing their debt and rebuilding their
consolidation as significant downside risks to the eco- savings, the deleveraging process was still ongoing, the
nomic outlook. Although participants generally agreed level of housing debt remained high, and a significant
that improvements in recent years in the capital and number of mortgage borrowers continued to be un-
liquidity of financial institutions and in the strength of derwater on their loans. Home sales and construction
household and business balance sheets have increased were generally viewed as gradually improving, support-
the resilience of the economy, some were concerned ed in part by historically low mortgage interest rates.
that at its current pace, the recovery was still vulnerable Many participants reported that house prices in their
to adverse shocks. Given participants’ forecasts of Districts were rising or had bottomed out, and several
economic activity, they generally anticipated that the noted that their contacts saw signs of progress in re-
unemployment rate would decline only slowly toward ducing the overhang of unsold properties. However, it
levels that participants judge to be consistent with the was noted that the reduction in inventories should be
Committee’s mandate. Participants’ assessments of the viewed cautiously because owners who are underwater
outlook for inflation were largely unchanged from on their mortgages may be withholding their homes
those reported in June. Smoothing through the effects from the market, implying a substantial “shadow” in-
of fluctuations in food and energy prices, participants ventory.
anticipated that inflation over the medium term would
Regarding the business sector, many participants re-
remain at or below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-
ported that, with the exception of motor vehicle pro-
run objective.
duction, manufacturing activity in their Districts was

--- Page 7 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_l_y _3_1_–_A_u_g_u_s_t _1_, _2_0_12_______________________P_a_g_e_ _7
slow or had declined in recent months. Nonetheless, uation in the euro area, and participants continued to
forward-looking surveys of orders and manufacturing view the possibility of an intensification of strains in
production in a couple of Districts were more positive. global financial markets as a significant downside risk
Energy-related activity continued to expand, and in- to the domestic economic outlook. Several participants
vestment projects in that sector were reported to be indicated that recent trends in euro-area equity indexes
moving forward. However, contacts in several Dis- and sovereign debt yields had not been encouraging,
tricts indicated that export demand had weakened as a and some noted that the uncertainty prevailing in global
result of the slowdown in economic activity in Europe; financial markets was showing through in a cautious
Asia; and some emerging market countries, including posture of investors. Nonetheless, participants general-
China. More generally, some participants reported that ly agreed that conditions in domestic credit markets
their business contacts regarded the economic outlook remained more favorable than they were a year ago.
to be highly uncertain, in part due to unresolved fiscal One participant pointed out that credit risk spreads—
and regulatory matters. Although several participants while still above pre-recession norms—may have been
noted that the uncertainty had not led businesses in boosted by safe-haven demands for Treasury securities
their Districts to reduce payrolls or cut back spending, and indicated that broader financial market conditions
others cited reports of shortfalls from business plans seemed reasonably accommodative. Banks were re-
that could lead to cost-cutting, of restructuring to posi- ported to be seeing an increase in their residential
tion firms for leaner operations, or even of postponed mortgage business along with a continued rise in C&I
investment and hiring. Two participants provided an lending, especially to large firms; consumer credit was
update on the situation in the agricultural sector in light also increasing.
of the drought in the Midwest: With crop yields pro-
Participants discussed a number of policy tools that the
jected to be down markedly and prices rising, livestock
Committee might employ if it decided to provide addi-
producers appeared likely to suffer losses as a result of
tional monetary accommodation to support a stronger
higher input costs while crop producers would need to
economic recovery in a context of price stability. One
rely on higher prices and crop insurance to stabilize
of the policy options discussed was an extension of the
their income.
period over which the Committee expected to maintain
The incoming information on inflation over the inter- its target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to
meeting period was largely in line with participants’ ¼ percent. It was noted that such an extension might
expectations. Consumer prices had decelerated as a be particularly effective if done in conjunction with a
result of the pass-through of lower crude oil costs to statement indicating that a highly accommodative
retail prices of gasoline and fuel oil. Crude oil prices stance of monetary policy was likely to be maintained
had turned up again more recently, but one participant even as the recovery progressed. Given the uncertainty
noted that global inventories of oil were elevated and, attending the economic outlook, a few participants
with world demand easing, prices should be restrained questioned whether the conditionality of the forward
going forward. Participants acknowledged that the guidance was sufficiently clear, and they suggested that
drought would likely result in a temporary run-up in the Committee should consider replacing the calendar
consumer food prices later this year. Nonetheless, in- date with guidance that was linked more directly to the
flation was expected to remain subdued, on balance, economic factors that the Committee would consider
over coming quarters. In explaining that outlook, par- in deciding to raise its target for the federal funds rate,
ticipants cited the lack of upward pressure from labor or omit the forward guidance language entirely.
costs and prices of imported commodities as well as the
Participants also exchanged views on the likely benefits
stability of inflation expectations. A couple of partici-
and costs of a new large-scale asset purchase program.
pants referred to information from business contacts
Many participants expected that such a program could
suggesting that inflation was unlikely to decline further,
provide additional support for the economic recovery
and a few expressed concerns that maintaining a highly
both by putting downward pressure on longer-term
accommodative stance of monetary policy for an ex-
interest rates and by contributing to easier financial
tended period could erode the stability of inflation ex-
conditions more broadly. In addition, some partici-
pectations over time and hence posed upside risks to
pants noted that a new program might boost business
the inflation outlook.
and consumer confidence and reinforce the Commit-
Financial markets remained sensitive to ongoing devel- tee’s commitment to making sustained progress toward
opments related to the sovereign debt and banking sit- its mandated objectives. Participants also discussed the

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
merits of purchases of Treasury securities relative to ate over coming quarters and then would pick up very
agency MBS. However, others questioned the possible gradually. While most members did not view the
efficacy of such a program under present circumstanc- medium-run economic outlook as having changed sig-
es, and a couple suggested that the effects on economic nificantly since the June meeting, several noted that
activity might be transitory. In reviewing the costs that they had lowered their expectations for economic
such a program might entail, some participants ex- growth over coming quarters. Furthermore, members
pressed concerns about the effects of additional asset generally attached an unusually high level of uncertainty
purchases on trading conditions in markets related to to their assessments of the economic outlook and con-
Treasury securities and agency MBS, but others agreed tinued to judge that the risks to economic growth were
with the staff’s analysis showing substantial capacity for tilted to the downside because of strains in financial
additional purchases without disrupting market func- markets stemming from the sovereign debt and bank-
tioning. Several worried that additional purchases ing situation in Europe as well as the potential for a
might alter the process of normalizing the Federal Re- significant slowdown in global economic growth and
serve’s balance sheet when the time came to begin re- for a sharper-than-anticipated fiscal contraction in the
moving accommodation. A few participants were con- United States. A number of members noted that if the
cerned that an extended period of accommodation or recent modest rate of economic growth were to persist,
an additional large-scale asset purchase program could the economy would be less able to weather a material
increase the risks to financial stability or lead to a rise in adverse shock without slipping back into recession.
longer-term inflation expectations. Many participants Most members continued to anticipate that, with long-
indicated that any new purchase program should be er-term inflation expectations stable and the existing
sufficiently flexible to allow adjustments, as needed, in slack in resource utilization being taken up very gradu-
response to economic developments or to changes in ally, inflation would run over the medium term at a rate
the Committee’s assessment of the efficacy and costs at or below the Committee’s objective of 2 percent. In
of the program. contrast, one member thought that the economy may
be operating near its current potential and, thus, that
Some participants commented on other possible tools
maintaining the Committee’s current highly accommo-
for adding policy accommodation, including a reduc-
dative policy stance well into 2014 would pose upside
tion in the interest rate paid on required and excess
risks to the inflation outlook.
reserve balances. While a couple of participants fa-
vored such a reduction, several others raised concerns The Committee had provided additional accommoda-
about possible adverse effects on money markets. It tion at its previous meeting by announcing the continu-
was noted that the ECB’s recent cut in its deposit rate ation of the maturity extension program through the
to zero provided an opportunity to learn more about end of the year, and more time was seen as necessary to
the possible consequences for market functioning of evaluate the effects of that decision. Nonetheless,
such a move. In light of the Bank of England’s Fund- many members expected that at the end of 2014, the
ing for Lending Scheme, a couple of participants ex- unemployment rate would still be well above their es-
pressed interest in exploring possible programs aimed timates of its longer-term normal rate and that inflation
at encouraging bank lending to households and firms, would be at or below the Committee’s longer-run ob-
although the importance of institutional differences jective of 2 percent. A number of them indicated that
between the two countries was noted. additional accommodation could help foster a more
rapid improvement in labor market conditions in an
Committee Policy Action
environment in which price pressures were likely to be
The information received over the intermeeting period
subdued. Many members judged that additional mone-
indicated that economic activity had decelerated in re-
tary accommodation would likely be warranted fairly
cent months, with a notable slowing in consumer
soon unless incoming information pointed to a sub-
spending. Employment gains continued to be modest,
stantial and sustainable strengthening in the pace of the
and the unemployment rate was unchanged at a level
economic recovery. Several members noted the bene-
that almost all members saw as elevated relative to lev-
fits of accumulating further information that could help
els consistent with the Committee’s mandate. Inflation
clarify the contours of the outlook for economic activi-
had declined from its rate earlier in the year, mainly
ty and inflation as well as the need for further policy
reflecting lower prices of crude oil and gasoline, and
action. One member judged that additional accommo-
inflation expectations had been stable. Members gen-
dation would likely not be effective in improving the
erally expected that economic growth would be moder-

--- Page 9 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_l_y _3_1_–_A_u_g_u_s_t _1_, _2_0_12_______________________P_a_g_e_ _9
economic outlook and viewed the potential costs asso- June to purchase Treasury securities with re-
ciated with such action as unacceptably high. At the maining maturities of 6 years to 30 years with
conclusion of the discussion, members agreed that they a total face value of about $267 billion by the
would closely monitor economic and financial devel- end of December 2012, and to sell or redeem
opments and carefully weigh the potential benefits and Treasury securities with remaining maturities
costs of various tools in assessing whether additional of approximately 3 years or less with a total
policy action would be warranted. face value of about $267 billion. For the du-
ration of this program, the Committee directs
With respect to the statement to be released following
the Desk to suspend its current policy of roll-
the meeting, members agreed that it should
ing over maturing Treasury securities into new
acknowledge the deceleration in economic activity, the
issues. The Committee directs the Desk to
small gains in employment, and the slowing in inflation
maintain its existing policy of reinvesting
reflected in the economic data over the intermeeting
principal payments on all agency debt and
period. Because most saw no significant changes in the
agency mortgage-backed securities in the Sys-
medium-run outlook, they agreed to continue to indi-
tem Open Market Account in agency mort-
cate that the Committee anticipates a very gradual
gage-backed securities. These actions should
pickup in economic activity over time and a slow de-
maintain the total face value of domestic secu-
cline in unemployment, with inflation at or below the
rities at approximately $2.6 trillion. The
rate that it judges most consistent with its dual man-
Committee directs the Desk to engage in dol-
date. Many members expressed support for extending
lar roll transactions as necessary to facilitate
the Committee’s forward guidance, but they agreed to
settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency
defer a decision on this matter until the September
MBS transactions. The System Open Market
meeting in order to consider such an adjustment in the
Account Manager and the Secretary will keep
context of updates to participants’ individual economic
the Committee informed of ongoing devel-
projections and the Committee’s further consideration
opments regarding the System’s balance sheet
of its policy options. The statement also reiterated the
that could affect the attainment over time of
Committee’s intention to extend the average maturity
the Committee’s objectives of maximum em-
of its securities holdings as announced in June. Con-
ployment and price stability.”
sistent with the concerns expressed by many members
about the slow pace of the economic recovery, the The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
downside risks to economic growth, and the consider- low to be released at 2:15 p.m.:
able slack in resource utilization, the Committee decid-
“Information received since the Federal
ed that the statement should conclude by indicating
Open Market Committee met in June sug-
that it will provide additional accommodation as need-
gests that economic activity decelerated
ed to promote a stronger economic recovery and sus-
somewhat over the first half of this year.
tained improvement in labor market conditions in a
Growth in employment has been slow in re-
context of price stability.
cent months, and the unemployment rate
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee remains elevated. Business fixed investment
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank has continued to advance. Household
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe- spending has been rising at a somewhat
cute transactions in the System Account in accordance slower pace than earlier in the year. Despite
with the following domestic policy directive: some further signs of improvement, the
housing sector remains depressed. Inflation
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
has declined since earlier this year, mainly re-
monetary and financial conditions that will
flecting lower prices of crude oil and gaso-
foster price stability and promote sustainable
line, and longer-term inflation expectations
growth in output. To further its long-run ob-
have remained stable.
jectives, the Committee seeks conditions in
reserve markets consistent with federal funds Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee seeks to foster maximum em-
Committee directs the Desk to continue the ployment and price stability. The Committee
maturity extension program it announced in expects economic growth to remain moder-

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
ate over coming quarters and then to pick up my C. Stein, Daniel K. Tarullo, John C. Williams, and
very gradually. Consequently, the Commit- Janet L. Yellen.
tee anticipates that the unemployment rate
Voting against this action: Jeffrey M. Lacker.
will decline only slowly toward levels that it
judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. Mr. Lacker dissented because he did not believe that
Furthermore, strains in global financial mar- exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate were
kets continue to pose significant downside likely to be warranted for the length of time specified in
risks to the economic outlook. The Com- the Committee’s statement. In his view, significant
mittee anticipates that inflation over the me- uncertainty regarding the evolution of economic condi-
dium term will run at or below the rate that it tions over the next few years made the future path of
judges most consistent with its dual mandate. interest rates difficult to forecast, and the Committee’s
statement implied more confidence on this score than
To support a stronger economic recovery
justified by the current outlook.
and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
is at the rate most consistent with its dual Consensus Forecast Experiment
mandate, the Committee expects to maintain In light of the discussion at the previous FOMC meet-
a highly accommodative stance for monetary ing, the subcommittee on communications developed
policy. In particular, the Committee decided an initial experimental exercise intended to shed light
today to keep the target range for the federal on the feasibility and desirability of constructing an
funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently FOMC consensus forecast. At this meeting, partici-
anticipates that economic conditions— pants discussed various aspects of the exercise, such as
including low rates of resource utilization the possible monetary policy assumptions on which to
and a subdued outlook for inflation over the condition an FOMC consensus forecast, the measure-
medium run—are likely to warrant excep- ment of the degree of uncertainty surrounding each of
tionally low levels for the federal funds rate the projected variables in the forecast, and the potential
at least through late 2014. for communications benefits. In conclusion, partici-
pants generally expressed support for a second exercise
The Committee also decided to continue
to be undertaken in conjunction with the September
through the end of the year its program to ex-
FOMC meeting.
tend the average maturity of its holdings of
securities as announced in June, and it is It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting would be held on Wednesday–Thursday, September
principal payments from its holdings of agen- 12–13, 2012. The meeting adjourned at 2:15 p.m. on
cy debt and agency mortgage-backed securi- August 1, 2012.
ties in agency mortgage-backed securities.
Notation Vote
The Committee will closely monitor incoming
By notation vote completed on July 10, 2012, the
information on economic and financial devel-
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
opments and will provide additional accom-
FOMC meeting held on June 19–20, 2012.
modation as needed to promote a stronger
economic recovery and sustained improve-
ment in labor market conditions in a context
of price stability.” _____________________________
William B. English
Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C.
Secretary
Dudley, Elizabeth Duke, Dennis P. Lockhart, Sandra
Pianalto, Jerome H. Powell, Sarah Bloom Raskin, Jere-