# 20120913_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:37:08*
*Pages: 25, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
September 12–13, 2012
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Pol-
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the icy and Research, Board of Governors
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on
Wednesday, September 12, 2012, at 10:30 a.m. and Jon W. Faust, Special Adviser to the Board, Office of
continued on Thursday, September 13, 2012, at Board Members, Board of Governors
8:30 a.m.
James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Mone-
PRESENT: tary Affairs, Board of Governors; Maryann F.
Ben Bernanke, Chairman Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Su-
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman pervision and Regulation, Board of Governors
Elizabeth Duke
Jeffrey M. Lacker Andreas Lehnert,¹ Deputy Director, Office of Financial
Dennis P. Lockhart Stability Policy and Research, Board of Governors
Sandra Pianalto
Jerome H. Powell Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Sarah Bloom Raskin Board Members, Board of Governors
Jeremy C. Stein
Daniel K. Tarullo Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Director, Division
John C. Williams of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Janet L. Yellen
Thomas Laubach, Senior Adviser, Division of Research
James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, and Statistics, Board of Governors; Ellen E. Meade
Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Alternate and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Brian J. Gross,² Special Assistant to the Board, Office
Charles I. Plosser, Presidents of the Federal Re- of Board Members, Board of Governors
serve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadel-
phia, respectively Eric M. Engen, Michael G. Palumbo, and Wayne
Passmore, Associate Directors, Division of Re-
William B. English, Secretary and Economist search and Statistics, Board of Governors
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary Fabio M. Natalucci, Deputy Associate Director, Divi-
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Edward Nelson, Section Chief, Division of Monetary
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Affairs, Board of Governors
Steven B. Kamin, Economist
David W. Wilcox, Economist Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Economist, Division of Re-
search and Statistics, Board of Governors
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy,
William Nelson, David Reifschneider, Glenn D. Kelly J. Dubbert, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Rudebusch, William Wascher, and John A. Wein- Bank of Kansas City
berg, Associate Economists
_______________________
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account ¹ Attended Wednesday’s session only.
² Attended Thursday’s session only.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Loretta J. Mester, Harvey Rosenblum, and Daniel G. tional work regarding the implications of such purchas-
Sullivan, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Re- es for the normalization of policy.
serve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Chicago,
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
respectively
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
The Manager of the System Open Market Account
Cletus C. Coughlin, Troy Davig, Mark E. Schweitzer,
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and
and Kei-Mu Yi, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
foreign financial markets during the period since the
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, Cleve-
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) met on
land, and Minneapolis, respectively
July 31–August 1, 2012. He also reported on System
open market operations, including the ongoing rein-
Lorie K. Logan, Jonathan P. McCarthy, Giovanni Oli-
vestment into agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed se-
vei, and Nathaniel Wuerffel,³ Vice Presidents, Fed-
curities (MBS) of principal payments received on
eral Reserve Banks of New York, New York, Bos-
SOMA holdings of agency debt and agency-guaranteed
ton, and New York, respectively
MBS as well as the operations related to the maturity
extension program authorized at the June 19–20, 2012,
Michelle Ezer,4 Markets Officer, Federal Reserve Bank
FOMC meeting. By unanimous vote, the Committee
of New York
ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over the in-
termeeting period. There were no intervention opera-
_______________________
tions in foreign currencies for the System’s account
³ Attended after the discussion on potential effects of a large-
over the intermeeting period.
scale asset purchase program.
4 Attended the discussion on potential effects of a large-scale
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
asset purchase program.
The information reviewed at the September 12–13
meeting suggested that economic activity continued to
increase at a moderate pace in recent months. Em-
Potential Effects of a Large-Scale Asset Purchase
ployment rose slowly, and the unemployment rate was
Program
still high. Consumer price inflation stayed subdued,
The staff presented an analysis of various aspects of
while measures of long-run inflation expectations re-
possible large-scale asset purchase programs, including
mained stable.
a comparison of flow-based purchase programs to pro-
grams of fixed size. The presentation reviewed the Private nonfarm employment increased in July and Au-
modeling approach used by the staff in estimating the gust at only a slightly faster pace than in the second
financial and macroeconomic effects of such purchases. quarter, and the rate of decline in government em-
While significant uncertainty surrounds such estimates, ployment eased somewhat. The unemployment rate
the presentation indicated that asset purchases could be was 8.1 percent in August, just a bit lower than its aver-
effective in fostering more rapid progress toward the age during the first half of the year, and the labor force
Committee’s objectives. The staff noted that, for a participation rate edged down further. The share of
flow-based program, the public’s understanding of the workers employed part time for economic reasons re-
conditions under which the Committee would end pur- mained large, and the rate of long-duration unemploy-
chases would shape expectations of the magnitude of ment continued to be high. Indicators of job openings
the Federal Reserve’s holdings of longer-term securi- and firms’ hiring plans were little changed, on balance,
ties, and thus also influence the financial and economic and initial claims for unemployment insurance were
effects of such a program. The staff also discussed the essentially flat over the intermeeting period.
potential implications of additional asset purchases for
Manufacturing production increased at a faster pace in
the evolution of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet
July than in the second quarter, and the rate of manu-
and income. The presentation noted that significant
facturing capacity utilization rose slightly. However,
additional asset purchases should not adversely affect
automakers’ schedules indicated that the pace of motor
the ability of the Committee to tighten the stance of
vehicle assemblies would be somewhat lower in the
policy when doing so becomes appropriate. In their
coming months than it was in July, and broader indica-
discussion of the staff presentation, a few participants
tors of manufacturing activity, such as the diffusion
noted the uncertainty surrounding estimates of the ef-
indexes of new orders from the national and regional
fects of large-scale asset purchases or the need for addi-
manufacturing surveys, generally remained quite muted

--- Page 3 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_2_–_1_3_, _2_0_1_2______________________P_a_g_e_ _3
in recent months at levels consistent with only meager The U.S. international trade deficit was about un-
gains in factory output in the near term. changed in July after narrowing significantly in June.
Exports declined in July, as decreases in the exports of
Following a couple of months when real personal con-
industrial supplies, automotive products, and consumer
sumption expenditures (PCE) were roughly flat, spend-
goods were only partially offset by greater exports of
ing increased in July, and the gains were fairly wide-
agricultural products. Imports also declined in July,
spread across categories of consumer goods and servic-
reflecting lower imports of capital goods and petroleum
es. Incoming data on factors that tend to support
products and somewhat higher imports of automotive
household spending were somewhat mixed. Real dis-
products. The trade data for July pointed toward real
posable incomes increased solidly in July, boosted in
net exports having a roughly neutral effect on the
part by lower energy prices. The continued rise in
growth of U.S. real gross domestic product (GDP) in
house values through July, and the increase in equity
the third quarter after they made a positive contribu-
prices during the intermeeting period, suggested that
tion to the increase in real GDP in the second quarter.
households’ net worth may have improved a little in
recent months. However, consumer sentiment re- Overall U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE
mained more downbeat in August than earlier in the price index, were flat in July. Consumer food prices
year. were essentially unchanged, but the substantial increas-
es in spot and futures prices of farm commodities in
Housing market conditions continued to improve, but
recent months, reflecting the effects of the drought in
construction activity was still at a low level, reflecting
the Midwest, pointed toward some temporary upward
the restraint imposed by the substantial inventory of
pressures on retail food prices later this year. Consum-
foreclosed and distressed properties and by tight credit
er energy prices declined slightly in July, but survey data
standards for mortgage loans. Starts of new single-
indicated that retail gasoline prices rose in August.
family homes declined in July, but permits increased,
Consumer prices excluding food and energy also were
which pointed to further gains in single-family con-
flat in July. Near-term inflation expectations from the
struction in the coming months. Both starts and per-
Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of
mits for new multifamily units rose in July. Home
Consumers increased somewhat in August, while long-
prices increased for the sixth consecutive month in
er-term inflation expectations in the survey edged up
July, and sales of both new and existing homes also
but remained within the narrow range that they have
rose.
occupied for many years. Long-run inflation expecta-
Real business expenditures on equipment and software tions from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
appeared to be decelerating. Both nominal shipments Survey of Professional Forecasters continued to be
and new orders for nondefense capital goods excluding stable in the third quarter.
aircraft declined in July, and the backlog of unfilled
Measures of labor compensation indicated that increas-
orders decreased. Other forward-looking indicators,
es in nominal wages remained modest. The rise in
such as downbeat readings from surveys of business
compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector
conditions and capital spending plans, also pointed to-
was muted over the year ending in the second quarter,
ward only muted increases in real expenditures for
and with small gains in productivity, unit labor costs
business equipment in the near term. Nominal busi-
rose only slightly. The employment cost index in-
ness spending for new nonresidential construction de-
creased a little more slowly than the measure of com-
clined in July after only edging up in the second quar-
pensation per hour over the same period. More recent-
ter. Inventories in most industries looked to be rough-
ly, the gains in average hourly earnings for all em-
ly aligned with sales in recent months.
ployees in July and August were small.
Real federal government purchases appeared to de-
Overall foreign economic growth appeared to be sub-
crease further, as data for nominal federal spending in
dued in the third quarter after slowing in the second
July pointed to continued declines in real defense ex-
quarter. In the euro area, policy developments contri-
penditures. Real state and local government purchases
buted to an improvement in financial conditions; recent
also appeared to still be trending down. State and local
indicators pointed to further decreases in production,
government payrolls contracted in July and August,
however, and both business and consumer confidence
although at a somewhat slower rate than in the second
continued to decline. Indicators of activity in the
quarter, and nominal construction spending by these
emerging market economies generally weakened. In
governments decreased slightly in July.

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
China, export growth slowed, while retail sales and in- Broad price indexes for U.S. equities rose moderately,
vestment spending changed little. The rate of econom- on net, over the intermeeting period, prompted by gen-
ic growth rose in Brazil but was still sluggish, and in- erally better-than-expected readings on economic activ-
creases in economic activity in Mexico were below the ity released early in the period, somewhat reduced con-
faster pace seen earlier in the year. Consistent with the cerns about the situation in Europe, and some addi-
slowing in foreign economic growth, readings on for- tional anticipation of monetary policy easing later in the
eign inflation continued to moderate. period. Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index
fell in early August to levels not seen since the middle
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
of 2007; it subsequently partially retraced. Equity pric-
Sentiment in financial markets improved somewhat
es for large domestic banks rose about in line with the
since the time of the August FOMC meeting. Inves-
broad equity price indexes, and credit default swap
tors’ concerns about the situation in Europe seemed to
(CDS) spreads for the largest bank holding companies
ease somewhat, and market participants also appeared
continued to move down.
to have increased their expectations of additional mon-
etary policy accommodation. Yields on investment-grade corporate bonds were little
changed at near-record low levels over the intermeeting
On balance, the nominal Treasury yield curve steep-
period, while yields on speculative-grade corporate
ened over the intermeeting period, with yields on long-
bonds edged down. The spread of yields on corporate
er-dated Treasury securities rising notably. Following
bonds over those on comparable-maturity Treasury
the August FOMC statement, Treasury yields moved
securities narrowed. Net debt issuance by nonfinancial
up, reportedly in part because investors had factored in
firms continued to be strong over the period. Invest-
some probability that the anticipated liftoff date for the
ment- and speculative-grade bond issuance increased in
federal funds rate in the forward-guidance language
August from an already robust pace in preceding
would be moved back at that meeting. Treasury yields
months, and commercial and industrial (C&I) loans
subsequently rose further as concerns about the situa-
rose further. In the syndicated leveraged loan market,
tion in the euro area moderated. Later in the period,
gross issuance of institutional loans continued to be
Treasury yields retraced some of their earlier gains as
solid in July and August. Issuance of collateralized loan
market participants’ expectations of additional policy
obligations remained on pace to post its strongest year
action increased following the release of the minutes of
since 2007. The rate of gross public equity issuance by
the August FOMC meeting, the Chairman’s speech at
nonfinancial firms increased slightly in August but was
the economic symposium in Jackson Hole, and the
still at a subdued level.
weaker-than-expected August employment report. On
net, the expected path of the federal funds rate derived Financial conditions in the commercial real estate
from overnight index swap rates was little changed. (CRE) market were still somewhat strained against a
Indicators of inflation expectations derived from no- backdrop of weak fundamentals and tight underwriting
minal and inflation-protected Treasury securities edged standards. Nevertheless, issuance of commercial mort-
up over the period but stayed in the ranges observed gage-backed securities continued at a solid pace over
over recent quarters. the intermeeting period.
Conditions in unsecured short-term dollar funding Mortgage rates remained at very low levels over the
markets remained stable over the intermeeting period. intermeeting period. Refinancing activity increased but
In secured funding markets, conditions were also little was still restrained by tight underwriting conditions,
changed. capacity constraints at mortgage originators, and low
levels of home equity. Nonrevolving consumer credit
In the September Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey
continued to expand briskly in June, largely due to ro-
on Dealer Financing Terms, respondents reported no
bust growth in student loans originated by the federal
significant changes in credit terms for important classes
government, while revolving credit remained subdued.
of counterparties over the past three months, although
Delinquency rates for consumer credit were still low,
a few noted a slight easing in terms for some clients.
mostly reflecting a shift in lending toward higher-
The use of leverage by hedge funds was reported to
credit-quality borrowers.
have remained basically unchanged. However, respon-
dents noted greater demand for funding of agency and Gross issuance of long-term municipal bonds picked
non-agency residential MBS. up in August from the subdued pace in July, but net
issuance continued to decline. CDS spreads for debt

--- Page 5 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_2_–_1_3_, _2_0_1_2______________________P_a_g_e_ _5
issued by state governments moved lower over the in- asset classes did not appear stretched, or supported by
termeeting period, and the ratio of yields on long-term excessive leverage. The staff also did not find evidence
general obligation municipal bonds to yields on com- that excessive risk-taking was widespread, although
parable-maturity Treasury securities decreased, on bal- such behavior had appeared in a few smaller and less
ance. liquid markets.
Bank credit continued to expand at a moderate pace Staff Economic Outlook
over the intermeeting period, as growth in C&I loans In the economic projection prepared by the staff for
remained brisk while CRE and home equity loans both the September FOMC meeting, the forecast for real
trended down further. The August Survey of Terms of GDP growth in the near term was broadly similar, on
Business Lending indicated that overall interest-rate balance, to the previous projection. The near-term
spreads on C&I loans were little changed; spreads on forecast incorporated a larger negative effect of the
loans drawn on recently established commitments nar- drought on farm output in the second half of this year
rowed materially, although they remained wide. than the staff previously anticipated, but this effect was
mostly offset by the staff’s expectation of a smaller
M2 growth was rapid in July, likely reflecting investors’
drag from net exports. The staff’s medium-term pro-
heightened demand for safe and liquid assets amid con-
jection for real GDP growth, which was conditioned
cerns about the situation in Europe, but it slowed to a
on the assumption of no changes in monetary policy,
moderate pace in August as those concerns eased
was revised up a little, mostly reflecting a slight im-
somewhat. The monetary base rose in July and August
provement in the outlook for the European situation
as reserve balances and currency expanded.
and a somewhat higher projected path for equity prices.
Sentiment improved in foreign financial markets as the Nevertheless, with fiscal policy assumed to be tighter
European Central Bank (ECB) outlined a plan to make next year than this year, the staff expected that increas-
additional sovereign bond purchases in conjunction es in real GDP would not materially exceed the growth
with the European Financial Stability Facility and the of potential output in 2013. In 2014, economic activity
European Stability Mechanism. Spreads of shorter- was projected to accelerate gradually, supported by an
term yields on peripheral euro-area sovereign bonds easing in fiscal policy restraint, increases in consumer
over those on comparable-maturity German bunds and business confidence, further improvements in fi-
declined substantially over the period. The staff’s nancial conditions and credit availability, and accom-
broad nominal index of the foreign exchange value of modative monetary policy. The expansion in economic
the dollar declined and benchmark sovereign yields in activity was expected to narrow the significant margin
the major advanced foreign economies increased as of slack in labor and product markets only slowly over
safe-haven demands eased with the lessening of con- the projection period, and the unemployment rate was
cerns about the European situation. Most global anticipated to still be elevated at the end of 2014.
benchmark indexes for equity prices moved up, and the
The staff’s near-term forecast for inflation was revised
equity prices of European banks rose sharply. Funding
up from the projection prepared for the August FOMC
conditions for euro-area banks improved, although
meeting, reflecting increases in consumer energy prices
these conditions remained fragile, and draws on the
that were greater than anticipated. However, the staff’s
Federal Reserve’s liquidity swap facility with the ECB
projection for inflation over the medium term was little
fell.
changed. With crude oil prices expected to gradually
The staff also reported on potential risks to financial decline from their current levels, the boost to retail
stability, including those owing to the developments in food prices from the drought anticipated to be only
Europe and to the current environment of low interest temporary and comparatively small, long-run inflation
rates. Although the support for economic activity pro- expectations assumed to remain stable, and substantial
vided by low interest rates enhances financial stability, resource slack persisting over the projection period, the
low interest rates also could eventually contribute to staff continued to forecast that inflation would be sub-
excessive borrowing or risk-taking and possibly leave dued through 2014.
some aspects of the financial system vulnerable to a
The staff viewed the uncertainty around the forecast
future rise in interest rates. The staff surveyed a wide
for economic activity as elevated and the risks skewed
range of asset markets and financial institutions for
to the downside, largely reflecting concerns about the
signs of excessive valuations, leverage, or risk-taking
situation in Europe and the possibility of a more severe
that could pose systemic risks. Valuations for broad

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
tightening in U.S. fiscal policy than anticipated. Al- the outlook for U.S. fiscal and regulatory policies was
though the staff saw the outlook for inflation as uncer- weighing on confidence, thereby restraining household
tain, the risks were viewed as balanced and not un- and business spending. However, others questioned
usually high. the role of uncertainty about policy as a factor con-
straining aggregate demand. In addition, participants
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
still saw significant downside risks to the outlook for
Economic Outlook
economic growth. Prominent among these risks were a
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, meeting par-
possible intensification of strains in the euro zone, with
ticipants—the 7 members of the Board of Governors
potential spillovers to U.S. financial markets and insti-
and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks, all
tutions and thus to the broader U.S. economy; a larger-
of whom participate in the deliberations of the
than-expected U.S. fiscal tightening; and the possibility
FOMC—submitted their assessments of real output
of a further slowdown in global economic growth. A
growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the tar-
few participants, however, mentioned the possibility
get federal funds rate for each year from 2012 through
that economic growth could be more rapid than cur-
2015 and over the longer run, under each participants’
rently anticipated, particularly if major sources of un-
judgment of appropriate monetary policy. The longer-
certainty were resolved favorably or if faster-than-
run projections represent each participant’s assessment
expected advances in the housing sector led to im-
of the rate to which each variable would be expected to
provements in household balance sheets, increased
converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy
confidence, and easier credit conditions. Participants’
and in the absence of further shocks to the economy.
forecasts for economic activity, which in most cases
These economic projections and policy assessments are
were conditioned on an assumption of additional, near-
described in the Summary of Economic Projections,
term monetary policy accommodation, were also asso-
which is attached as an addendum to these minutes.
ciated with an outlook for the unemployment rate to
In their discussion of the economic situation and out- remain close to recent levels through 2012 and then to
look, meeting participants regarded the information decline gradually toward levels judged to be consistent
received during the intermeeting period as indicating with the Committee’s mandate.
that economic activity had continued to expand at a
In the household sector, incoming data on retail sales
moderate pace in recent months. However, recent
were somewhat stronger than expected. Participants
gains in employment were small and the unemploy-
noted, however, that households were still in the
ment rate remained high. Although consumer spend-
process of deleveraging, confidence was low, and con-
ing had continued to advance, growth in business fixed
sumers appeared to remain particularly pessimistic
investment appeared to have slowed. The housing sec-
about the prospects for the future, raising doubts that
tor showed some further signs of improvement, albeit
the somewhat stronger pace of spending would persist.
from a depressed level. Consumer price inflation had
Although the level of activity in the housing sector re-
been subdued despite recent increases in the prices of
mained low, the somewhat faster pace of home sales
some key commodities, and longer-term inflation ex-
and construction provided some encouraging signs of
pectations had remained stable.
improvement. A number of participants also observed
Regarding the economic outlook, participants generally that house prices were rising. It was noted that such
agreed that the pace of the economic recovery would increases, coupled with historically low mortgage rates,
likely remain moderate over coming quarters but would could lead to a stronger upturn in housing activity, al-
pick up over the 2013–15 period. In the near term, the though constraints on the capacity for loan origination
drought in the Midwest was expected to weigh on eco- and still-tight credit terms for some borrowers contin-
nomic growth. Moreover, participants observed that ued to weigh on mortgage lending.
the pace of economic recovery would likely continue to
Business contacts in many parts of the country were
be held down for some time by persistent headwinds,
reported to be highly uncertain about the outlook for
including continued weakness in the housing market,
the economy and for fiscal and regulatory policies.
ongoing household sector deleveraging, still-tight credit
Although firms’ balance sheets were generally strong,
conditions for some households and businesses, and
these uncertainties had led them to be particularly cau-
fiscal consolidation at all levels of government. Many
tious and to remain reluctant to hire or expand capaci-
participants also noted that a high level of uncertainty
ty. Reports on manufacturing activity were mixed, with
regarding the European fiscal and banking crisis and
production related to autos and housing the most not-

--- Page 7 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_2_–_1_3_, _2_0_1_2______________________P_a_g_e_ _7
able areas of relative strength. In one District, business market, stated again that weak aggregate demand was
surveys pointed to further growth; however, readings the principal reason for the high unemployment rate.
on forward-looking indicators of orders around the They saw slack in resource utilization as remaining
country were less positive. In addition, business con- wide, indicating an important role for additional policy
tacts noted that export demand was showing signs of accommodation. Several participants noted the risk
weakness as a result of the slowdown in economic ac- that continued high levels of unemployment, even if
tivity in Europe. The energy sector continued to ex- initially cyclical, might ultimately induce adverse struc-
pand. In the agricultural sector, high grain prices and tural changes. In particular, they expressed concerns
crop insurance payments were supporting farm in- about the risk that the exceptionally high level of long-
comes, helping offset declines in production and re- term unemployment and the depressed level of labor
duced profits on livestock. The drought was expected participation could ultimately lead to permanent nega-
to reduce farm inventories and have a transitory impact tive effects on the skills and prospects of those without
on broader measures of economic growth. jobs, thereby reducing the longer-run normal level of
employment and potential output.
Participants generally expected that fiscal policy would
continue to be a drag on economic activity over com- Sentiment in financial markets improved notably during
ing quarters. In addition to ongoing weakness in the intermeeting period. Participants indicated that
spending at the federal, state, and local government recent decisions by the ECB helped ease investors’ an-
levels, uncertainties about tax and spending policies xiety about the near-term prospects for the euro.
reportedly were restraining business decisionmaking. However, participants also observed that significant
Participants also noted that if an agreement was not risks related to the euro-area banking and fiscal crisis
reached to tackle the expiring tax cuts and scheduled remained, and that a number of important issues would
spending reductions, a sharp consolidation of fiscal have to be resolved in order to achieve further progress
policy would take place at the beginning of 2013. toward a comprehensive solution to the crisis. Partici-
pants noted that indicators of financial stress in the
The available indicators pointed to continued weakness
United States were not especially high and overall con-
in overall labor market conditions. Growth in em-
ditions in U.S. financial markets remained favorable.
ployment had been disappointing, with the average
Longer-term interest rates were low and supportive of
monthly increases in payrolls so far this year below last
economic growth, while equity prices had risen. One
year’s pace and below the pace that would be required
participant noted that, while there were few current
to make significant progress in reducing the unem-
signs of excessive risk-taking, low interest rates could
ployment rate. The unemployment rate declined
ultimately lead to financial imbalances that would be
around the turn of the year but had not fallen signifi-
challenging to detect before they became serious prob-
cantly since then. In addition, the labor force participa-
lems.
tion rate and employment-to-population ratios were at
or near post-recession lows. The incoming information on inflation over the inter-
meeting period was largely in line with participants’
Meeting participants again discussed the extent of slack
expectations. Despite recent increases in the prices of
in labor markets. A few participants reiterated their
some key commodities, consumer price inflation re-
view that the persistently high level of unemployment
mained subdued. With longer-term inflation expecta-
reflected the effect of structural factors, including mis-
tions stable and the unemployment rate elevated, par-
matches across and within sectors between the skills of
ticipants generally anticipated that inflation over the
the unemployed and those demanded in sectors in
medium run would likely run at or below the 2 percent
which jobs were currently available. It was also sug-
rate that the Committee judges to be most consistent
gested that there was an ongoing process of polariza-
with its mandate. Most participants saw the risks to the
tion in the labor market, with the share of job oppor-
outlook for inflation as roughly balanced. A few partic-
tunities in middle-skill occupations continuing to de-
ipants felt that maintaining a highly accommodative
cline while the shares of low and high skill occupations
stance of monetary policy over an extended period
increased. Both of these views would suggest a lower
could unmoor longer-term inflation expectations and,
level of potential output and thus reduced scope for
against a backdrop of higher energy and commodity
combating unemployment with additional monetary
prices, posed upside risks to inflation. Other partici-
policy stimulus. Several participants, while acknowl-
pants, by contrast, saw inflation risks as tilted to the
edging some evidence of structural changes in the labor

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
downside, given their expectations for sizable and per- sponse to economic developments or to changes in its
sistent resource slack. assessment of their efficacy and costs.
Participants again exchanged views on the likely bene- Participants also discussed issues related to the provi-
fits and costs of a new large-scale asset purchase pro- sion of forward guidance regarding the future path of
gram. Many participants anticipated that such a pro- the federal funds rate. It was noted that clear commu-
gram would provide support to the economic recovery nication and credibility allow the central bank to help
by putting downward pressure on longer-term interest shape the public’s expectations about policy, which is
rates and promoting more accommodative financial crucial to managing monetary policy when the federal
conditions. A number of participants also indicated funds rate is at its effective lower bound. A number of
that it could lift consumer and business confidence by participants questioned the effectiveness of continuing
emphasizing the Committee’s commitment to contin- to use a calendar date to provide forward guidance,
ued progress toward its dual mandate. In addition, it noting that a change in the calendar date might be in-
was noted that additional purchases could reinforce the terpreted pessimistically as a downgrade of the Com-
Committee’s forward guidance regarding the federal mittee’s economic outlook rather than as conveying the
funds rate. Participants discussed the effectiveness of Committee’s determination to support the economic
purchases of Treasury securities relative to purchases of recovery. If the public interpreted the statement pes-
agency MBS in easing financial conditions. Some par- simistically, consumer and business confidence could
ticipants suggested that, all else being equal, MBS pur- fall rather than rise. Many participants indicated a pre-
chases could be preferable because they would more ference for replacing the calendar date with language
directly support the housing sector, which remains describing the economic factors that the Committee
weak but has shown some signs of improvement of would consider in deciding to raise its target for the
late. One participant, however, objected that purchases federal funds rate. Participants discussed the benefits
of MBS, when compared to purchases of longer-term of such an approach, including the potential for en-
Treasury securities, would likely result in higher interest hanced effectiveness of policy through greater clarity
rates for many borrowers in other sectors. A number regarding the Committee’s future behavior. That ap-
of participants highlighted the uncertainty about the proach could also bolster the stimulus provided by the
overall effects of additional purchases on financial System’s holdings of longer-term securities. It was
markets and the real economy. Some participants noted that forward guidance along these lines would
thought past purchases were useful because they were allow market expectations regarding the federal funds
conducted during periods of market stress or height- rate to adjust automatically in response to incoming
ened deflation risk and were less confident of the effi- data on the economy. Many participants thought that
cacy of additional purchases under present circum- more-effective forward guidance could be provided by
stances. A few expressed skepticism that additional specifying numerical thresholds for labor market and
policy accommodation could help spur an economy inflation indicators that would be consistent with main-
that they saw as held back by uncertainties and a range taining the federal funds rate at exceptionally low levels.
of structural issues. In discussing the costs and risks However, reaching agreement on specific thresholds
that such a program might entail, several participants could be challenging given the diversity of participants’
reiterated their concern that additional purchases might views, and some were reluctant to specify explicit nu-
complicate the Committee’s efforts to withdraw mone- merical thresholds out of concern that such thresholds
tary policy accommodation when it eventually became would necessarily be too simple to fully capture the
appropriate to do so, raising the risk of undesirably complexities of the economy and the policy process or
high inflation in the future and potentially unmooring could be incorrectly interpreted as triggers prompting
inflation expectations. One participant noted that an an automatic policy response. In addition, numerical
extended period of accommodation resulting from ad- thresholds could be confused with the Committee’s
ditional asset purchases could lead to excessive risk- longer-term objectives, and so undermine the Commit-
taking on the part of some investors and so undermine tee’s credibility. At the conclusion of the discussion,
financial stability over time. The possible adverse ef- most participants agreed that the use of numerical
fects of large purchases on market functioning were thresholds could be useful to provide more clarity
also noted. However, most participants thought these about the conditionality of the forward guidance but
risks could be managed since the Committee could thought that further work would be needed to address
make adjustments to its purchases, as needed, in re- the related communications challenges.

--- Page 9 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_2_–_1_3_, _2_0_1_2______________________P_a_g_e_ _9
Committee Policy Action of agency MBS, undertake additional asset purchases,
Committee members saw the information received and employ its other policy tools as appropriate until
over the intermeeting period as suggesting that eco- such improvement is achieved in a context of price
nomic activity had continued to expand at a moderate stability. This flexible approach was seen as allowing
pace in recent months. However, growth in employ- the Committee to tailor its policy response over time to
ment had been slow, and almost all members saw the incoming information while incorporating conditional
unemployment rate as still elevated relative to levels features that clarified the Committee’s intention to im-
that they viewed as consistent with the Committee’s prove labor market conditions, thereby enhancing the
mandate. Members generally judged that without addi- effectiveness of the action by helping to bolster busi-
tional policy accommodation, economic growth might ness and consumer confidence. While members gener-
not be strong enough to generate sustained improve- ally viewed the potential risks associated with these
ment in labor market conditions. Moreover, while the purchases as manageable, the Committee agreed that in
sovereign and banking crisis in Europe had eased some determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset
recently, members still saw strains in global financial purchases, it would, as always, take appropriate account
conditions as posing significant downside risks to the of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases. With
economic outlook. The possibility of a larger-than- regard to the forward guidance, the Committee agreed
expected fiscal tightening in the United States and on an extension through mid-2015, in conjunction with
slower global growth were also seen as downside risks. language in the statement indicating that it expects that
Inflation had been subdued, even though the prices of a highly accommodative stance of policy will remain
some key commodities had increased recently. Mem- appropriate for a considerable time after the economic
bers generally continued to anticipate that, with longer- recovery strengthens. That new language was meant to
term inflation expectations stable and given the existing clarify that the maintenance of a very low federal funds
slack in resource utilization, inflation over the medium rate over that period did not reflect an expectation that
term would run at or below the Committee’s longer- the economy would remain weak, but rather reflected
run objective of 2 percent. the Committee’s intention to support a stronger eco-
nomic recovery. One member dissented from the poli-
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
cy decision, on the grounds that he opposed additional
ahead, members generally expressed concerns about
asset purchases and preferred to omit the calendar date
the slow pace of improvement in labor market condi-
from the forward guidance; in his view, it would be
tions and all members but one agreed that the outlook
better to use qualitative language to describe the factors
for economic activity and inflation called for additional
that would influence the Committee’s decision to in-
monetary accommodation. Members agreed that such
crease the target federal funds rate.
accommodation should be provided through both a
strengthening of the forward guidance regarding the At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
federal funds rate and purchases of additional agency voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
MBS at a pace of $40 billion per month. Along with of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
the ongoing purchases of $45 billion per month of ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance
longer-term Treasury securities under the maturity ex- with the following domestic policy directive:
tension program announced in June, these purchases
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
will increase the Committee’s holdings of longer-term
monetary and financial conditions that will
securities by about $85 billion each month through the
foster price stability and promote sustainable
end of the year, and should put downward pressure on
growth in output. To further its long-run
longer-term interest rates, support mortgage markets,
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions
and help make broader financial conditions more ac-
in reserve markets consistent with federal
commodative. Members also agreed to maintain the
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.
Committee’s existing policy of reinvesting principal
The Committee directs the Desk to continue
payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency
the maturity extension program it announced
MBS into agency MBS. The Committee agreed that it
in June to purchase Treasury securities with
would closely monitor incoming information on eco-
remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years
nomic and financial developments in coming months,
with a total face value of about $267 billion
and that if the outlook for the labor market did not
by the end of December 2012, and to sell or
improve substantially, it would continue its purchases
redeem Treasury securities with remaining

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
maturities of approximately 3 years or less to the economic outlook. The Committee
with a total face value of about $267 billion. also anticipates that inflation over the me-
For the duration of this program, the Com- dium term likely would run at or below its
mittee directs the Desk to suspend its policy 2 percent objective.
of rolling over maturing Treasury securities
To support a stronger economic recovery
into new issues. The Committee directs the
and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
Desk to maintain its existing policy of rein-
is at the rate most consistent with its dual
vesting principal payments on all agency debt
mandate, the Committee agreed today to in-
and agency mortgage-backed securities in the
crease policy accommodation by purchasing
System Open Market Account in agency
additional agency mortgage-backed securities
mortgage-backed securities. The Desk is al-
at a pace of $40 billion per month. The
so directed to begin purchasing agency mort-
Committee also will continue through the
gage-backed securities at a pace of about
end of the year its program to extend the av-
$40 billion per month. The Committee di-
erage maturity of its holdings of securities as
rects the Desk to engage in dollar roll and
announced in June, and it is maintaining its
coupon swap transactions as necessary to fa-
existing policy of reinvesting principal pay-
cilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s
ments from its holdings of agency debt and
agency MBS transactions. The System Open
agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
Market Account Manager and the Secretary
mortgage-backed securities. These actions,
will keep the Committee informed of ongo-
which together will increase the Committee’s
ing developments regarding the System’s bal-
holdings of longer-term securities by about
ance sheet that could affect the attainment
$85 billion each month through the end of
over time of the Committee’s objectives of
the year, should put downward pressure on
maximum employment and price stability.”
longer-term interest rates, support mortgage
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be- markets, and help to make broader financial
low to be released at 12:30 p.m.: conditions more accommodative.
“Information received since the Federal The Committee will closely monitor incom-
Open Market Committee met in August sug- ing information on economic and financial
gests that economic activity has continued to developments in coming months. If the out-
expand at a moderate pace in recent months. look for the labor market does not improve
Growth in employment has been slow, and substantially, the Committee will continue its
the unemployment rate remains elevated. purchases of agency mortgage-backed securi-
Household spending has continued to ad- ties, undertake additional asset purchases,
vance, but growth in business fixed invest- and employ its other policy tools as appro-
ment appears to have slowed. The housing priate until such improvement is achieved in
sector has shown some further signs of im- a context of price stability. In determining
provement, albeit from a depressed level. the size, pace, and composition of its asset
Inflation has been subdued, although the purchases, the Committee will, as always,
prices of some key commodities have in- take appropriate account of the likely efficacy
creased recently. Longer-term inflation ex- and costs of such purchases.
pectations have remained stable.
To support continued progress toward max-
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the imum employment and price stability, the
Committee seeks to foster maximum em- Committee expects that a highly accommo-
ployment and price stability. The Committee dative stance of monetary policy will remain
is concerned that, without further policy ac- appropriate for a considerable time after the
commodation, economic growth might not economic recovery strengthens. In particu-
be strong enough to generate sustained im- lar, the Committee also decided today to
provement in labor market conditions. Fur- keep the target range for the federal funds
thermore, strains in global financial markets rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently antic-
continue to pose significant downside risks ipates that exceptionally low levels for the

--- Page 11 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_2_–_1_3_, _2_0_1_2_____________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
federal funds rate are likely to be warranted the feasibility and desirability of constructing an FOMC
at least through mid-2015.” consensus forecast. At this meeting, participants dis-
cussed possible formulations of the monetary policy
Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C.
assumptions on which to condition an FOMC consen-
Dudley, Elizabeth Duke, Dennis P. Lockhart, Sandra
sus forecast and alternative approaches for participants
Pianalto, Jerome H. Powell, Sarah Bloom Raskin, Jere-
to express their endorsement of the consensus forecast.
my C. Stein, Daniel K. Tarullo, John C. Williams, and
In conclusion, participants agreed to have a broad dis-
Janet L. Yellen.
cussion of the experiences gathered from the two ex-
Voting against this action: Jeffrey M. Lacker. perimental exercises in conjunction with the October
FOMC meeting.
Mr. Lacker dissented because he believed that addition-
al monetary stimulus at this time was unlikely to result It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
in a discernible improvement in economic growth would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, October 23–
without also causing an unwanted increase in inflation. 24, 2012. The meeting adjourned at 12:10 p.m. on Sep-
Moreover, he expressed his opposition to the purchase tember 13, 2012.
of more MBS, because he viewed it as inappropriate for
Notation Vote
the Committee to choose a particular sector of the
By notation vote completed on August 21, 2012, the
economy to support; purchases of Treasury securities
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
instead would have avoided this effect. Finally, he pre-
FOMC meeting held on July 31–August 1, 2012.
ferred to omit the description of the time period over
which exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate
were likely to be warranted.
Consensus Forecast Experiment
_____________________________
In light of the discussion at the previous FOMC meet-
William B. English
ing, the subcommittee on communications developed a
Secretary
second experimental exercise intended to shed light on

--- Page 12 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the September 12−13, 2012, Fed- ticipants judged that the growth rate of real gross do-
eral Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, meet- mestic product (GDP) would increase somewhat in
ing participants—the 7 members of the Board of Gov- 2013 and that economic growth in 2014 and 2015
ernors and the 12 presidents of the Federal Reserve would modestly exceed participants’ estimates of the
Banks, all of whom participate in the deliberations of longer-run sustainable rate of growth, while the unem-
the FOMC—submitted their assessments, under each ployment rate would decline gradually through 2015.
participant’s judgment of appropriate monetary policy, Participants projected that inflation, as measured by the
of real output growth, the unemployment rate, infla- annual change in the price index for personal consump-
tion, and the target federal funds rate for each year tion expenditures (PCE), would run close to or below
from 2012 through 2015 and over the longer run. the FOMC’s longer-run inflation objective of 2 percent.
These assessments were based on information available
As shown in figure 2, most participants judged that
at the time of the meeting and participants’ individual
highly accommodative monetary policy was likely to be
assumptions about the factors likely to affect economic
warranted over the next few years. In particular,
outcomes. The longer-run projections represent each
13 participants thought that it would be appropriate for
participant’s judgment of the rate to which each varia-
the first increase in the target federal funds rate to oc-
ble would be expected to converge, over time, under
cur during 2015 or later. The majority of participants
appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of fur-
judged that appropriate monetary policy would involve
ther shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary
a decision by the Committee, at the September meeting
policy” is defined as the future path of policy that par-
or before long, to undertake significant additional asset
ticipants deem most likely to foster outcomes for eco-
purchases.
nomic activity and inflation that best satisfy their indi-
vidual interpretations of the Federal Reserve’s objec- As in June, participants in September judged the uncer-
tives of maximum employment and stable prices. tainty associated with the outlook for real activity and
the unemployment rate to be unusually high compared
Overall, the assessments that FOMC participants sub-
with historical norms, with the risks weighted mainly
mitted in September indicated that, under appropriate
toward slower economic growth and a higher unem-
monetary policy, the pace of economic recovery over
ployment rate. While a number of participants viewed
the 2012−15 period would gradually pick up and infla-
the uncertainty surrounding their projections for infla-
tion would remain subdued (table 1 and figure 1). Par-
tion to be unusually high in comparison with historical
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, September 2012
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer run 2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer run
Change in real GDP . . 1.7 to 2.0 2.5 to 3.0 3.0 to 3.8 3.0 to 3.8 2.3 to 2.5 1.6 to 2.0 2.3 to 3.5 2.7 to 4.1 2.5 to 4.2 2.2 to 3.0
June projection. . . 1.9 to 2.4 2.2 to 2.8 3.0 to 3.5 n.a. 2.3 to 2.5 1.6 to 2.5 2.2 to 3.5 2.8 to 4.0 n.a. 2.2 to 3.0
Unemployment rate. . . 8.0 to 8.2 7.6 to 7.9 6.7 to 7.3 6.0 to 6.8 5.2 to 6.0 8.0 to 8.3 7.0 to 8.0 6.3 to 7.5 5.7 to 6.9 5.0 to 6.3
June projection. . . 8.0 to 8.2 7.5 to 8.0 7.0 to 7.7 n.a. 5.2 to 6.0 7.8 to 8.4 7.0 to 8.1 6.3 to 7.7 n.a. 4.9 to 6.3
PCE inflation. . . . . . . . 1.7 to 1.8 1.6 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 2.0 1.5 to 1.9 1.5 to 2.1 1.6 to 2.2 1.8 to 2.3 2.0
June projection. . . 1.2 to 1.7 1.5 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 n.a. 2.0 1.2 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.1 1.5 to 2.2 n.a. 2.0
Core PCE inflation3. . 1.7 to 1.9 1.7 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 1.9 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.2 1.8 to 2.3
June projection. . . . 1.7 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 n.a. 1.7 to 2.0 1.4 to 2.1 1.5 to 2.2 n.a.
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the pre-
vious year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for
personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average
civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary
policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The June projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee on June 19–20, 2012.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

--- Page 13 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure1. Centraltendenciesandrangesofeconomicprojections,2012–15andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
5
Central tendency of projections
4
Range of projections
3
2
1
+
Actual 0
-
1
2
3
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesofthevariablesare
annual.

--- Page 14 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_2–_1_3_,_ 2_0_1_2____________P_a_g_e_ _3
Figure2. OverviewofFOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy,September2012
Number of participants
Appropriate timing of policy firming
13
12
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
3
2
2
1 1
1
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Appropriate pace of policy firming Percent
Target federal funds rate at year end
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer run
Note: Intheupperpanel,theheightofeachbardenotesthenumberofFOMCparticipantswhojudgethat,under
appropriatemonetarypolicy,thefirstincreaseinthetargetfederalfundsratefromitscurrentrangeof0to1/4percent
will occur in the specified calendar year. In June 2012, the numbers of FOMC participants who judged that the first
increaseinthetargetfederalfundsratewouldoccurin2012,2013,2014,and2015were,respectively,3,3,7,and6. In
the lower panel, each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/4 percentage point) of an individual
participant’sjudgmentoftheappropriatelevelofthetargetfederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryear
oroverthelongerrun.

--- Page 15 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
norms, many judged it to be broadly similar to histori- ment that would prevail under the assumption of ap-
cal norms, and most considered the risks to inflation to propriate monetary policy and in the absence of further
be roughly balanced. shocks to the economy was 5.2 to 6.0 percent, un-
changed from June. Most participants projected that
The Outlook for Economic Activity
the gap between the current unemployment rate and
Conditional on their individual assumptions about ap-
their estimates of its longer-run normal rate would be
propriate monetary policy, participants judged that the
closed in five or six years, while a few judged that less
economy would grow at a moderate pace over coming
time would be needed.
quarters and then pick up somewhat in 2013 before
expanding in 2014 and 2015 at a rate modestly above Figures 3.A and 3.B provide details on the diversity of
what participants saw as the longer-run rate of output participants’ views regarding the likely outcomes for
growth. The central tendency of their projections for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate over the
the change in real GDP in 2012 was 1.7 to 2.0 percent, next three years and over the longer run. The disper-
somewhat lower than in June. Many participants cha- sion in these projections reflects differences in partici-
racterized the incoming data as having been to the pants’ assessments of many factors, including appropri-
weak side of their expectations at the time of the June ate monetary policy and its effects on the economy, the
meeting; several participants also cited the severe rate of improvement in the housing sector, the spillover
drought as a factor causing them to mark down their effects of the fiscal and financial situation in Europe,
projections for economic growth in 2012. However, the prospective path for U.S. fiscal policy, the extent of
participants’ projections for 2013 and 2014 were gener- structural dislocations in the labor market, the likely
ally slightly higher than in June; this reflected, in part, a evolution of credit and financial market conditions, and
greater assumed amount of monetary policy accommo- longer-term trends in productivity and the labor force.
dation than in their June submissions as well as some With much of the data for the first eight months of
improvement since then in the outlook for economic 2012 now in hand, the dispersion of participants’ pro-
activity in Europe. The central tendency of partici- jections of real GDP growth and the unemployment
pants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2013 was 2.5 rate this year narrowed in September compared with
to 3.0 percent, followed by central tendencies for both June. The range of participants’ forecasts for the
2014 and 2015 of 3.0 to 3.8 percent. The central ten- change in real GDP in 2013 and 2014, however, was
dency for the longer-run rate of increase of real GDP little changed from June, on balance. The distribution
remained at 2.3 to 2.5 percent, unchanged from June. of projections for the unemployment rate was not
While most participants noted that the increased degree much altered for 2013, while for 2014 it narrowed a bit
of monetary policy accommodation assumed in their and shifted down slightly. The range for the unem-
projections would help promote a faster recovery, par- ployment rate for 2015 was 5.7 to 6.9 percent. As in
ticipants cited several headwinds that would be likely to June, the dispersion of estimates for the longer-run rate
hold back the pace of economic expansion over the of output growth was fairly narrow, with the values
forecast period, including slower growth abroad, a still- being mostly from 2.2 to 2.7 percent. The range of
weak housing market, the difficult fiscal and financial participants’ estimates of the longer-run rate of unem-
situation in Europe, and fiscal restraint in the United ployment was 5.0 to 6.3 percent, a similar range to that
States. in June; this range reflected different judgments among
participants about several factors, including the outlook
Participants projected the unemployment rate at the
for labor force participation and the structure of the
end of 2012 to remain close to recent levels, with a cen-
labor market.
tral tendency of 8.0 to 8.2 percent, the same as in their
June submissions. Participants anticipated gradual im- The Outlook for Inflation
provement from 2013 through 2015; even so, they gen- Participants’ views on the broad outlook for inflation
erally thought that the unemployment rate at the end of under the assumption of appropriate monetary policy
2015 would still lie well above their individual estimates were little changed from June. For 2012 as a whole,
of its longer-run normal level. The central tendencies most anticipated that overall inflation would be only
of participants’ forecasts for the unemployment rate slightly above its average annual rate of 1.6 percent
were 7.6 to 7.9 percent at the end of 2013, 6.7 to over the first half of the year; a number of participants
7.3 percent at the end of 2014, and 6.0 to 6.8 percent at pointed to higher food prices in response to the
the end of 2015. The central tendency of participants’ drought, along with recent increases in oil prices, as
estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemploy- temporary sources of upward pressure on the headline

--- Page 16 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_2–_1_3_,_ 2_0_1_2____________P_a_g_e_ _5
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2012–15andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2012 20
September projections 18
16
June projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2. 8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4. 0 4.2
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2013 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2. 8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4. 0 4.2
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2. 8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4. 0 4.2
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2. 8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4. 0 4.2
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 17 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2012–15andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2012 20
September projections 18
16
June projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.8 5.0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2 7. 4 7. 6 7. 8 8. 0 8. 2 8. 4
4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2013 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.8 5.0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2 7. 4 7. 6 7. 8 8. 0 8. 2 8. 4
4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.8 5.0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2 7. 4 7. 6 7. 8 8. 0 8. 2 8. 4
4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.8 5.0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2 7. 4 7. 6 7. 8 8. 0 8. 2 8. 4
4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.8 5.0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2 7. 4 7. 6 7. 8 8. 0 8. 2 8. 4
4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 18 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_2–_1_3_,_ 2_0_1_2____________P_a_g_e_ _7
rate. Almost all participants judged that both headline tary policy called for a more-accommodative path for
and core inflation would remain subdued over the the federal funds rate than in their June submissions,
2013–15 period, running at rates at or below the involving either a lower target for the federal funds rate
FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent. In pointing at the end of the initial year of policy firming, or a shift
to factors likely to restrain price pressures, several par- out in the first year of firming.
ticipants cited sizable resource slack and stable inflation
All participants reported levels for the appropriate tar-
expectations, while a few noted the subdued behavior
get federal funds rate at the end of 2014 that were well
of labor compensation. Specifically, the central ten-
below their estimates of the level expected to prevail in
dency of participants’ projections for inflation, as
the longer run, and most saw the appropriate target
measured by the PCE price index, moved up and tight-
federal funds rate as still well below its longer-run value
ened to 1.7 to 1.8 percent for 2012 and was little
at the end of 2015. Estimates of the longer-run target
changed for 2013 and 2014 at 1.6 to 2.0 percent. For
federal funds rate ranged from 3 to 4½ percent, reflect-
2015, the central tendency was 1.8 to 2.0 percent. The
ing the Committee’s inflation objective of 2 percent
central tendencies of the forecasts for core inflation
and participants’ judgments about the longer-run equi-
were broadly similar to those for the headline measure
librium level of the real federal funds rate.
for 2013 through 2015.
Participants also provided qualitative information on
Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information about the
their views regarding the appropriate path of the Fed-
diversity of participants’ views about the outlook for
eral Reserve’s balance sheet. Eleven participants indi-
inflation. Participants’ projections for headline infla-
cated that appropriate policy would involve a decision
tion for 2012, which in June had ranged from 1.2 to
by the Committee, at the September meeting or soon
2 percent, narrowed in September to the range of 1.5 to
thereafter, to undertake significant additional asset pur-
1.9 percent; about three-fourths of participants’ projec-
chases. Several participants envisioned this program as
tions took values of 1.7 to 1.8 percent, broadly in line
entailing purchases of agency mortgage-backed securi-
with recent inflation readings. The distributions of
ties. Almost all participants assumed that, at the ap-
participants’ projections for headline inflation in 2013
propriate time, the Committee would carry out the
and 2014 were very similar to those for June, while the
normalization of the balance sheet according to the
range of projections for core inflation narrowed slightly
principles approved at the June 2011 FOMC meeting.
for both years. The distributions for core and overall
In general, participants linked their preferred start dates
inflation in 2015 were concentrated near the Commit-
for the normalization process to their views for the
tee’s longer-run inflation objective of 2 percent.
appropriate timing of the first increase in the target
Appropriate Monetary Policy federal funds rate.
As indicated in figure 2, most participants judged that
The key factors informing participants’ individual as-
exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate would
sessments of the appropriate setting for monetary poli-
remain appropriate for several more years. In particu-
cy included their judgments regarding labor market
lar, 12 participants thought that the first increase in the
conditions that would be consistent with the maximum
target federal funds rate would not be warranted until
level of employment, the extent to which employment
2015, and 1 viewed a start to firming in 2016 as appro-
currently deviated from the maximum level of em-
priate (upper panel). The 12 participants who expected
ployment, the extent to which inflation deviated from
that the target federal funds rate would not move
the Committee’s longer-term objective of 2 percent,
above its effective lower bound until 2015 thought the
and participants’ projections of the likely time horizon
federal funds rate would be 1.6 percent or lower at the
necessary to return employment and inflation to
end of that year, while the one participant who ex-
mandate-consistent levels. Several participants noted
pected that policy firming would commence in 2016
that their assessments of appropriate monetary policy
saw the funds rate target at 75 basis points at the end of
reflected the subpar pace of labor market improvement
that year. Six participants judged that policy firming in
and the persistent shortfall of output from potential
2012, 2013, or 2014 would be consistent with the
since the 2007–09 recession. A few participants noted
Committee’s statutory mandate. Those participants
that their settings of appropriate federal funds rate pol-
judged that the appropriate value for the federal funds
icy took into account unusual factors prevailing in re-
rate would range from 1½ to 3 percent at the end of
cent years, such as the likelihood that the neutral level
2014 and from 2½ to 4½ percent at the end of 2015.
of the federal funds rate was somewhat below its his-
In total, 14 participants judged that appropriate mone-

--- Page 19 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2012–15andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2012 20
September projections 18
16
June projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2013 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_2–_1_3_,_ 2_0_1_2____________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2012–15
Number of participants
2012 20
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2013 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
torical norm and the fact that policy rate setting had Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
been constrained by the effective lower bound on nom- Percentage points
Variable 2012 2013 2014 2015
inal interest rates. Two participants expressed concern
that a protracted period of very accommodative mone-
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . ±0.6 ±1.4 ±1.7 ±1.7
tary policy could lead to imbalances in the financial Unemployment rate1 . . . . . ±0.2 ±0.9 ±1.5 ±1.9
system. Participants also noted that because the ap-
Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.5 ±0.9 ±1.1 ±1.0
propriate stance of monetary policy is conditional on
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the
the evolution of real activity and inflation over time, root mean squared error of projections for 1992 through 2011 that
their assessments of the appropriate future path of the were released in the fall by various private and government forecas-
ters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain
federal funds rate and the balance sheet could change if
assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual out-
economic conditions were to evolve in an unexpected comes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in
manner. ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the
past. Further information may be found in David Reifschneider and
Figure 3.E details the distribution of participants’ Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Out-
look from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics
judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the
federal funds rate at the end of each calendar year from Federal Reserve System, November).
1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
2012 to 2015 and over the longer run. As previously
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price meas-
noted, most participants judged that economic condi- ure that has been most widely used in government and private eco-
tions would warrant maintaining the current low level nomic forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the
previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.
of the federal funds rate through the end of 2014.
Views on the appropriate level of the federal funds rate broadly similar to historical norms. The main factors
at the end of 2015 were more widely dispersed, with cited as contributing to the elevated uncertainty about
10 participants seeing the appropriate level of the fed- economic outcomes were the ongoing fiscal and finan-
eral funds rate as 1 percent or lower and 6 of them see- cial situation in Europe, the outlook for fiscal policy in
ing the appropriate rate as 2½ percent or higher. the United States, and a general slowdown in global
Those who judged that a longer period of very accom- economic growth, including the possibility of a signifi-
modative monetary policy would be appropriate gener- cant slowdown in China. As in June, participants noted
ally were participants who projected a sizable gap be- the difficulties associated with forecasting the path of
tween the unemployment rate and the longer-run nor- the U.S. economic recovery following a financial crisis
mal level of the unemployment rate until 2015 or later. and recession that differed markedly from recent his-
In contrast, the 6 participants who judged that policy torical experience. A number of participants com-
firming should begin in 2012, 2013, or 2014 indicated mented that in the aftermath of the financial crisis, they
that the Committee would need to act relatively soon in were more uncertain about the level of potential output
order to keep inflation near the FOMC’s longer-run and its rate of growth. A couple of participants noted
objective of 2 percent and to prevent a rise in inflation that some of the uncertainty about potential output
expectations. arose from the risk that continuation of long-term un-
employment might impair the skill level of the labor
Uncertainty and Risks
force or cause some workers to retire earlier than
Nearly all participants judged that their current level of
would otherwise have been the case, thereby reducing
uncertainty about real GDP growth and unemployment
potential output in the medium term.
was higher than was the norm during the previous
20 years (figure 4).1 Eight participants judged the level A majority of participants reported that they saw the
of uncertainty associated with their forecasts of total risks to their forecasts of real GDP growth as weighted
PCE inflation to be higher as well, while another toward the downside and, accordingly, the risks to their
10 participants viewed uncertainty about inflation as projections of the unemployment rate as tilted to the
upside. The most frequently identified sources of risk
were the situation in Europe, which many participants
1 Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for
the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total thought had the potential to slow global economic ac-
consumer price inflation over the period from 1991 to 2011. tivity further, particularly over the near term, and issues
At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” associated with fiscal policy in the United States.
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the
Most participants continued to judge the risks to their
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess
projections for inflation as broadly balanced, with sev-
the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projec-
tions. eral highlighting the recent stability of inflation expecta-

--- Page 22 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_2–_1_3_,_ 2_0_1_2___________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthetargetfederalfundsrate,2012–15andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2012
September projections
June projections 1 2 8 0
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2013
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2014
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2015
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Note: The target federal funds rate is measured as the level of the target rate at the end of the calendar year or
inthelongerrun.

--- Page 23 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4. Uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth 20 Risks to GDP growth 20
September projections 18 September projections 18
June projections 16 June projections 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate 20 Risks to the unemployment rate 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation 20 Risks to PCE inflation 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation 20 Risks to core PCE inflation 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”Defini-
tionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 24 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_2–_1_3_,_ 2_0_1_2___________P__ag_e_ _1_3
tions. However, four participants saw the risks to infla- side in light of concerns about U.S. fiscal imbalances,
tion as tilted to the downside, with a couple of them the current highly accommodative stance of monetary
noting that slack in resource markets could turn out to policy, and uncertainty about the Committee’s ability to
be greater than they were anticipating. Three partici- shift to a less accommodative policy stance when it
pants saw the risks to inflation as weighted to the up becomes appropriate to do so.

--- Page 25 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_4____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by cent in the second year, and 1.3 to 4.7 percent
the members of the Board of Governors and in the third and fourth years. The correspond-
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks ing 70 percent confidence intervals for overall
inform discussions of monetary policy among inflation would be 1.5 to 2.5 percent in the cur-
policymakers and can aid public understand- rent year, 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the second year,
ing of the basis for policy actions. Consider- 0.9 to 3.1 percent in the third year, and 1.0 to
able uncertainty attends these projections, 3.0 percent in the fourth year.
however. The economic and statistical models Because current conditions may differ
and relationships used to help produce eco- from those that prevailed, on average, over his-
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de- tory, participants provide judgments as to
scriptions of the real world, and the future whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
path of the economy can be affected by myr- jections of each variable is greater than, smaller
iad unforeseen developments and events. than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, forecast uncertainty in the past, as shown in
participants consider not only what appears to table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
be the most likely economic outcome as em- to whether the risks to their projections are
bodied in their projections, but also the range weighted to the upside, are weighted to the
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
their occurring, and the potential costs to the participants judge whether each variable is
economy should they occur. more likely to be above or below their projec-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical tions of the most likely outcome. These judg-
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including ments about the uncertainty and the risks at-
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports tending each participant’s projections are dis-
and those prepared by the Federal Reserve tinct from the diversity of participants’ views
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the about the most likely outcomes. Forecast un-
Federal Open Market Committee. The pro- certainty is concerned with the risks associated
jection error ranges shown in the table il- with a particular projection rather than with
lustrate the considerable uncertainty asso- divergences across a number of different pro-
ciated with economic forecasts. For example, jections.
suppose a participant projects that real gross As with real activity and inflation, the out-
domestic product (GDP) and total consumer look for the future path of the federal funds
prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, re- rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This
spectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty arises primarily because each partic-
uncertainty attending those projections is simi- ipant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of
lar to that experienced in the past and the risks monetary policy depends importantly on the
around the projections are broadly balanced, evolution of real activity and inflation over
the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a time. If economic conditions evolve in an un-
probability of about 70 percent that actual expected manner, then assessments of the ap-
GDP would expand within a range of 2.4 to propriate setting of the federal funds rate
3.6 percent in the current year, 1.6 to 4.4 per- would change from that point forward.

# Tables

## Page_12_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |      |      |      |            |      |      |      |      |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|------|------------|------|------|------|------|
| 2012                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | 2013 | 2014 | 2015 | Longer run | 2012 | 2013 | 2014 | 2015 |
| 1.7 to 2.0 2.5 to 3.0 3.0 to 3.8 3.0 to 3.8 2.3 to 2.5
1.9 to 2.4 2.2 to 2.8 3.0 to 3.5 n.a. 2.3 to 2.5
8.0 to 8.2 7.6 to 7.9 6.7 to 7.3 6.0 to 6.8 5.2 to 6.0
8.0 to 8.2 7.5 to 8.0 7.0 to 7.7 n.a. 5.2 to 6.0
1.7 to 1.8 1.6 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 2.0
1.2 to 1.7 1.5 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 n.a. 2.0
1.7 to 1.9 1.7 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 1.9 to 2.0
1.7 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 n.a. |      |      |      |            |      |      |      |      |