# 20120620_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:37:07*
*Pages: 24, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
June 19–20, 2012
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Jon W. Faust and Andrew T. Levin, Special Advisors to
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues- Governors
day, June 19, 2012, at 11:00 a.m. and continued on
Wednesday, June 20, 2012, at 8:30 a.m. Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
PRESENT:
Ben Bernanke, Chairman Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Director, Division
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Timothy
Elizabeth Duke P. Clark, Senior Associate Director, Division of
Jeffrey M. Lacker Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of
Dennis P. Lockhart Governors
Sandra Pianalto
Jerome H. Powell Thomas Laubach, Senior Adviser, Division of Research
Sarah Bloom Raskin and Statistics, Board of Governors; Ellen E.
Jeremy C. Stein Meade, Stephen A. Meyer, and Joyce K. Zickler,
Daniel K. Tarullo Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs,
John C. Williams Board of Governors
Janet L. Yellen
Daniel M. Covitz, Eric M. Engen, Michael T. Kiley,²
James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, David E. Lebow, and Michael G. Palumbo, Asso-
Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Alternate ciate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Board of Governors
Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and David Bowman, Deputy Associate Director, Division
Charles I. Plosser, Presidents of the Federal Re- of International Finance, Board of Governors
serve Banks of Dallas, Minneapolis, and Philadel-
phia, respectively Steven A. Sharpe and John J. Stevens, Assistant Direc-
tors, Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
William B. English, Secretary and Economist Governors
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Mone-
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary tary Affairs, Board of Governors
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Francisco Covas and Jennifer E. Roush, Senior Econ-
Richard M. Ashton,¹ Assistant General Counsel omists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Steven B. Kamin, Economist Governors; Andrea De Michelis, Senior Econo-
David W. Wilcox, Economist mist, Division of International Finance, Board of
Governors
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy,
William Nelson, Simon Potter, David Reifschneid- Sarah G. Green, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
er, Mark S. Sniderman, William Wascher, John A. Bank of Richmond
Weinberg, and Kei-Mu Yi, Associate Economists
_______________________
Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account ¹ Attended Tuesday’s morning session only.
² Attended Tuesday’s session only.
Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Pol-
icy and Research, Board of Governors

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Loretta J. Mester and Harvey Rosenblum, Executive diverse views come together in the Committee’s collec-
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Phila- tive judgment about the outlook and appropriate policy
delphia and Dallas, respectively as expressed in its postmeeting statement. Many partic-
ipants indicated that if it were possible to construct a
Troy Davig, Geoffrey Tootell, and Christopher J. Wal- quantitative economic projection and associated path
ler, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of appropriate policy that reflected the collective judg-
of Kansas City, Boston, and St. Louis, respectively ment of the Committee, such a projection could poten-
tially be helpful in clarifying how the outlook and poli-
John Fernald, Group Vice President, Federal Reserve cy decisions are related. Participants discussed exam-
Bank of San Francisco ples of the economic and policy projections published
by a number of foreign central banks. Participants
Lorie K. Logan and Anna Paulson, Vice Presidents, generally indicated a willingness to explore adjustments
Federal Reserve Banks of New York and Chicago, to the SEP, while highlighting the importance of com-
respectively municating not only the Committee’s collective judg-
ment but also the diversity of their views regarding the
economic outlook and monetary policy. Many partici-
pants noted that developing a quantitative forecast that
Organizational Matters
reflects the Committee’s collective judgment could be
By unanimous vote, Simon Potter was selected to serve
challenging, given the range of their views about the
at the pleasure of the Committee as Manager, System
economy’s structure and dynamics. Several participants
Open Market Account, effective June 30, 2012, on the
judged that the incremental gains in transparency that
understanding that his selection was subject to being
would result from developing and presenting such a
satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
consensus projection would be modest, given the
Secretary’s note: Advice subsequently was breadth of information already provided in the Com-
received that the selection of Mr. Potter as mittee’s policy statements, the minutes of Federal
Manager was satisfactory to the Federal Re- Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings, and the
serve Bank of New York. Chairman’s press briefings. Participants agreed to con-
tinue to explore ways to increase clarity and transpar-
By unanimous vote, the Committee selected James J.
ency in the Committee’s policy communications; many
McAndrews to serve as Associate Economist, effective
noted that the Committee had introduced a number of
June 30, 2012, until the selection of his successor at the
changes in its communications over the past year or so,
first regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee in
and emphasized that further changes should be consid-
2013.
ered carefully. At the end of the discussion, the
By unanimous vote, the Committee amended the Chairman asked the subcommittee on communications
FOMC Policy on External Communications of Federal to explore the feasibility and workability of potential
Reserve System Staff to clarify some specific aspects of approaches to developing an FOMC consensus fore-
the policy.3 cast.
Discussion of Communications regarding Eco- Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
nomic Projections eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
Meeting participants discussed several possibilities for The Manager of the System Open Market Account
enhancing the clarity and transparency of the Commit- (SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and
tee’s economic projections and their role in policy deci- foreign financial markets during the period since the
sions and policy communications. In particular, partic- FOMC met on April 24–25, 2012. He also reported on
ipants noted that while the Summary of Economic Pro- System open market operations, including the ongoing
jections (SEP) provides information about their indi- reinvestment into agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed
vidual projections of key macroeconomic variables and securities (MBS) of principal payments received on
about the path of monetary policy that each sees as SOMA holdings of agency debt and agency-guaranteed
appropriate and consistent with his or her projections, MBS as well as the operations related to the maturity
the SEP does not provide guidance about how those extension program authorized at the September 20–21,
2011, FOMC meeting. By unanimous vote, the Com-
3 The policy is available at www.federalreserve.gov/monetary mittee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions over
policy/files/FOMC_ExtCommunicationStaff.pdf .

--- Page 3 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_9_–_2_0,_ 2_0_1_2_________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
the intermeeting period. There were no intervention were generally at levels consistent with modest increas-
operations in foreign currencies for the System’s ac- es in output in the near term.
count over the intermeeting period.
Real personal consumption expenditures increased sol-
By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Domestic idly in the first quarter. In April and May, however,
Open Market Operations was amended to include the nominal retail sales excluding purchases of motor ve-
authority to conduct small-value operations for the hicles declined while sales of motor vehicles slowed
purposes of routine testing of operational readiness. In from their brisk pace in the first quarter. Factors that
addition, the Authorization was amended to include the tend to support households’ expenditures were, on bal-
authority to conduct intraday repurchase agreement ance, a little softer in recent months. The estimated
(repo) transactions with foreign and international ac- level of households’ real disposable income was revised
counts to prevent daylight overdrafts in those ac- down for the fourth quarter of last year. Moreover,
counts.4 real disposable income rose at a subdued pace in the
first quarter of this year, though it received some boost
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
from lower energy prices in April. Households’ net
The information reviewed at the June 19–20 meeting
worth increased in the first quarter, but the decline in
suggested that economic activity was expanding at a
equity prices during the intermeeting period suggested
somewhat more modest pace than earlier in the year.
that net worth may have fallen more recently. Con-
Improvements in labor market conditions slowed in
sumer sentiment was lower in early June than earlier in
recent months, and the unemployment rate remained
the year, and it continued to be subdued.
elevated. Consumer price inflation declined, primarily
reflecting reductions in the prices of crude oil and gaso- Activity in the housing sector generally improved in
line, and measures of long-run inflation expectations recent months, but it was still restrained by tight credit
continued to be stable. standards for mortgage loans and the substantial inven-
tory of foreclosed and distressed properties. Both
Private nonfarm employment rose at a slower pace in
starts and permits of new single-family homes rose in
April and May than in the first quarter of the year,
April and May but remained at low levels. Although
while total government employment continued to trend
starts of new multifamily units ran at a somewhat lower
down. The unemployment rate stood at 8.2 percent in
pace, on average, in April and May than in the first
May, essentially the same as its average in the first quar-
quarter, permits increased in recent months, likely
ter. The rate of long-duration unemployment remained
pointing to further gains in multifamily construction.
very high, and the share of workers employed part time
Home prices rose for the fourth consecutive month in
for economic reasons was little changed in recent
April. Sales of existing homes were a little higher in
months. Indicators of job openings and firms’ hiring
April than their monthly average in the first quarter,
plans were mixed, while initial claims for unemploy-
but the pace of new home sales was roughly un-
ment insurance were essentially unchanged over the
changed.
intermeeting period at a level consistent with modest
net job gains in the coming months. Real business expenditures on equipment and software
increased moderately in the first quarter. In April,
Manufacturing production edged up, on net, in April
nominal shipments and orders of nondefense capital
and May after rising at a robust pace in the first quarter.
goods excluding aircraft decreased. Recent forward-
Meanwhile, the rate of manufacturing capacity utiliza-
looking indicators, such as surveys of business condi-
tion remained about the same as earlier in the year. In
tions and capital spending plans, pointed toward con-
recent months, the output of motor vehicles and parts
tinued moderate increases in outlays for business
increased further, on balance, although at a slower rate
equipment in subsequent months. Nominal business
than in the first quarter, while factory output outside of
spending for nonresidential construction was essentially
the motor vehicle sector only inched up. Motor vehicle
flat in April relative to the first quarter. Meanwhile,
assemblies were scheduled to hold steady in the coming
inventories in most industries looked to be roughly
months, and broader indicators of manufacturing pro-
aligned with sales in recent months.
duction, such as the diffusion indexes of new orders
from the national and regional manufacturing surveys, Real federal government purchases fell markedly in the
first quarter, led by a sharp decrease in defense spend-
ing. Data for federal government spending in April
4 The authorization is available at www.federalreserve.gov/
and May pointed to a slower pace of decline in defense
monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_DomesticAuthorization.pdf .

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
outlays in the second quarter. Real state and local gov- other commodities contributed to decreases in
ernment purchases also decreased in the first quarter. 12-month measures of inflation since late last year.
Moreover, the payrolls of state and local governments
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
contracted in April and May after edging up in the first
Growing concerns about developments in the euro area
quarter, and nominal construction spending by these
and weaker-than-expected economic data in the United
governments continued to decline in April.
States and abroad both weighed on financial markets
The U.S. international trade deficit widened in March since the time of the April FOMC meeting. The dete-
and then narrowed in April to a level near its average in rioration in investor sentiment was tempered to an ex-
the first quarter. Both imports and exports rose tent by market participants’ expectations for further
strongly in March before receding a bit in April. In policy accommodation by central banks as well as by
particular, exports to the euro area, which had in- the anticipation of additional measures to address Eu-
creased strongly in the first quarter on a seasonally ad- ropean fiscal and banking issues.
justed basis despite the weakness in economic activity
Yields on longer-dated nominal and inflation-protected
in the region, fell back in April.
Treasury securities moved down substantially, on net,
Overall U.S. consumer prices were flat in April and over the intermeeting period. The yield on nominal
then fell in May as consumer energy prices declined 10-year Treasury securities reached a historically low
considerably in both months. Survey data indicated level immediately following the release of the May em-
that gasoline prices fell further in the first half of June, ployment report. A sizable portion of the decline in
in line with continued decreases in crude oil prices. longer-term Treasury rates over the period appeared to
Meanwhile, consumer food prices only edged up in reflect greater safe-haven demands by investors, along
recent months. Consumer prices excluding food and with some increase in market participants’ expectations
energy increased moderately in April and May. Near- of further Federal Reserve balance sheet actions. Indi-
term inflation expectations from the Thomson Reu- cators of inflation expectations derived from nominal
ters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers and inflation-protected Treasury securities also fell,
declined in May and held steady in early June, while apparently responding at least in part to the decline in
longer-term inflation expectations in the survey re- commodity prices. The expected path for the federal
mained stable. funds rate derived from money market futures quotes
shifted down in 2014 and beyond.
Measures of labor compensation indicated that increas-
es in nominal wages continued to be subdued. Gains There was limited evidence of increased strains in un-
in compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sec- secured, short-term dollar funding markets over the
tor were quite muted over the year ending in the first intermeeting period despite heightened concerns about
quarter, and with small gains in productivity, unit labor the situation in Europe. In secured funding markets,
costs rose only slightly. The employment cost index the overnight general collateral Treasury repo rate
increased only a little faster than the compensation per edged higher. Market participants attributed some por-
hour measure over the same period. More recently, tion of the firming in short-term rates over the past
average hourly earnings for all employees edged up in several months to a temporary increase in short-dated
April and May, and their rate of increase from Treasury securities held by dealers as a result of cumu-
12 months earlier continued to be slow. lative net Treasury issuance of such securities and sales
of these securities by the Federal Reserve under its ma-
Recent indicators suggested that overall foreign eco-
turity extension program.
nomic activity was expanding at a below-trend pace in
the second quarter. Euro-area economies appeared to Broad U.S. stock price indexes declined, and option-
be slowing: Industrial production declined in the euro implied volatility on the S&P 500 index rose. Equity
area in April, and the composite purchasing managers prices for large domestic banks significantly underper-
index and indicators of business confidence fell in May formed the broad indexes amid uncertainty about the
to their lowest levels in more than two years. In China, situation in Europe and the outlook for the global
data on production and sales in April and May sug- economy. Disclosure of a large trading loss at a major
gested that economic activity was increasing at a less U.S. bank also contributed to the underperformance.
rapid pace than last year. In both advanced and emerg- Investors’ expectation that five large U.S. banks would
ing market economies, declining prices for energy and have their credit ratings downgraded at the end of June,
as part of rating agencies’ review of major financial in-

--- Page 5 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_9_–_2_0,_ 2_0_1_2_________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
stitutions, may also have weighed on the equity prices Lending indicated that lending conditions again eased
of those banks. slightly, although perhaps less so for small businesses.
In the June 2012 Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey M2 increased at a somewhat slower pace in April and
on Dealer Financing Terms (SCOOS), respondents May than in the first quarter of the year. The level of
reported that terms in a variety of dealer-intermediated M2 and its largest component—liquid deposits—
markets were little changed over the past three months. remained elevated, apparently reflecting investors’ con-
Some respondents reported a decline in the use of lev- tinued desire to hold safe and liquid assets.
erage by hedge funds across various transaction types.
Heightened financial strains in the euro area and indica-
Yields on investment- and speculative-grade corporate tions of a weaker pace of global economic activity
debt remained low by historical standards, but their weighed on foreign financial markets during the inter-
spreads over comparable-maturity Treasury securities meeting period. Yields on most euro-area peripheral
widened a bit. Nonfinancial firms continued to raise countries’ sovereign debt rose, particularly after the
funds at a solid pace over the period, with the proceeds May 6 elections in Greece failed to produce a new gov-
primarily used to refinance existing debt. Both com- ernment. In addition, indicators of the conditions of
mercial and industrial (C&I) loans and nonfinancial European banks continued to deteriorate: Rating agen-
commercial paper outstanding increased, on net, during cies downgraded major banks in Germany, Italy, Spain,
April and May. New syndicated loan issuance also ap- and several other European countries; prices of euro-
peared to remain solid, although there were some re- area bank stocks fell sharply; and credit default swap
ports of tighter terms. Gross public equity issuance by premiums for many euro-area banks increased. Pres-
nonfinancial firms remained strong in April and into sures on Spanish banks led euro-area authorities to
May but then slowed after the poor performance of a agree to provide official aid to the Spanish government
prominent initial public offering. for the purpose of recapitalizing the country’s troubled
banks. Indicators of funding market stresses remained
Financing conditions for the commercial real estate
muted, as many banks obtained funds from the Euro-
sector remained strained over the intermeeting period.
pean Central Bank (ECB) rather than interbank mar-
Even so, issuance of commercial mortgage-backed se-
kets. The spreads of euro London interbank offered
curities in April and May outpaced issuance during the
rates (or euro LIBOR) over comparable overnight in-
first quarter.
dex swap rates, along with implied basis spreads from
Credit conditions in residential mortgage markets con- euro–dollar swaps, were little changed at short maturi-
tinued to be tight. Mortgage refinancing activity rose in ties, and the amount of dollar swaps outstanding with
April and May but remained subdued despite further the ECB declined on balance. The total outstanding
declines in mortgage rates to historically low levels. amount drawn on the Federal Reserve’s dollar liquidity
Consumer credit expanded at a solid pace in recent swap lines with foreign central banks dropped to
months, as increases in student loans boosted nonre- $24.2 billion over the intermeeting period.
volving credit while revolving credit was about flat.
Although equity prices in many countries rallied mod-
Delinquency rates for consumer credit remained low,
estly late in the intermeeting period, global equity prices
partly reflecting a shift in the composition of borrowers
declined, on balance, over the period, with especially
toward those with higher credit scores.
large net decreases in Japan and many emerging market
Gross issuance of long-term municipal bonds picked economies. Flight-to-safety flows helped push yields
up in April and May, with net issuance turning positive on both U.K. and German 10-year sovereign debt to
for the first time since the beginning of 2011. Howev- record lows before these rates partly retraced their de-
er, credit default swap spreads for state governments clines. The staff’s broad nominal dollar index ended
generally moved higher, and spreads on long-term gen- the intermeeting period up moderately. Signs of a
eral obligation municipal bonds over comparable- slowdown in global economic growth prompted policy
maturity Treasury securities rose as well. easing by central banks in Brazil, China, and Australia,
and the Bank of England announced new lending ini-
Bank credit expanded in April and May. Banks’ hold-
tiatives.
ings of securities continued to rise, and core loans—
C&I, real estate, and consumer loans—also increased The risks to the U.S. financial system emanating from
modestly. The May Survey of Terms of Business strains in Europe appeared to increase over the inter-
meeting period. Although signs of strains in short-term

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
funding markets were muted, the reliance of some fi- and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks, all
nancial firms on these markets remained a potential of whom participate in the deliberations of the
vulnerability, given that investors could withdraw rapid- FOMC—submitted their assessments of real output
ly in a period of financial stress. Respondents to the growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the tar-
June 2012 SCOOS reported that financial institutions get federal funds rate for each year from 2012 through
and market participants had increased the amount of 2014 and over the longer run, under each participant’s
resources and attention devoted to the management of judgment of appropriate monetary policy. The longer-
concentrated exposures to central counterparties and run projections represent each participant’s assessment
other financial utilities. of the rate to which each variable would be expected to
converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy
Staff Economic Outlook
and in the absence of further shocks to the economy.
In the economic projection prepared by the staff for
These economic projections and policy assessments are
the June FOMC meeting, the forecast for real gross
described in the Summary of Economic Projections,
domestic product (GDP) growth in the near term was
which is attached as an addendum to these minutes.
revised down. The revision reflected data indicating a
slower pace of private-sector job gains, more-subdued In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
retail sales, a lower trajectory for personal income, look, participants agreed that the information received
greater restraint in government purchases, and weaker since the Committee’s previous meeting suggested that
net exports than the staff anticipated at the time of the the economy had continued to expand moderately,
previous projection. Moreover, recent adverse devel- though many noted that a variety of indicators showed
opments in Europe and tighter domestic financial con- smaller gains than had been anticipated. Growth in
ditions led the staff to revise down somewhat the me- employment, in particular, appeared to have slowed in
dium-term forecast for real GDP growth. With the recent months, and the unemployment rate remained
drag from fiscal policy anticipated to increase next year, elevated. Business fixed investment had continued to
the staff projected that the growth rate of real GDP advance, and household spending appeared to be rising
would not materially exceed that of potential output at a somewhat slower pace than earlier in the year.
until 2014 when economic activity was expected to ac- There were further signs of improvement in the hous-
celerate gradually, supported by accommodative mone- ing sector, but the level of activity remained very low.
tary policy, further improvements in credit availability, Volatility in financial markets increased over the inter-
and rising consumer and business sentiment. Increases meeting period, and investors’ appetite for riskier assets
in economic activity were anticipated to narrow the declined, likely in response to heightened fiscal and
wide margin of slack in labor and product markets only financial strains in Europe as well as some weaker-
slowly over the projection period, and the unemploy- than-expected incoming data about the U.S. economy
ment rate was expected to still be elevated at the end of and foreign economies. Inflation had slowed some-
2014. what, mainly reflecting the decline in the prices of
crude oil and gasoline in recent months, and longer-
The staff’s near-term projection for inflation was re-
term inflation expectations remained stable.
vised down from the forecast prepared for the April
FOMC meeting, reflecting a greater-than-expected Participants generally interpreted the information that
drop in consumer energy prices. However, the staff’s became available during the intermeeting period as
projection for inflation over the medium term was es- suggesting that economic growth would most likely
sentially unchanged. With the upward pressure from remain moderate over coming quarters and then pick
the earlier run-up in crude oil prices on consumer ener- up very gradually. Most participants saw the incoming
gy prices unwinding and oil prices expected to decline information as indicating somewhat slower growth in
further, long-run inflation expectations anticipated to total demand, output, and employment over coming
remain stable, and substantial resource slack persisting quarters than they had projected in April, and most
over the forecast period, the staff continued to project carried forward some of that downward revision to
that inflation would be subdued through 2014. their projections of medium-term growth. However,
some participants judged that the recent weakness in a
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
variety of economic indicators was more likely to prove
Economic Outlook
transitory, and thought that the outlook beyond this
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, meeting par-
year was essentially unchanged. Reflecting the pro-
ticipants—the 7 members of the Board of Governors
jected moderate pace of growth in production and em-

--- Page 7 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_9_–_2_0,_ 2_0_1_2_________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
ployment, most participants anticipated that the unem- Indicators of home sales, construction, and prices sug-
ployment rate would decline only slowly. A number of gested some improvement in the housing sector.
factors continued to be seen as likely to limit the eco- However, not all regions shared in the gains, and the
nomic expansion to a moderate pace in the near term; sector remained depressed overall. Most participants
these included slow growth or even contraction in anticipated that housing markets were likely to recover
some major foreign economies, ongoing and prospec- only slowly over time, in part because tight credit stan-
tive fiscal tightening in the United States, modest dards in mortgage lending meant that low mortgage
growth in household income, and—despite some re- rates were now generating less of a pickup in home
cent signs of improvement—continued weakness in the sales and construction than had been the case during
housing sector. As in April, participants expected that the recoveries from earlier recessions. A few partici-
most of the factors restraining economic expansion pants were more sanguine about the potential for a
would ease over time, and so anticipated that the re- sizable upturn in housing activity. Still, with residential
covery eventually would gain strength. However, investment currently a much smaller share of real GDP
strains in global financial markets, which stemmed pri- than during past recoveries, the housing sector seemed
marily from fiscal and banking concerns in Europe, had unlikely to contribute substantially to a stronger eco-
become more pronounced over the intermeeting period nomic recovery.
and continued to pose significant downside risks to the
Anecdotal evidence from business contacts indicated
economic outlook; the possibility of a sharper-than-
that activity in the energy and agriculture sectors con-
anticipated fiscal tightening in the United States also
tinued to advance in recent months. Information from
posed a downside risk. Looking beyond the temporary
manufacturing and transportation firms was generally
effects on inflation of this year’s fluctuations in oil and
less optimistic than earlier in the year. There were a
other commodity prices, almost all participants contin-
number of reports of slowing sales to Europe and Asia.
ued to anticipate that inflation over the medium-term
Contacts in some parts of the country also indicated
would run at or below the 2 percent rate that the
that firms had become more cautious in their hiring
Committee judges to be most consistent with its statu-
and investment decisions, with most capital investment
tory mandate. In one participant’s judgment, appropri-
being undertaken to improve productivity and reduce
ate monetary policy would lead to inflation modestly
costs rather than to expand capacity. Some participants
greater than 2 percent for a time in order to bring un-
cited examples of business contacts saying that height-
employment down somewhat faster. Some participants
ened uncertainty about future tax and regulatory poli-
indicated that they saw persistent slack in resource uti-
cies had led them to put potential investment projects
lization as posing downside risks to the outlook for
on hold until the uncertainty is resolved.
inflation; a few participants judged that the highly ac-
commodative stance of monetary policy posed upside Participants expected that fiscal policy would continue
risks to the medium-term inflation outlook. to be a drag on economic growth over coming quarters.
They generally also saw the federal budget situation as a
In discussing the household sector, meeting partici-
downside risk to the economic outlook: If an agree-
pants noted that real personal consumption expendi-
ment was not reached to address the expiring tax cuts
tures had continued to expand despite weak growth in
and scheduled spending reductions in current law, a
real disposable income, but that the pace of expansion
sharp tightening of fiscal policy would occur at the start
appeared to have slowed since earlier this year. A few
of 2013. A few participants reported hearing that de-
participants expressed concern that slow growth in
fense contractors were making contingency plans to
employment and low levels of consumer confidence
reduce their workforces if potential spending cuts go
would further restrain consumer spending. Many par-
into effect; one reported that some firms already had
ticipants, however, said that business contacts had re-
begun to make such reductions. In contrast, it was
ported that consumer spending was holding up. Sever-
noted that an agreement on a credible longer-term plan
al observed that recent declines in gasoline prices
that put the federal budget on a sustainable path over
would increase households’ real incomes and could
the medium run in a way that removes the near-term
boost consumer spending in coming quarters. More
fiscal risks to the recovery would help alleviate uncer-
broadly, improving household balance sheets and a
tainty, likely would have positive effects on consumer
diminishing drag from household deleveraging were
and business sentiment, and so could spur an increase
seen as likely to help support rising household expendi-
in business investment and hiring.
tures over time.

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Exports helped support U.S. economic growth during research showing that job-finding rates among the
the early months of this year. However, recent reports long-term unemployed were somewhat higher in the
from some business contacts pointed to slowing ex- recent past than a year earlier; anecdotal evidence to the
ports to Europe and China, and several participants effect that employers do not see long spells of unem-
noted the risk that economic weakness in Europe or a ployment as making applicants less attractive for most
more significant slowing in the pace of expansion in jobs; and reports that employers were receiving large
emerging markets in Asia could damp exports further. numbers of applications for each opening and were
A couple of participants expressed the view that the being especially discriminating when filling vacant posi-
direct effects on the U.S. economy stemming from tions. Another participant pointed to research showing
slower economic growth abroad—effects that would that, in many countries, inflation is less responsive to
be manifested through declining U.S. exports—would downward pressure from labor market slack when in-
be noticeable but not large. However, another partici- flation is already low than when inflation is elevated,
pant noted that recent appreciation of the dollar in for- and to evidence that firms in the United States have
eign exchange markets would also contribute to re- been reluctant to cut nominal wages in recent years, as
duced exports. indications that sizable slack might not cause inflation
to decline from its already low level. These arguments
The pace of improvement in labor market conditions
imply that slack in labor markets remains considerable
diminished in recent months; in particular, growth in
and therefore that a reduction in the unemployment
employment slowed. Job growth late last year and early
rate toward its longer-run normal level would not have
this year was boosted by unusually mild winter weather;
much effect on inflation.
some slowing had been expected as weather became
more normal during the spring, but the reported slow- Measures of consumer price inflation declined over the
ing was more substantial than many participants had intermeeting period, mainly reflecting reductions in oil
anticipated. One participant noted that the apparent and gasoline prices since earlier in the year. Several
tension between strong employment growth and mod- participants noted that they saw little if any evidence of
erate output growth seen earlier in the year had been price pressures, commenting that increases in labor
resolved more recently by slower job growth rather costs continued to be subdued and that non-energy
than faster output growth. Even so, average monthly commodity prices had declined of late. With longer-
growth in payrolls from January through May was in run inflation expectations well anchored and the un-
line with last year’s pace. employment rate elevated, almost all participants antic-
ipated that inflation in coming quarters and over the
Meeting participants again discussed the extent of slack
medium run would be at or below the 2 percent rate
in labor markets. Some participants judged that the
that the Committee judges to be most consistent with
unemployment rate was being substantially boosted by
its mandate; several had revised down their inflation
structural factors such as mismatches between the skills
forecasts. Most participants viewed the risks to their
of unemployed workers and those required for availa-
inflation outlook as being roughly balanced. Some par-
ble jobs, a view that would imply less slack in labor
ticipants, however, saw persistent slack in resource uti-
markets than suggested by a simple comparison of the
lization as weighting the risks to the outlook for infla-
current unemployment rate to participants’ estimates of
tion to the downside. In contrast, a few saw inflation
its longer-run normal level. A couple of participants
risks as tilted to the upside; they generally were skepti-
said they would have expected inflation to slow notice-
cal of models that rely on economic slack to forecast
ably if there were substantial and persistent slack. One
inflation and were concerned that maintaining the cur-
implication of the view that there is relatively little slack
rent highly accommodative stance of monetary policy
is that providing more monetary stimulus would be
over the medium run risked eroding the stability of
likely to raise inflation above the Committee’s objec-
inflation expectations, with a couple noting that large
tive. Some other participants acknowledged that struc-
long-run fiscal imbalances also posed a risk.
tural factors were contributing to unemployment, but
said that, in their view, slack remained high and weak Many FOMC participants judged that overall financial
aggregate demand was the major reason that the unem- conditions had become somewhat less supportive of
ployment rate was still elevated. These participants growth in demand for goods and services. Investors’
cited a range of evidence to support their judgment: concerns about the sovereign debt and banking situa-
the still-high fraction of workers who report working tion in the euro area reportedly intensified during the
part-time jobs because they cannot find full-time work; intermeeting period, leading to higher risk spreads and

--- Page 9 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_9_–_2_0,_ 2_0_1_2_________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
lower prices for riskier assets including equities and to recent months. Averaging through its recent fluctua-
broad-based appreciation of the U.S. dollar on foreign tions, inflation appeared to be running near the Com-
exchange markets. In contrast, a few participants ob- mittee’s 2 percent longer-run objective; with longer-
served that the marked drop in yields on longer-term term inflation expectations stable, members anticipated
U.S. Treasury securities could provide some impetus to that inflation over the medium run would be at or be-
growth. Focusing more narrowly on the banking sec- low that rate. Some members judged that persistent
tor in the United States, it was noted that measures of slack in resource utilization posed downside risks to the
credit quality for bank loans generally had continued to outlook for inflation. In contrast, one member thought
improve, that bank capital levels were quite high, and that maintaining the current highly accommodative
that banks had ample liquidity. Consumer and business stance of monetary policy well into 2014 would pose
loans were increasing, although credit standards re- upside risks to inflation.
mained tight and commercial and residential real estate
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
lending were relatively weak. A few participants indi-
ahead, members agreed that it would be appropriate to
cated that they were seeing signs that very low interest
keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to
rates might be inducing some investors to take on im-
¼ percent in order to support a stronger economic
prudent risks in the search for higher nominal returns.
recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is
Participants discussed the risk that strains in global fi-
at the 2 percent rate that the Committee judges most
nancial markets and pressures on European financial
consistent with its mandate. In addition, all members
institutions could worsen and spill over to parts of the
but one agreed that it would be appropriate to continue
domestic financial sector, and some noted the impor-
through the end of this year the Committee’s program
tance of undertaking adequate preparations to address
to extend the average maturity of the Federal Reserve’s
such spillovers if they were to occur; it also was recog-
holdings of securities; specifically, they agreed to con-
nized that investor sentiment could improve and strains
tinue purchasing Treasury securities with remaining
in global markets might ease. Several participants
maturities of 6 years to 30 years at the current pace of
commented that it would be desirable to explore the
about $44 billion per month while selling or redeeming
possibility of developing new tools to promote more-
an equal amount of Treasury securities with remaining
accommodative financial conditions and thereby sup-
maturities of approximately 3 years or less. These steps
port a stronger economic recovery.
would increase the Federal Reserve’s holdings of long-
Committee Policy Action er-term Treasury securities by about $267 billion while
Committee members saw the information received reducing its holdings of shorter-term Treasury securi-
over the intermeeting period as suggesting that the ties by the same amount. Members also agreed to
economy had been expanding moderately. However, maintain the Committee’s existing policy regarding the
growth in employment had slowed in recent months, reinvestment of principal payments from Federal Re-
and almost all members saw the unemployment rate as serve holdings of agency securities into agency MBS.
still elevated relative to levels that they viewed as con- Members generally judged that continuing the maturity
sistent with the Committee’s mandate. Members gen- extension program would put some downward pressure
erally expected growth to be moderate over coming on longer-term interest rates and help make broader
quarters and then to pick up very gradually, with the financial conditions more accommodative. Some
unemployment rate declining only slowly. Most pro- members noted the risk that continued purchases of
jected somewhat slower growth through next year, and longer-term Treasury securities could, at some point,
a smaller reduction in unemployment, than they had lead to deterioration in the functioning of the Treasury
projected in April. Furthermore, strains in global fi- securities market that could undermine the intended
nancial markets, which largely stemmed from the sov- effects of the policy. However, members generally
ereign debt and banking situation in Europe, had in- agreed that such risks seemed low at present, and were
creased during the intermeeting period and continued outweighed by the expected benefits of the action.
to pose significant downside risks to economic activity Several members noted that the downward pressure on
both here and abroad, making the outlook quite uncer- longer-term rates from continuing the Committee’s
tain. The possibility that U.S. fiscal policy would be maturity extension program was likely to be modest.
more contractionary than anticipated was also cited as a One member anticipated little if any effect on econom-
downside risk. Inflation had slowed, mainly reflecting ic growth and unemployment and did not agree that
the decline in the prices of crude oil and gasoline in

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
the outlook for economic activity and inflation called “The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
for further policy accommodation. monetary and financial conditions that will
foster price stability and promote sustainable
With respect to the statement to be released following
growth in output. To further its long-run
the meeting, members agreed that only relatively small
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions
modifications to the first two paragraphs were needed
in reserve markets consistent with federal
to reflect the incoming economic data and the changes
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.
to the economic outlook. In light of their assessment
The Committee directs the Desk to continue
of the economic situation, almost all members again
the maturity extension program it began in
agreed to indicate that the Committee expects to main-
September to purchase, by the end of June
tain a highly accommodative stance for monetary policy
2012, Treasury securities with remaining ma-
and currently anticipates that economic conditions—
turities of 6 years to 30 years with a total face
including low rates of resource utilization and a sub-
value of $400 billion, and to sell Treasury se-
dued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are
curities with remaining maturities of 3 years
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal
or less with a total face value of $400 billion.
funds rate at least through late 2014. Some Committee
Following the conclusion of these purchases,
members indicated that their policy judgment reflected
the Committee directs the Desk to purchase
in part their perception of significant downside risks to
Treasury securities with remaining maturities
growth, especially since the Committee’s ability to re-
of 6 years to 30 years with a total face value
spond to weaker-than-expected economic conditions
of about $267 billion by the end of Decem-
would be somewhat limited by the constraint imposed
ber 2012, and to sell or redeem Treasury se-
on monetary policy when the policy rate is at or near its
curities with remaining maturities of approx-
effective lower bound. Members again noted that the
imately 3 years or less with a total face value
forward guidance is conditional on economic develop-
of about $267 billion. For the duration of
ments and that the date given in the statement would
this program, the Committee directs the
be subject to revision should there be a significant
Desk to suspend its current policy of rolling
change in the economic outlook.
over maturing Treasury securities into new
A few members expressed the view that further policy issues. The Committee directs the Desk to
stimulus likely would be necessary to promote satisfac- maintain its existing policy of reinvesting
tory growth in employment and to ensure that the in- principal payments on all agency debt and
flation rate would be at the Committee’s goal. Several agency mortgage-backed securities in the
others noted that additional policy action could be war- System Open Market Account in agency
ranted if the economic recovery were to lose momen- mortgage-backed securities. These actions
tum, if the downside risks to the forecast became suffi- should maintain the total face value of do-
ciently pronounced, or if inflation seemed likely to run mestic securities at approximately $2.6 tril-
persistently below the Committee’s longer-run objec- lion. The Committee directs the Desk to en-
tive. The Committee agreed that it was prepared to gage in dollar roll transactions as necessary to
take further action as appropriate to promote a strong- facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s
er economic recovery and sustained improvement in agency MBS transactions. The System Open
labor market conditions in a context of price stability. Market Account Manager and the Secretary
A few members observed that it would be helpful to will keep the Committee informed of ongo-
have a better understanding of how large the Federal ing developments regarding the System’s bal-
Reserve’s asset purchases would have to be to cause a ance sheet that could affect the attainment
meaningful deterioration in securities market function- over time of the Committee’s objectives of
ing, and of the potential costs of such deterioration for maximum employment and price stability.”
the economy as a whole.
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee low to be released at 12:30 p.m.:
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
“Information received since the Federal
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
Open Market Committee met in April sug-
ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance
gests that the economy has been expanding
with the following domestic policy directive:
moderately this year. However, growth in

--- Page 11 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_9_–_2_0,_ 2_0_1_2________________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
employment has slowed in recent months, or less. This continuation of the maturity
and the unemployment rate remains ele- extension program should put downward
vated. Business fixed investment has con- pressure on longer-term interest rates and
tinued to advance. Household spending ap- help to make broader financial conditions
pears to be rising at a somewhat slower pace more accommodative. The Committee is
than earlier in the year. Despite some signs maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting
of improvement, the housing sector remains principal payments from its holdings of
depressed. Inflation has declined, mainly re- agency debt and agency mortgage-backed se-
flecting lower prices of crude oil and gaso- curities in agency mortgage-backed securi-
line, and longer-term inflation expectations ties. The Committee is prepared to take fur-
have remained stable. ther action as appropriate to promote a
stronger economic recovery and sustained
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
improvement in labor market conditions in a
Committee seeks to foster maximum em-
context of price stability.”
ployment and price stability. The Commit-
tee expects economic growth to remain Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C.
moderate over coming quarters and then to Dudley, Elizabeth Duke, Dennis P. Lockhart, Sandra
pick up very gradually. Consequently, the Pianalto, Jerome H. Powell, Sarah Bloom Raskin, Jere-
Committee anticipates that the unemploy- my C. Stein, Daniel K. Tarullo, John C. Williams, and
ment rate will decline only slowly toward lev- Janet L. Yellen.
els that it judges to be consistent with its
Voting against this action: Jeffrey M. Lacker.
dual mandate. Furthermore, strains in global
financial markets continue to pose significant Mr. Lacker dissented because he opposed continuation
downside risks to the economic outlook. of the maturity extension program. He did not believe
The Committee anticipates that inflation that further monetary stimulus at this time would make
over the medium term will run at or below a substantial difference for economic growth and em-
the rate that it judges most consistent with ployment without also increasing inflation by more
its dual mandate. than would be desirable. In Mr. Lacker’s view, the out-
look for economic growth had clearly weakened of late,
To support a stronger economic recovery
but he questioned whether the maturity extension pro-
and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
gram would have much effect in current circumstances.
is at the rate most consistent with its dual
Should inflation fall substantially and persistently below
mandate, the Committee expects to maintain
the Committee’s 2 percent goal, however, he felt that
a highly accommodative stance for monetary
monetary stimulus might then be appropriate to ensure
policy. In particular, the Committee decided
the return of inflation toward target.
today to keep the target range for the federal
funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
anticipates that economic conditions— would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, July 31–Au-
including low rates of resource utilization gust 1, 2012. The meeting adjourned at 11:05 a.m. on
and a subdued outlook for inflation over the June 20, 2012.
medium run—are likely to warrant excep-
Notation Vote
tionally low levels for the federal funds rate
By notation vote completed on May 15, 2012, the
at least through late 2014.
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
The Committee also decided to continue FOMC meeting held on April 24–25, 2012.
through the end of the year its program to
extend the average maturity of its holdings
of securities. Specifically, the Committee in-
tends to purchase Treasury securities with
_____________________________
remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years at
William B. English
the current pace and to sell or redeem an
Secretary
equal amount of Treasury securities with re-
maining maturities of approximately 3 years

--- Page 12 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the June 19–20, 2012, Federal real gross domestic product (GDP) would pick up
Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, meeting gradually and that the unemployment rate would edge
participants—the 7 members of the Board of Gover- down very slowly. Participants projected that inflation,
nors and the 12 presidents of the Federal Reserve as measured by the annual change in the price index for
Banks, all of whom participate in the deliberations of personal consumption expenditures (PCE), would run
the FOMC—submitted their assessments, under each close to or below the FOMC’s longer-run inflation ob-
participant’s judgment of appropriate monetary policy, jective of 2 percent.
of real output growth, the unemployment rate, infla-
As shown in figure 2, most participants judged that
tion, and the target federal funds rate for each year
highly accommodative monetary policy was likely to be
from 2012 through 2014 and over the longer run.
warranted over the forecast period. In particular,
These assessments were based on information available
13 participants thought that it would be appropriate for
at the time of the meeting and participants’ individual
the first increase in the target federal funds rate to oc-
assumptions about the factors likely to affect economic
cur during 2014 or later. A majority of participants
outcomes. The longer-run projections represent each
judged that appropriate monetary policy would involve
participant’s judgment of the rate to which each varia-
an extension of the maturity extension program (MEP)
ble would be expected to converge, over time, under
through the end of 2012.
appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of fur-
ther shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary Overall, participants judged the uncertainty associated
policy” is defined as the future path of policy that par- with the outlook for real activity and the unemploy-
ticipants deem most likely to foster outcomes for eco- ment rate to be unusually high relative to historical
nomic activity and inflation that best satisfy their indi- norms, with the risks weighted mainly toward slower
vidual interpretations of the Federal Reserve’s objec- economic growth and a higher unemployment rate.
tives of maximum employment and stable prices. Many participants also viewed the uncertainty sur-
rounding their projections for inflation to be greater
Overall, the assessments that FOMC participants sub-
than normal, but most saw the risks to inflation to be
mitted in June indicated that, under appropriate mone-
broadly balanced.
tary policy, the pace of economic expansion over the
2012−14 period would likely continue to be moderate The Outlook for Economic Activity
and inflation would remain subdued (see table 1 and Conditional upon their individual assumptions about
figure 1). Participants judged that the growth rate of appropriate monetary policy, participants judged that
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board membersand Federal Reserve Bank presidents, June 2012
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2012 2013 2014 Longer run 2012 2013 2014 Longer run
Change in real GDP. . . . . . 1.9 to 2.4 2.2 to 2.8 3.0 to 3.5 2.3 to 2.5 1.6 to 2.5 2.2 to 3.5 2.8 to 4.0 2.2 to 3.0
April projection. . . . . . 2.4 to 2.9 2.7 to 3.1 3.1 to 3.6 2.3 to 2.6 2.1 to 3.0 2.4 to 3.8 2.9 to 4.3 2.2 to 3.0
Unemployment rate. . . . . . 8.0 to 8.2 7.5 to 8.0 7.0 to 7.7 5.2 to 6.0 7.8 to 8.4 7.0 to 8.1 6.3 to 7.7 4.9 to 6.3
April projection. . . . . . 7.8 to 8.0 7.3 to 7.7 6.7 to 7.4 5.2 to 6.0 7.8 to 8.2 7.0 to 8.1 6.3 to 7.7 4.9 to 6.0
PCE inflation. . . . . . . . . . . 1.2 to 1.7 1.5 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 2.0 1.2 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.1 1.5 to 2.2 2.0
April projection. . . . . . 1.9 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 2.0 1.8 to 2.3 1.5 to 2.1 1.5 to 2.2 2.0
Core PCE inflation3. . . . . . 1.7 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 1.4 to 2.1 1.5 to 2.2
April projection. . . . . 1.8 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.1 1.7 to 2.2
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the pre-
vious year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index
for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the aver-
age civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate
monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under ap-
propriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The April projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Fed-
eral Open Market Committee on April 24–25, 2012.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

--- Page 13 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2012–14 and over the longer run
Percent
Change in real GDP
5
Central tendency of projections
4
Range of projections
3
2
1
+
Actual 0
-
1
2
3
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesofthevariablesare
annual.

--- Page 14 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_9_–_2_0_, _2_0_1_2___________________
Figure 2. Overview of FOMC participants’ assessments of appropriate monetary policy, June 2012
Number of participants
Appropriate timing of policy firming
9
8
7
7
6
6
5
4
3 3
3
2
1
2012 2013 2014 2015
Appropriate pace of policy firming Percent
Target federal funds rate at year end
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2012 2013 2014 Longer run
Note: Intheupperpanel,theheightofeachbardenotesthenumberofFOMCparticipantswhojudgethat,under
appropriatemonetarypolicy,thefirstincreaseinthetargetfederalfundsratefromitscurrentrangeof0to1/4percent
will occur in the specified calendar year. In April 2012, the numbers of FOMC participants who judged that the first
increaseinthetargetfederalfundsratewouldoccurin2012,2013,2014,and2015were,respectively,3,3,7,and4. In
the lower panel, each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/4 percentage point) of an individual
participant’sjudgmentoftheappropriatelevelofthetargetfederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryear
oroverthelongerrun.

--- Page 15 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
the economy would continue to expand at a moderate persistent headwinds impeding the economic expan-
pace in 2012 and 2013 before picking up in 2014 to a sion.
pace somewhat above what participants view as the
Figures 3.A and 3.B provide details on the diversity of
longer-run rate of output growth. The central tendency
participants’ views regarding the likely outcomes for
of their projections for the change in real GDP in 2012
real GDP growth and the unemployment rate over the
was 1.9 to 2.4 percent, lower than in April. Many par-
next three years and over the longer run. The disper-
ticipants characterized the incoming data—especially
sion in these projections reflects differences in partici-
for household spending and the labor market—as hav-
pants’ assessments of many factors, including appropri-
ing been weaker than they had anticipated in April. In
ate monetary policy and its effects on the economy, the
addition, most noted that the worsening situation in
underlying momentum in economic activity, the spill-
Europe was leading to a slowdown in global economic
over effects of the fiscal and financial situation in Eu-
growth and greater volatility in financial markets.
rope, the prospective path for U.S. fiscal policy, the
Compared with their April submissions, most partici-
extent of structural dislocations in the labor market,
pants lowered their medium-run projections of eco-
and the likely evolution of credit and financial market
nomic activity somewhat. The central tendencies of
conditions. Compared with their April assessments,
participants’ projections of real economic growth in
the range of participants’ forecasts for the change in
2013 and 2014 were 2.2 to 2.8 percent and 3.0 to
real GDP in 2012 and 2013 shifted lower, while the
3.5 percent, respectively. The central tendency for the
dispersion of individual forecasts for growth in 2014
longer-run rate of increase of real GDP was 2.3 to
was about unchanged. Consistent with the downward
2.5 percent, little changed from April. Participants
shift in the distribution of forecasts for economic
cited several headwinds that were likely to hold back
growth, the distribution of projections for the unem-
the pace of economic expansion over the forecast pe-
ployment rate shifted up in 2012 and 2013 and, to a
riod, including the difficult fiscal and financial situation
lesser extent, in 2014. As in April, the dispersion of
in Europe, a still-depressed housing market, tight credit
estimates for the longer-run rate of output growth was
for some borrowers, and fiscal restraint in the United
fairly narrow, generally in a range of 2.2 to 2.7 percent.
States.
In contrast, participants’ views about the level to which
Consistent with the downward revisions to their pro- the unemployment rate would converge in the longer
jections for real GDP growth in 2012 and 2013, nearly run were more diverse, reflecting, among other things,
all participants marked up their assessments for the rate different views on the outlook for labor supply and the
of unemployment. Participants projected the unem- structure of the labor market.
ployment rate at the end of 2012 to remain at or
The Outlook for Inflation
slightly below recent levels, with a central tendency of
Participants’ views about the medium-run outlook for
8.0 to 8.2 percent, somewhat higher than their April
inflation under the assumption of appropriate mone-
submissions. Participants anticipated gradual im-
tary policy were little changed from April. However,
provement in labor market conditions by 2014, but
nearly all of them marked down their assessment of
even so, they generally thought that the unemployment
headline inflation in the near term, pointing to recent
rate at the end of that year would still lie well above
declines in the prices of crude oil and gasoline that
their individual estimates of its longer-run normal level.
were sharper than previously projected. Almost all par-
The central tendencies of participants’ forecasts for the
ticipants judged that both headline and core inflation
unemployment rate were 7.5 to 8.0 percent at the end
would remain subdued over the 2012−14 period, run-
of 2013 and 7.0 to 7.7 percent at the end of 2014. The
ning at rates at or below the FOMC’s longer-run objec-
central tendency of participants’ estimates of the long-
tive of 2 percent. Some participants noted that infla-
er-run normal rate of unemployment that would prevail
tion expectations had remained stable, and several
under the assumption of appropriate monetary policy
pointed to resource slack and moderate increases in
and in the absence of further shocks to the economy
labor compensation as sources of restraint on prices.
was 5.2 to 6.0 percent, unchanged from April. Most
Specifically, the central tendency of participants’ projec-
participants projected that the gap between the current
tions for inflation, as measured by the PCE price index,
unemployment rate and their estimates of its longer-
moved down in 2012 to 1.2 to 1.7 percent and was little
run normal rate would be closed in five or six years, a
changed in 2013 and 2014 at 1.5 to 2.0 percent. The
couple judged that less time would be needed, and one
central tendencies of the forecasts for core inflation
thought more time would be necessary because of the

--- Page 16 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_9_–_2_0_, _2_0_1_2___________________
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2012–14andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2012 20
June projections 18
April projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2. 8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4. 0 4.2
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2013 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2. 8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4. 0 4.2
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2. 8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4. 0 4.2
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2. 8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4. 0 4.2
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 17 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2012–14andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2012 20
June projections 18
April projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.8 5.0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2 7. 4 7. 6 7. 8 8. 0 8. 2 8. 4
4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2013 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.8 5.0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2 7. 4 7. 6 7. 8 8. 0 8. 2 8. 4
4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.8 5.0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2 7. 4 7. 6 7. 8 8. 0 8. 2 8. 4
4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.8 5.0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2 7. 4 7. 6 7. 8 8. 0 8. 2 8. 4
4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 18 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_9_–_2_0_, _2_0_1_2___________________
were broadly the same as those for the headline meas- proving labor market conditions or in the event of a
ure in 2013 and 2014. significant deterioration in the economic outlook or a
further increase in downside risks to that outlook. Al-
Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information about the
most all participants assumed that the Committee
diversity of participants’ views about the outlook for
would carry out the normalization of the balance sheet
inflation. Relative to the assessments compiled in
according to the principles approved at the June 2011
April, the projections for headline inflation shifted
FOMC meeting. That is, prior to the first increase in
down in 2012, reflecting the declines in energy prices.
the federal funds rate, the Committee would likely
The distributions of participants’ projections for head-
cease reinvesting some or all principal payments on
line and core inflation in 2013 and 2014 were slightly
securities in the System Open Market Account
lower than those reported in April.
(SOMA), and it would likely begin sales of agency se-
Appropriate Monetary Policy curities from the SOMA sometime after the first rate
As indicated in figure 2, most participants judged that increase, aiming to eliminate the SOMA’s holdings of
exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate would agency securities over a period of three to five years.
remain appropriate at least until late 2014. In particu- In general, participants linked their preferred start dates
lar, seven participants thought that it would be appro- for the normalization process to their views for the
priate to commence policy firming in 2014, while appropriate timing for the first increase in the target
another six participants thought that the first increase federal funds rate. One participant who thought that
in the target federal funds rate would not be warranted the liftoff of the federal funds rate should occur rela-
until 2015 (upper panel). Eleven participants indicated tively soon indicated that the reinvestment of maturing
that the appropriate federal funds rate at the end of securities should continue for a time after liftoff.
2014 would be 75 basis points or lower (lower panel),
The key factors informing participants’ individual as-
and those who judged that policy liftoff would not oc-
sessments of the appropriate setting for monetary poli-
cur until 2015 thought the federal funds rate would be
cy included their judgments regarding the maximum
1½ percent or lower at the end of that year. As in
level of employment, the extent to which current con-
April, six participants judged that economic conditions
ditions had deviated from mandate-consistent levels,
would warrant an increase in the target federal funds
and participants’ projections of the likely time horizon
rate in either 2012 or 2013 in order to achieve the
necessary to return employment and inflation to such
Committee’s statutory mandate. Those participants
levels. Several participants noted that their assessments
judged that the appropriate value for the federal funds
of appropriate monetary policy reflected the subpar
rate would range from 1½ to 3 percent at the end of
pace of the economic expansion and the persistent
2014.
shortfall in aggregate demand since the 2007–09 reces-
All participants reported levels for the appropriate tar- sion, and two commented that the neutral level of the
get federal funds rate at the end of 2014 that were well federal funds rate was likely somewhat below its histor-
below their estimates of the level expected to prevail in ical norm. One participant expressed concern that a
the longer run. Estimates of the longer-run target fed- protracted period of very accommodative monetary
eral funds rate ranged from 3 to 4½ percent, reflecting policy could lead to a buildup of risks in the financial
the Committee’s inflation objective of 2 percent and system. Participants also noted that because the ap-
participants’ judgments about the longer-run equili- propriate stance of monetary policy depends impor-
brium level of the real federal funds rate. tantly on the evolution of real activity and inflation
over time, their assessments of the appropriate future
Participants also provided qualitative information on
path of the federal funds rate and the balance sheet
their views regarding the appropriate path of the Fed-
could change if economic conditions were to evolve in
eral Reserve’s balance sheet. Of the 12 participants
an unexpected manner.
whose assessments of appropriate monetary policy in-
cluded additional balance sheet policies, 11 indicated Figure 3.E details the distribution of participants’
that their assumptions incorporated an extension judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target
through the end of 2012 of the MEP, and 2 partici- federal funds rate at the end of each calendar year from
pants conditioned their economic forecasts on a new 2012 to 2014 and over the longer run. Most partici-
program of securities purchases. Two indicated that pants judged that economic conditions would warrant
they would consider such purchases in the event that maintaining the current low level of the federal funds
the economy did not make satisfactory progress in im- rate through the end of 2013. Views on the appropri-

--- Page 19 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2012–14andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2012 20
June projections 18
April projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2013 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_9_–_2_0_, _2_0_1_2___________________
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2012–14
Number of participants
2012
20
June projections
April projections 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 3 1. 5 1.7 1. 9 2. 1
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2013
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 3 1. 5 1.7 1. 9 2. 1
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2014
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 3 1. 5 1.7 1. 9 2. 1
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthetargetfederalfundsrate,2012–14andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2012
June projections 20
April projections 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2013
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2014
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Note: The target federal funds rate is measured as the level of the target rate at the end of the calendar year or
inthelongerrun.

--- Page 22 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_9_–_2_0_, _2_0_1_2___________________
ate level of the federal funds rate at the end of 2014
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
were more widely dispersed, with 11 participants seeing
Percentage points
the appropriate level of the federal funds rate as ¾ per- Variable 2012 2013 2014
centage point or lower and 4 of them seeing the appro-
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . . ±1.0 ±1.6 ±1.7
priate rate as 2 percent or higher. Those who judged
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . . ±0.4 ±1.2 ±1.7
that a longer period of very accommodative monetary
policy would be appropriate generally projected that the Total consumer prices2 . . . . . . ±0.8 ±1.0 ±1.1
unemployment rate would remain further above its NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root
mean squared error of projections for 1992 through 2011 that were
longer-run normal level at the end of 2014. In contrast,
released in the summer by various private and government forecasters.
the 6 participants who judged that policy firming As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assump-
should begin in 2012 or 2013 indicated that the Com- tions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for
real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied
mittee would need to act soon to keep inflation near
by the average size of projection errors made in the past. Further infor-
the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 percent and to mation is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the
prevent a rise in inflation expectations. Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting
Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washing-
Uncertainty and Risks ton: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).
1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
Nearly all participants judged that their current level of
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
uncertainty about GDP growth and unemployment was that has been most widely used in government and private economic
forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous
higher than was the norm during the previous 20 years
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.
(figure 4).1 About half of all participants judged the
projections of the unemployment rate as tilted to the
level of uncertainty associated with their inflation fore-
upside. The most frequently identified sources of risk
casts to be higher as well, while another eight partici-
were the situation in Europe, which many participants
pants viewed uncertainty about inflation as broadly
thought had the potential to slow global economic ac-
similar to historical norms. The main factors cited as
tivity, particularly over the near term, and the fiscal sit-
underlying the elevated uncertainty about economic
uation in the United States.
outcomes were the ongoing fiscal and financial situa-
tion in Europe, the outlook for fiscal policy in the Most participants continued to judge the risks to their
United States, and a general slowdown in global eco- projections for inflation as broadly balanced, with sev-
nomic growth, including the possibility of a significant eral highlighting the recent stability of inflation expecta-
slowdown in China. As in April, participants noted the tions. However, five participants saw the risks to infla-
difficulties associated with forecasting the path of the tion as tilted to the downside, a larger number than in
U.S. economic recovery following a financial crisis and April; a couple of them noted that slack in resource
recession that differed markedly from recent historical markets could turn out to be greater or could put more
experience. Several commented that in the aftermath downward pressure on inflation than they were antic-
of the financial crisis, they were more uncertain about ipating. Two participants saw the risks to inflation as
the level of potential output and its trend rate of weighted to the upside, in light of concerns about U.S.
growth. fiscal imbalances, the current highly accommodative
stance of monetary policy, or the Committee’s ability to
A majority of participants reported that they saw the
effectively remove policy accommodation when it be-
risks to their forecasts of real GDP growth as weighted
comes appropriate to do so.
toward the downside and, accordingly, the risks to their
1 Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for
the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total
consumer price inflation over the period from 1992 to 2011.
At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty”
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess
the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projec-
tions.

--- Page 23 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure 4. Uncertainty and risks in economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth 20 Risks to GDP growth 20
June projections 18 June projections 18
April projections 16 April projections 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate 20 Risks to the unemployment rate 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation 20 Risks to PCE inflation 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation 20 Risks to core PCE inflation 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”Defini-
tionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 24 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_9_–_2_0_, _2_0_1_2___________________
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by cent in the second year, and 1.3 to 4.7 percent
the members of the Board of Governors and in the third year. The corresponding 70 percent
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks confidence intervals for overall inflation would
inform discussions of monetary policy among be 1.2 to 2.8 percent in the current year, 1.0 to
policymakers and can aid public understand- 3.0 percent in the second year, and 0.9 to
ing of the basis for policy actions. Consider- 3.1 percent in the third year.
able uncertainty attends these projections, Because current conditions may differ
however. The economic and statistical models from those that prevailed, on average, over his-
and relationships used to help produce eco- tory, participants provide judgments as to
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de- whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
scriptions of the real world, and the future jections of each variable is greater than, smaller
path of the economy can be affected by myr- than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
iad unforeseen developments and events. forecast uncertainty in the past, as shown in
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
participants consider not only what appears to to whether the risks to their projections are
be the most likely economic outcome as em- weighted to the upside, are weighted to the
bodied in their projections, but also the range downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of participants judge whether each variable is
their occurring, and the potential costs to the more likely to be above or below their projec-
economy should they occur. tions of the most likely outcome. These judg-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical ments about the uncertainty and the risks at-
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including tending each participant’s projections are dis-
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports tinct from the diversity of participants’ views
and those prepared by the Federal Reserve about the most likely outcomes. Forecast un-
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the certainty is concerned with the risks associated
Federal Open Market Committee. The pro- with a particular projection rather than with
jection error ranges shown in the table il- divergences across a number of different pro-
lustrate the considerable uncertainty asso- jections.
ciated with economic forecasts. For example, As with real activity and inflation, the out-
suppose a participant projects that real gross look for the future path of the federal funds
domestic product (GDP) and total consumer rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This
prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, re- uncertainty arises primarily because each partic-
spectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the ipant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of
uncertainty attending those projections is simi- monetary policy depends importantly on the
lar to that experienced in the past and the risks evolution of real activity and inflation over
around the projections are broadly balanced, time. If economic conditions evolve in an un-
the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a expected manner, then assessments of the ap-
probability of about 70 percent that actual propriate setting of the federal funds rate
GDP would expand within a range of 2.0 to would change from that point forward.
4.0 percent in the current year, 1.4 to 4.6 per-

# Tables

## Page_12_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |      |      |            |      |      |      |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|------------|------|------|------|
| 2012                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | 2013 | 2014 | Longer run | 2012 | 2013 | 2014 |
| 1.9 to 2.4 2.2 to 2.8 3.0 to 3.5 2.3 to 2.5
2.4 to 2.9 2.7 to 3.1 3.1 to 3.6 2.3 to 2.6
8.0 to 8.2 7.5 to 8.0 7.0 to 7.7 5.2 to 6.0
7.8 to 8.0 7.3 to 7.7 6.7 to 7.4 5.2 to 6.0
1.2 to 1.7 1.5 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 2.0
1.9 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 2.0
1.7 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0
1.8 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 |      |      |            |      |      |      |