# 20110921_tealbook.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:40:05*
*Pages: 52, Tables: 3*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that
material was received on a confidential basis. Redacted material is indicated by
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content. All redacted
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of
Information Act.
Content last modified 02/03/2017.

--- Page 2 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR)
Report to the FOMC
on Economic Conditions
and Monetary Policy
Book B
Monetary Policy:
Strategies and Alternatives
September 15, 2011
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
by the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

--- Page 3 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
Monetary Policy Strategies
s
e
i
g
All of the staff’s estimates of short-run r*—the real federal funds rate that, if e
t
a
maintained, would return output to its potential in twelve quarters—declined over the r
t
S
intermeeting period. By historical standards, these estimates of the equilibrium real
federal funds rate remain low, and all except the EDO model’s estimate of short-run r* are
below the estimated actual real federal funds rate. As shown in the last two columns of
the table in the exhibit, “Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate,” the estimates of short-run
r* generated by the FRB/US model and the EDO model that are conditioned on the staff
outlook for the economy (that is, the “Tealbook-consistent” estimates) decreased 60 and
140 basis points, respectively. The downward revisions to these r* estimates reflect the
staff’s assessment that the economic outlook has weakened, resulting in a more negative
trajectory for the output gap than in the August Tealbook.1 The r* estimates from the
single-equation and small structural models, which condition on the staff’s assessment of
the current output gap, have both decreased by 10 basis points. In addition, estimates of
short-run r* from the FRB/US and EDO models based on the models’ own economic
projections have declined by 70 and 20 basis points, respectively.
The exhibit “Constrained vs. Unconstrained Monetary Policy” shows the results of
optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model. In these simulations, policymakers are
assumed to place equal weights on keeping headline PCE inflation close to a 2 percent
inflation goal, on keeping unemployment close to the staff’s estimate of the effective
natural rate of unemployment, and on minimizing changes in the federal funds rate. As
has been true for some time, the simulations indicate that the optimal path of the policy
rate is affected significantly by the zero lower-bound constraint on the nominal federal
funds rate. In the constrained simulation, the only way that policymakers can provide
additional stimulus is by delaying and slowing down future increases in the federal funds
rate. 2 Consequently, the policy prescriptions from optimal control simulations of the
FRB/US model call for the federal funds rate to remain near zero through the end of 2015,
four quarters later than in the previous Tealbook and five quarters later than assumed in
the staff’s current baseline forecast (not shown). By committing to keep the funds rate
1 For a discussion of these revisions, see Book A of the Tealbook.
2 The staff’s baseline forecast incorporates the effects of the large-scale asset purchase program that was
completed at the end of June, as well as the maturity extension program included in Alternative B, and these
same effects have been incorporated into the optimal policy simulations.
Page 1 of 50

--- Page 4 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
s
e
i
g
e Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
t Percent
a
r 8 8
t
S
6 6
4 4
2 2
0 0
-2 -2
-4 -4
The actual real funds rate based on lagged core inflation
-6 -6
Range of four model-based estimates
70 Percent confidence interval
-8 90 Percent confidence interval -8
Tealbook-consistent measure (FRB/US)
-10 -10
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Current Tealbook Previous Tealbook
Short-Run Measures
Single-equation model -2.4 -2.3
Small structural model -2.2 -2.1
EDO model -0.4 -0.2
FRB/US model -3.4 -2.7
Confidence intervals for four model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval -3.9 to -0.2
90 percent confidence interval -4.9 to 1.0
Tealbook-consistent measures
EDO model -4.7 -3.3
FRB/US model -3.5 -2.9
Medium-Run Measures
Single-equation model (0.9 (1.0
Small structural model (0.7 (0.8
Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval -0.1 to 1.7
90 percent confidence interval -0.7 to 2.4
TIPS-based factor model (1.7 1.8
Memo
Actual real federal funds rate -1.1 -1.1
Note: Explanatory Note A provides background information regarding the construction of these measures and confidence
intervals. The actual real federal funds rate shown is generated using lagged core inflation as a proxy for inflation
expectations. For information regarding alternative measures, see Explanatory Note A.
Page 2 of 50

--- Page 5 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
Constrained vs. Unconstrained Monetary Policy
(2 Percent Inflation Goal)
s
e
i
Nominal Federal Funds Rate Real Federal Funds Rate g
e
Percent Percent t
8 8 4 4 r
a
Current Tealbook: Constrained S t
Previous Tealbook: Constrained
Current Tealbook: Unconstrained
6 6
2 2
4 4
0 0
2 2
-2 -2
0 0
-4 -4
-2 -2
-6 -6
-4 -4
-6 -6 -8 -8
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Civilian Unemployment Rate PCE Inflation
Percent Four-quarter average Percent
1 1 11 3.0 3.0
10 10
2.5 2.5
9 9
2.0 2.0
8 8
7 7 1.5 1.5
6 6
1.0 1.0
5 5
0.5 0.5
4 4
3 3 0.0 0.0
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Note: The optimal control simulations are derived from a loss function that uses headline inflation and the lower right
panel displays the behavior of simulated headline inflation.
Page 3 of 50

--- Page 6 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
near zero for such a long stretch of time, optimal policy would promote a faster pace of
economic recovery and somewhat higher inflation. Specifically, the unemployment rate
s would fall to 5 percent in 2016 (compared to 6 percent in the baseline), while headline
e
i
g
e inflation would average a bit above 2 percent from 2012 through 2016 (compared to 1.4
t
a
r percent in the baseline). That said, projected outcomes under this strategy are estimated to
t
S
be less favorable than they were at the time of the August Tealbook, because the staff now
foresees greater weakness in labor and product markets—a development that constrained
optimal policy only partially offsets.
If the nominal funds rate could fall below zero, the optimal federal funds rate
would decline to minus 3¼ percent in the first quarter of 2013, and not turn positive until
the first quarter of 2015. Under this unconstrained policy, the unemployment rate would
gradually decline from its current 9.1 percent level to just above 5 percent by the end of
2016, falling slightly below the staff estimate of the effective natural rate of
unemployment in the third quarter of 2014—more than a year earlier than under the
constrained policy. Projected inflation through mid-decade is broadly similar, however,
primarily because the private sector anticipates that the FOMC will tolerate somewhat
higher average inflation for a time after 2016 under constrained optimal policy as a means
of lowering the path of real interest rates, thereby providing stimulus to the economy in
the presence of the lower bound constraint.
As shown in the exhibit “Policy Rules and Market-Based Expectations for the
Federal Funds Rate,” the expected funds rate implied by the estimated outcome-based
policy rule moves above its effective lower bound only in the third quarter of 2014, four
quarters later than in the previous Tealbook.3 This change reflects the staff’s projection of
a wider output gap and slower real GDP growth relative to the last Tealbook. The
estimated rule prescribes a considerably lower path for the policy rate from 2013 through
2016 than in the August Tealbook.
As shown to the right, information from financial markets suggests that investors’
current expectations for the path of the federal funds rate imply that the funds rate will
remain within its current target range until the second quarter of 2013 before rising
gradually to 2 percent by the end of 2016. Compared with the August Tealbook, the
distribution of the federal funds rate implied by financial market data has narrowed,
particularly over the next two years.
3 This rule is used to set the longer-run path for the federal funds rate in the Tealbook baseline forecast.
Page 4 of 50

--- Page 7 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
Policy Rules and Market-Based Expectations for the Federal Funds Rate
s
e
FRB/US Model Simulations of Market-Based Expectations i
g
Estimated Outcome-Based Rule for the Federal Funds Rate e
Percent Percent t
8 8 8 8 r
a
Current Tealbook Current Tealbook t
S
Previous Tealbook Previous Tealbook
7 7 7 7
6 6 6 6
5 5 5 5
4 4 4 4
3 3 3 3
2 2 2 2
1 1 1 1
0 0 0 0
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Note: The staff baseline projection for the federal funds rate is derived from the outcome-based policy rule shown in
the top-left panel. The top-right panel depicts the mean path and confidence intervals of future federal funds rates
derived from market quotes as of September 14. In both panels, dark and light shadings represent the 70 and 90 percent
confidence intervals respectively. Explanatory Note B provides further background information.
Near-Term Prescriptions of Simple Policy Rules
Constrained Policy Unconstrained Policy
2011Q4 2012Q1 2011Q4 2012Q1
Taylor (1993) rule 0.72 0.74 0.72 0.74
Previous Tealbook 0.76 0.81 0.76 0.81
Taylor (1999) rule 0.13 0.13 -2.37 -2.35
Previous Tealbook 0.13 0.13 -2.20 -2.12
Estimated outcome-based rule 0.13 0.13 -0.23 -0.57
Previous Tealbook Outlook 0.13 0.13 -0.15 -0.40
Estimated forecast-based rule 0.13 0.13 -0.30 -0.77
Previous Tealbook Outlook 0.13 0.13 -0.21 -0.53
First-difference rule 0.13 0.13 -0.07 -0.14
Previous Tealbook Outlook 0.13 0.25 0.12 0.25
Memo 2011Q4 2012Q1
Staff assumption 0.13 0.13
Fed funds futures 0.07 0.07
Median expectation of primary dealers 0.13 0.13
Blue Chip forecast (September 1, 201 1) 0.10 0.10
Note: In calculating the near-term prescriptions of these simple policy rules, policymakers’ long-run inflation objective is
assumed to be 2 percent. Explanatory Note B provides further background information. For rules which have the lagged
policy rate as a right-hand-side variable, the lines denoted "Previous Tealbook Outlook" report rule prescriptions based
on the previous Tealbook’s staff outlook, but jumping off from the average value for the policy rate thus far in the quarter.
Page 5 of 50

--- Page 8 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
The lower panel of the exhibit provides near-term prescriptions from simple policy
rules.4 The right-hand columns display the prescriptions that would arise from these rules
s in the absence of the lower-bound constraint. As a consequence of the staff’s forecasts of
e
i
g
e wider output gaps and slower growth, all the rules prescribe a lower funds rate than in
t
a
r August, and all the unconstrained prescriptions except for the Taylor (1993) rule, which
t
S
places relatively less weight on the output gap, take values that are below the effective
lower bound.
4 In contrast to the optimal control simulations, which use headline inflation in the policymakers’
objective function, the policy rule prescriptions use core inflation as the measure of inflation. This choice of
rule specification was made in light of the tendency for current and near-term core inflation rates to
outperform headline inflation rates as predictors of the medium-term behavior of headline inflation. Thus,
the use of headline inflation in the optimal control simulations and of core inflation in the policy rules are
both consistent with the notion that policymakers are concerned with the medium-term behavior of headline
inflation.
Page 6 of 50

--- Page 9 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
Monetary Policy Alternatives
This Tealbook presents three policy alternatives—labeled A, B, and C—for the
Committee’s consideration. Both structure and content differ more substantially across
the alternatives than usually is the case.
Alternative A contains a new paragraph that offers more explicit definitions of
mandate-consistent longer-run rates of inflation and unemployment than the Committee
has heretofore included in its statement. Alternative A also replaces the qualitative
portion of the forward guidance that the FOMC included in the policy paragraph of its
August statement—the declaration that “low rates of resource utilization and a subdued
s
outlook for inflation over the medium run are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels e
v
i
t
for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013”—with numerical thresholds for a
n
r
inflation and the unemployment rate. These features of Alternative A reflect the e
t
l
A
illustrative language in the recent memo on clarifying forward guidance.1 Given the
staff’s baseline forecast, neither of the threshold values specified in Alternative A would
be met before 2015, suggesting that the Committee could extend the projected period of
exceptionally low rates to “at least through 2014.” Alternatives B and C retain the
qualitative forward guidance language from the August statement.
The three alternatives include a wide range of policy tools and options.
Alternative A includes a large-scale asset purchase program modeled on the one that the
Committee implemented from late-2010 to mid-2011. Under Alternative A, the
Committee would buy, over a period of 12 months, $1 trillion of longer-term Treasury
securities with remaining maturities of 1½ to 30 years.2 Alternative B includes two
variants of a maturity extension program. Under the first, the Committee would indicate
that it intends to purchase, over 9 months, $400 billion of Treasury securities with
remaining maturities of 6 to 30 years, and to sell an equal amount of Treasury securities
with remaining maturities of 3 years or less. Under the second, the Committee would
announce that it is initiating purchases of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of
1 “Approaches to Clarifying the Conditionality in the Committee’s Forward Guidance,” sent to the
Committee on September 12, 2011.
2 Relative to the previous program, the new purchases would be concentrated more heavily at the
longer end of the term structure, with two-thirds at maturities of 5½ years and longer. As a result, the
average maturity of securities purchased under the new program would be longer than the average maturity
of those purchased under the previous program.
Page 7 of 50

--- Page 10 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
6 to 30 years at a pace of about $45 billion per month, and that it will sell Treasury
securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less at the same pace; the Committee
also would announce that it anticipates continuing this maturity extension program for up
to 9 months.3 Any of these programs would extend the average maturity of the SOMA
portfolio and reduce the quantity of longer-term securities held by the public. Alternative
A would expand the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and the supply of reserve deposits,
while Alternative B would keep the size of the balance sheet and the level of reserve
deposits roughly unchanged. Alternative B raises the possibility of reducing the interest
rate paid on required and excess reserve balances from 25 to 10 basis points in order to
align those rates with current and projected levels of overnight market rates. This step
could be incorporated into Alternative A as well. Alternative C includes no new policy
action; instead, it introduces language saying that the Committee will regularly assess the
s
e
v implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and suggesting a greater
i
t
a
n willingness to act before mid-2013 if necessary to foster its objectives.
r
e
t
l
A
Each alternative acknowledges the weak incoming information on output and
employment, though with somewhat different emphases. No alternative attributes much
of the current softness in activity to earlier commodity price increases or supply chain
disruptions. To the contrary, Alternatives A and B note that household spending has
increased at only a modest pace in recent months despite a recovery in auto sales as
supply-chain disruptions eased. Alternative C, however, points to the recovery in
production and sales of motor vehicles as contributing to modest growth in consumer
spending. The draft statements also differ in their treatment of inflation: Alternative C
notes the pickup in inflation earlier this year as well as its more recent moderation;
Alternatives A and B focus on the moderation. Turning to the outlook, the drafts of
Alternatives A and B indicate that the Committee continues to expect some pickup in the
pace of recovery over coming quarters, but highlight downside risks to the economic
outlook, including strains in global financial markets. The draft of Alternative C notes
the presence of downside risks but emphasizes the projection of some pickup in growth.
The next three pages contain a table that shows key elements of the alternatives.
The table is followed by complete draft statements, then by a summary of the arguments
for each alternative.
3 The asset purchase programs in Alternatives A and B are analyzed in “Possible Approaches to
Providing Monetary Accommodation: Reinvestment Maturity Extension Program, SOMA Portfolio
Maturity Extension Program, and Long-Maturity LSAP,” also sent to the Committee on September 12.
Page 8 of 50

--- Page 11 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
Table 1: Overview of Alternatives for the Sept. 21 FOMC Statement
September Alternatives
Key August
Components Statement
A B C
Economic Activity
economic growth so far
Economic this year has been economic growth
economic growth remains slow
Recovery considerably slower than remains quite slow
Committee had expected
indicators suggest
Labor indicators point to continuing weakness in overall labor market conditions, and
deterioration in overall
Market unemployment rate remains elevated
labor market conditions
sales of new motor
Temporary appear to account for only vehicles recovering after
Factors some of the recent some recovery in sales of motor vehicles as auto manufacturers made
Influencing weakness in economic supply-chain disruptions eased progress in restoring
Recovery activity supply chains and
s
increased production e
v
Household has been increasing at only a modest pace in recent increased at a modest pace i
has flattened out a t
Spending months in recent months n
r
Inflation e
t
l
A
Inflation picked up earlier Inflation picked up earlier
in the year, mainly in the year, mainly
reflecting higher prices for reflecting higher prices for
n.a. n.a.
some commodities and some commodities and
imported goods, as well as imported goods, as well as
Recent supply chain disruptions. supply chain disruptions.
Developments More recently, inflation has More recently, inflation has
moderated as prices of Inflation has moderated since earlier in the year as moderated as prices of
energy and some prices of energy and some commodities have energy and some
commodities have declined declined from their peaks. commodities have declined
from their earlier peaks. from their peaks.
Longer-term inflation
Longer-term
expectations have remained Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable
expectations
stable
Longer-run Goals
The Committee judges
that inflation of 2 percent
as measured by the price
index for personal
Inflation n.a. consumption n.a. n.a.
expenditures is most
consistent, over the
longer run, with the dual
mandate.
Currently, the Committee
projects that, in the
absence of further shocks
to the economy, the
unemployment rate would
Employment n.a. n.a. n.a.
converge over time to a
level around [5 to 6]
percent; this projection is
subject to considerable
uncertainty.
Page 9 of 50

--- Page 12 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
Table 1: Overview of Alternatives for the Sept. 21 FOMC Statement
(continued)
September Alternatives
Key August
Components Statement
A B C
Outlook
The Committee now Committee continues to Committee continues to
Committee continues to expect
expects a somewhat expect some pickup in expect some pickup in
some pickup in pace of
slower pace of recovery pace of recovery over pace of recovery over
recovery over coming quarters
Economic Activity over coming quarters coming quarters but coming quarters but
and anticipates that the
and anticipates that the anticipates that the anticipates that the
unemployment rate will decline
unemployment rate will unemployment rate will unemployment rate will
gradually
decline only gradually decline only slowly decline only gradually
The Committee also
anticipates that inflation
will settle, over coming
quarters, at or below
e s levels consistent with The Committee also anticipates that inflation will settle, over coming quarters, at or
v the dual mandate as the below levels consistent with the dual mandate as the effects of past energy and other
t i commodity price increases dissipate further.
a effects of past energy
n
r Inflation and other commodity
e price increases dissipate
t
l
A further.
the Committee will
continue to pay close
the Committee will continue to pay close attention to the evolution of inflation and
attention to the evolution
inflation expectations
of inflation and inflation
expectations
Federal Funds Rate Target Range
Intermeeting
0 to ¼ percent 0 to ¼ percent
Period
Committee anticipates
that this exceptionally
low range for the federal
funds rate will be
Committee currently appropriate at least as
anticipates that long as unemployment
economic conditions— exceeds [ 7 ] percent,
including low rates of inflation is projected to
resource utilization and remain at or below [ 2½ ] Committee currently anticipates that economic
a subdued outlook for percent in the medium conditions—including low rates of resource utilization and
Forward Guidance inflation over the term, and longer-term a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium-term—are
medium-term—are inflation expectations likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal
likely to warrant continue to be well funds rate at least through mid-2013
exceptionally low levels anchored at mandate-
for the federal funds rate consistent levels. On the
at least through mid­ basis of currently
2013 available information,
the Committee expects
these conditions to
prevail [ at least through
2014 ].
Page 10 of 50

--- Page 13 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
Table 1: Overview of Alternatives for the Sept. 21 FOMC Statement
(continued)
Key August September Alternatives
Components Statement
A B C
SOMA Portfolio Policy
The Committee intends to
purchase, over 9 months,
$400 billion of Treasury
securities with maturities of
6 to 30 years and to sell an
equal amount with
maturities of 3 years or less.
The Committee decided
OR
to expand its holdings of
longer-term Treasury
The Committee is initiating
Asset securities by [ by a s
n.a. purchases of Treasury n.a. e
purchases/holdings further $1 trillion ] at a v
pace of $80 to $85 securities with remaining a t i
billion over the next [12] maturities of 6 years to 30 n
years at a pace of about $45 r
months. e
billion per month and will t
l
A
sell Treasury securities with
remaining maturities of 3
years or less at the same
pace; the Committee
anticipates continuing this
maturity-extension program
for up to 9 months.
maintain existing policy of
maintain existing policy
rolling over maturing
of rolling over maturing
Treasury securities at
Reinvestment maintain existing Treasury securities at maintain existing
auction; reinvest MBS
Policy reinvestment policy auction; reinvest MBS reinvestment policy
principal in Treasury
principal in longer-term
securities with remaining
Treasury securities
maturities of 6 to 30 years
Future Policy Action
will regularly review the
will regularly review the
pace of its securities
pace of its securities
purchases and the overall
transactions and the overall
will regularly review size of the purchase
size of the maturity
size and composition of program in light of
Asset Purchases / extension program in light
securities holdings and incoming information n.a.
Holdings of incoming information
is prepared to adjust as and will adjust the
and will adjust the program
appropriate program as needed to
as needed to best foster
best foster maximum
maximum employment and
employment and price
price stability
stability
will regularly assess the
will continue to assess will continue to assess
will continue to assess the implications of incoming
the economic outlook in the economic outlook in
economic outlook in light of information for the economic
light of incoming light of incoming
incoming information and is outlook and will employ its
Overall information and is information and is
prepared to employ its policy tools as necessary to
prepared to employ prepared to employ its
policy tools as appropriate foster maximum
these tools as policy tools as
employment and price
appropriate appropriate
stability
Page 11 of 50

--- Page 14 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
AUGUST 2011 FOMC STATEMENT
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in June indicates
that economic growth so far this year has been considerably slower than the Committee
had expected. Indicators suggest a deterioration in overall labor market conditions in
recent months, and the unemployment rate has moved up. Household spending has
flattened out, investment in nonresidential structures is still weak, and the housing sector
remains depressed. However, business investment in equipment and software continues
to expand. Temporary factors, including the damping effect of higher food and energy
prices on consumer purchasing power and spending as well as supply chain disruptions
associated with the tragic events in Japan, appear to account for only some of the recent
weakness in economic activity. Inflation picked up earlier in the year, mainly reflecting
higher prices for some commodities and imported goods, as well as the supply chain
disruptions. More recently, inflation has moderated as prices of energy and some
commodities have declined from their earlier peaks. Longer-term inflation expectations
s have remained stable.
e
v
i
t
a 2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
n
r employment and price stability. The Committee now expects a somewhat slower pace of
e
t
l recovery over coming quarters than it did at the time of the previous meeting and
A
anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline only gradually toward levels that the
Committee judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. Moreover, downside risks to
the economic outlook have increased. The Committee also anticipates that inflation will
settle, over coming quarters, at levels at or below those consistent with the Committee's
dual mandate as the effects of past energy and other commodity price increases dissipate
further. However, the Committee will continue to pay close attention to the evolution of
inflation and inflation expectations.
3. To promote the ongoing economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is
at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to keep the target
range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee currently anticipates
that economic conditions—including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued
outlook for inflation over the medium run—are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels
for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013. The Committee also will maintain
its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities holdings. The
Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings and is
prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate.
4. The Committee discussed the range of policy tools available to promote a stronger
economic recovery in a context of price stability. It will continue to assess the economic
outlook in light of incoming information and is prepared to employ these tools as
appropriate.
Page 12 of 50

--- Page 15 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
SEPTEMBER 2011 FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in August
indicates that economic growth remains quite slow. Recent indicators point to
continuing weakness in overall labor market conditions, and the unemployment rate
remains elevated. Household spending has been increasing at only a modest pace
in recent months despite some recovery in sales of motor vehicles as supply-chain
disruptions eased. Investment in nonresidential structures is still weak, and the
housing sector remains depressed. However, business investment in equipment and
software continues to expand. Inflation has moderated since earlier in the year as
prices of energy and some commodities have declined from their peaks. Longer-term
inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee judges that inflation of 2 percent
as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures is most
s
e
consistent, over the longer run, with the dual mandate. Whereas monetary policy v
i
t
can determine the longer-run inflation rate, monetary policy does not determine a
n
the longer-run equilibrium rate of unemployment, which depends on structural r
e
t
economic factors that may vary over time. Currently, the Committee projects l
A
that, in the absence of further shocks to the economy, the unemployment rate
would converge over time to a level around [ 5 to 6 ] percent; this projection is
subject to considerable uncertainty.
3. The Committee continues to expect some pickup in the pace of recovery over
coming quarters but anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline only slowly
toward its longer-run equilibrium level. Moreover, there are significant downside
risks to the economic outlook, including strains in global financial markets. The
Committee also anticipates that inflation will settle, over coming quarters, at levels at
or below those consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate as the effects of past
energy and other commodity price increases dissipate further. However, the
Committee will continue to pay close attention to the evolution of inflation and
inflation expectations.
4. To promote a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
is consistent with the dual mandate, the Committee decided today to keep the target
range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee anticipates that this
exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as
long as the unemployment rate exceeds [ 7 ] percent, inflation is projected to
remain at or below [ 2½ ] percent in the medium term, and longer-term inflation
expectations continue to be well anchored at mandate-consistent levels. On the
basis of currently available information, the Committee expects these conditions
to prevail [ at least through 2014 ].
5. In addition, the Committee decided to expand its holdings of longer-term
Treasury securities [ by a further $1 trillion ] at a pace of $80 to $85 billion per
month over the next [ 12 ] months. This program should put downward pressure
on longer-term interest rates and help make broader financial conditions more
Page 13 of 50

--- Page 16 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
accommodative. The Committee will regularly review the pace of its securities
purchases and the overall size of the purchase program in light of incoming
information and will adjust the program as needed to best foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee will maintain its existing policy of
rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction and will reinvest principal
payments from its holdings of agency securities in longer-term Treasury
securities.
6. The Committee will continue to assess the economic outlook in light of incoming
information and is prepared to employ its policy tools as appropriate to promote a
stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
Page 14 of 50

--- Page 17 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
SEPTEMBER 2011 FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in August
indicates that economic growth remains slow. Recent indicators point to continuing
weakness in overall labor market conditions, and the unemployment rate remains
elevated. Household spending has been increasing at only a modest pace in recent
months despite some recovery in sales of motor vehicles as supply-chain
disruptions eased. Investment in nonresidential structures is still weak, and the
housing sector remains depressed. However, business investment in equipment and
software continues to expand. Inflation has moderated since earlier in the year as
prices of energy and some commodities have declined from their peaks. Longer-term
inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee continues to expect some pickup in
the pace of recovery over coming quarters but anticipates that the unemployment rate s
e
will decline only gradually toward levels that the Committee judges to be consistent v
i
t
with its dual mandate. Moreover, there are significant downside risks to the a
n
economic outlook, including strains in global financial markets. The Committee e r
t
also anticipates that inflation will settle, over coming quarters, at levels at or below A l
those consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate as the effects of past energy and
other commodity price increases dissipate further. However, the Committee will
continue to pay close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation expectations.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
is at levels consistent with the dual mandate, the Committee decided today to extend
the average maturity of its holdings of securities. The Committee intends to
purchase, over the next 9 months, $400 billion of Treasury securities with
remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years and to sell an equal amount of
Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less. This program
should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and help make
broader financial conditions more accommodative. The Committee will regularly
review the pace of its securities transactions and the overall size of the maturity
extension program in light of incoming information and will adjust the program
as needed to best foster maximum employment and price stability. The
Committee will maintain its existing policy of rolling over maturing Treasury
securities at auction and will reinvest principal payments from its holdings of
agency securities in Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 years to
30 years.
OR
3'. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
is at levels consistent with the dual mandate, the Committee decided today to extend
the average maturity of its holdings of securities. The Committee is initiating
purchases of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years
at a pace of about $45 billion per month and will sell Treasury securities with
Page 15 of 50

--- Page 18 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
remaining maturities of 3 years or less at the same pace; the Committee
anticipates continuing this maturity-extension program for up to 9 months. This
program should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and help
make broader financial conditions more accommodative. The Committee will
regularly review the pace of its securities transactions and the overall size of the
maturity extension program in light of incoming information and will adjust the
program as needed to best foster maximum employment and price stability. The
Committee will maintain its existing policy of rolling over maturing Treasury
securities at auction and will reinvest principal payments from its holdings of
agency securities in Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 years to
30 years.
4. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to
¼ percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of
resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through
s
e
v mid-2013.
i
t
a
n
r 5. The Committee [ discussed the range of policy tools available to promote a stronger
e
l t economic recovery in a context of price stability. It ] will continue to assess the
A
economic outlook in light of incoming information and is prepared to employ its tools
as appropriate.
Note: If policymakers decide it is appropriate to reduce the remuneration rate on
reserve balances, the Board of Governors would issue an accompanying statement that
might read:
In a related action, the Board of Governors voted today to reduce the interest rate paid
on required and excess reserve balances from 25 basis points to 10 basis points
effective with the reserve maintenance period that begins on October 6, 2011.
Page 16 of 50

--- Page 19 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
SEPTEMBER 2011 FOMC STATEMENT —ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in August
indicates that economic growth remains slow. Recent indicators point to continuing
weakness in overall labor market conditions, and the unemployment rate remains
elevated. Household spending has increased at a modest pace in recent months,
with sales of new motor vehicles recovering after auto manufacturers made
progress in restoring their supply chains and increased production. Investment in
nonresidential structures is still weak, and the housing sector remains depressed.
However, business investment in equipment and software continues to expand.
Inflation picked up earlier in the year, mainly reflecting higher prices for some
commodities and imported goods, as well as the supply chain disruptions. More
recently, inflation has moderated as prices of energy and some commodities have
declined from their peaks. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
s
e
employment and price stability. Though downside risks to the economic outlook v
i
remain, the Committee continues to expect some pickup in the pace of recovery a t
n
over coming quarters and anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline r
e
gradually toward levels that the Committee judges to be consistent with its dual l t
A
mandate. The Committee also anticipates that inflation will settle, over coming
quarters, at levels at or below those consistent with the Committee's dual mandate as
the effects of past energy and other commodity price increases dissipate further.
However, the Committee will continue to pay close attention to the evolution of
inflation and inflation expectations.
3. To promote the ongoing economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over
time, is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to keep the
target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee currently
anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of resource utilization and a
subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are likely to warrant
exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013. The
Committee also will maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its securities holdings. The Committee will regularly assess the implications of
incoming information for the economic outlook and will employ its policy tools as
necessary to foster maximum employment and price stability.
Page 17 of 50

--- Page 20 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B
The Committee, like the staff, may see the information received during the
intermeeting period as pointing to an even more gradual pickup in economic activity over
the medium run—and so to an even slower reduction in the unemployment rate—than
was expected at the time of the August meeting. In particular, policymakers may note
that growth remains quite modest even with a reversal of temporary factors that were
seen as restraining activity earlier in the year. They also may view the sharp drop in
consumer confidence in recent months, the tepid growth in employment, and the
increasing strains in global financial markets as posing substantial downside risks to the
economic outlook. Moreover, they may judge that the U.S. economy is operating well
below potential and anticipate that, with energy and commodity prices generally having
s
e declined from earlier peaks, inflation is likely to subside to levels at or below those
v
i
a t judged to be most consistent with the dual mandate. Accordingly, policymakers might
n
r
e conclude that additional policy stimulus is appropriate at this meeting.
t
l
A
Committee members might judge that an adjustment in fiscal policy would be
most helpful in supporting the economic recovery, but see a negligible chance of timely
action on that front. Hence, they may think it beneficial to provide further monetary
stimulus by increasing the SOMA’s holdings of longer-term Treasuries in order to put
further downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and contribute to more
accommodative financial conditions. Even so, policymakers might be concerned that a
significant further expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and the supply of
reserve balances could pose an upside risk to inflation expectations because it might
make the public doubt that the Committee will be able to withdraw accommodation in a
timely fashion. If so, the Committee may see Alternative B, which would increase the
average maturity of the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings while avoiding a significant
expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, as appropriately balancing the potential
benefits and costs of additional monetary stimulus.4
4 As is the Committee’s usual practice, the draft directive for Alternative B expresses purchases and
sales in terms of the face value of securities. Given current and expected market interest rates, the market
prices of most newly purchased longer-term securities likely would exceed their face value; that is, their
prices would include a premium. Total premiums on the longer-term securities the Desk would buy likely
would be about $50 billion larger than the net unamortized premiums on the securities that the Desk would
sell. Although buying and selling the same face value of securities would keep the face value of securities
held in the SOMA portfolio constant at about $2.6 trillion, the supply of reserve balances would increase by
an amount equal to the difference in premiums. If it preferred to avoid an increase in reserve balances, the
Page 18 of 50

--- Page 21 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
Staff estimates suggest that purchasing $400 billion of Treasury securities with
remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years and selling an equal amount of Treasury
securities with maturities of 3 years or less (along with reinvesting principal payments
from agency MBS held in the SOMA entirely in Treasury securities with maturities of 6
years or more) would push down the level of longer-term private interest rates and ease
financial conditions enough to reduce the unemployment rate by ¼ to ½ percentage point
at the end of 2013. Staff also estimates that it would increase PCE inflation by about ¼
percentage point over the medium-run. These estimates, though subject to considerable
uncertainty, are almost as large as the estimated effects of the $1 trillion unsterilized
Treasury purchase program included in Alternative A. The smaller maturity extension
program of Alternative B is estimated to have nearly the same effects as the larger asset
purchase program of Alternative A because the former is structured to buy more
s
e
securities at the longer end of the term structure and thus results in a more persistent v
i
t
reduction in the average maturity of the publicly held debt.5 While the Desk’s sales of n a
r
e
shorter-term Treasury securities under the maturity extension program might put some t
l
A
upward pressure on short-term money market rates, any increase would likely be small so
long as the Committee maintains its forward guidance about the likely future path of the
federal funds rate.
Members may be concerned that a maturity extension program could delay
normalizing the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet after the Committee stops reinvesting
principal payments, because the runoff of Treasury securities would be much slower.
However, once it begins moving to a less accommodative stance of policy, the
Committee could, of course, instruct the Desk to sell securities in order to put total
holdings on a more rapid downward path. In addition, policymakers might find
undesirable the increase in the Federal Reserve’s exposure to unrealized capital losses
that would result if the Federal Reserve were to hold a longer-duration portfolio.
Nonetheless, they may consider the maturity extension program in Option B appropriate,
and be willing to accept the increased risk of capital losses, if they project persistent
Committee could direct the Desk to purchase $400 billion in face value of longer-term securities and to sell
enough shorter-term securities to leave the level of reserve balances essentially unchanged. Doing so
would decrease the face value of the SOMA portfolio by about $50 billion.
5 For additional information about the transmission mechanism and estimated effects of these
programs, see the memo titled “Possible Approaches to Providing Monetary Accommodation:
Reinvestment Maturity Extension Program, SOMA Portfolio Maturity Extension Program, and Long-
Maturity LSAP” that was distributed to the Committee on September 12.
Page 19 of 50

--- Page 22 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
economic weakness and lower-than-target inflation in the absence of further stimulus—
particularly if they see the risks to the already weak outlook as tilted to the downside.
Staff analysis and academic research suggests that more forceful forward
guidance such as that included in Alternative A could also reduce longer-term rates and
provide economic stimulus. Policymakers may, however, find it premature to alter the
forward guidance in such a significant manner; they may want to consider possible
changes to their forward guidance in the context of a broader discussion of the
Committee’s policy framework before making any changes. They may also believe that
any change in forward guidance that involves explicit numerical values for the mandate-
consistent rates of inflation and unemployment over the longer-term will need to be
explained carefully, a process that could take some time. In particular, policymakers
s
e might worry that the forward guidance in Alternative A, if adopted without careful prior
v
i
t
a communication, would be more likely to result in higher expected and actual inflation
n
r
e than in faster real growth. If so, they might anticipate that a statement along the lines of
t
l
A
Alternative A would quickly raise longer-run inflation expectations, or that the inflation
threshold in Alternative A would be triggered in fairly short order.
Some Committee members may see potential benefits from reducing the interest
rate paid on required and excess reserve balances to 10 basis points. Doing so would
better align that rate with short-term money market rates and thus might serve as a useful
complement to the Committee’s forward guidance. In addition, reducing this rate
probably would put downward pressure on a range of overnight and very-short-term
money market rates, potentially leading some investors to buy somewhat-longer-term
money market instruments; such behavior could lessen any upward pressure on short-
term rates that might result from the sales associated with the maturity extension
program. However, other members may see a further reduction in very-short-term rates
as likely to accelerate outflows from money market mutual funds, potentially reducing
firms’ ability to issue commercial paper or fund securities holdings. Cutting the
remuneration rate on excess reserves clearly would reduce depository institution’s
incentive to borrow federal funds and hold excess reserves, likely resulting in a further
reduction in trading volume in the federal funds market and potentially in greater
volatility in the effective federal funds rate. Moreover, while banks might respond by
making more loans as excess reserves became a less attractive investment, they might
instead impose greater fees on deposit accounts. If participants generally thought that a
reduction in the remuneration rates would be helpful, on balance, the Board could adopt
Page 20 of 50

--- Page 23 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
such a reduction and that step could be noted in the press release containing the FOMC
statement.
A statement along the lines of Alternative B would be broadly in line with market
expectations. Most respondents to the Desk’s recent survey of primary dealers indicated
that they expect the FOMC to announce a maturity extension program, most likely in the
form of buying longer-term and selling shorter-term Treasury securities rather than solely
by adjusting the reinvestment policy. On average, respondents saw about a 75 percent
probability that the Committee would announce a maturity extension program within a
year. Averaging across respondents, the expected size of a maturity extension program,
conditional on one being put in place, was $375 billion spread over 6½ months.6 In
contrast, they assigned about a 30 percent probability to a change in the forward guidance
s
within a year. On average respondents saw a 30 percent probability of a cut in the e
v
i
t
remuneration rate on required and excess reserves. Conditional on a cut occurring, a
n
r
respondents anticipated that the new level would be 10 basis points. While some market e
t
l
A
participants would be surprised by the timing of a statement like that in Alternative B, the
responses to the dealer survey, along with market commentary, suggest that investors
have already priced in much of the effect of a maturity extension program. Accordingly,
an announcement along the lines of Alternative B likely would have only a modest
further effect on asset prices—bond yields might decline a bit, the foreign exchange value
of the dollar slip, and equity prices edge higher—unless the Desk’s announcement of the
details of the maturity exchange program indicated that the Committee would remove
appreciably more or appreciably less duration from the public’s portfolio than investors
expected. If the interest rate on excess reserves were reduced, or if the statement
included the bracketed language in the final paragraph—language that suggests the
likelihood of additional steps to spur a stronger recovery if growth does not pick up
noticeably, the decline in yields likely would be somewhat larger.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A
Policymakers may view the information received since the August meeting as
confirming that additional policy accommodation is needed to promote outcomes that are
more consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate. In particular, they may regard
6 On average, respondents also anticipated that an “operation twist” maturity extension program would
involve buying securities with maturities of 6 to 26 years and selling securities with maturities of 6 months
to roughly 3 years. These parameters are close to those in Alternative B.
Page 21 of 50

--- Page 24 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
the recent data on household spending and labor markets as strong evidence that the
reasons for slow economic growth in 2011 go well beyond the transitory factors noted in
recent statements. They may also see a tightening of fiscal policy as likely and be
concerned about its adverse effects on economic activity and employment in the medium
run. Against this backdrop, policymakers may have significantly downgraded their
assessments of the near- and medium-term economic outlook, perhaps even to the point
of projecting that the U.S. economy could slip into a new downturn, as in the “Recession”
alternative simulation of Tealbook Part A. Moreover, the risk of a significant financial
dislocation in Europe appears to have increased in recent weeks, and the Committee may
judge that such an outcome could spill over to the U.S. financial system and have
important negative implications for the U.S. outlook, as detailed in the “Very Severe
Financial Stress in Europe” simulation.
s
e
v
i
t
a In addition, some participants may now anticipate little reduction in slack in labor
n
r
e markets over coming quarters, and so may expect greater restraint on wages and prices
t
l
A
than they anticipated earlier. If they also see large negative risks to the outlook for
growth, they may now view the main risk to inflation over the projection period as being
to the downside, with significant odds that inflation will fall below mandate-consistent
levels for a substantial period.
Committee members may judge that an unsterilized asset purchase program
would be more effective in spurring growth and keeping inflation close to mandate-
consistent levels than would a maturity extension program. Members might, for
example, anticipate that increased reserve balances would impart some further downward
pressure on money market rates and encourage banks to expand lending. Moreover,
policymakers may be confident that a larger balance sheet would not preclude a timely
increase in the federal funds rate when economic conditions warrant a less
accommodative stance of policy.
Accordingly, policymakers may conclude that both the maximum employment
and price stability elements of the dual mandate justify action along the lines of
Alternative A. That is, they may judge that not only is increased monetary policy
accommodation necessary, but that with the federal funds rate constrained by the zero
lower bound and with downside risks to both output and inflation rising, it would be
prudent to undertake a third large-scale asset purchase program and to issue stronger
forward guidance. If policymakers see growing public uncertainty that the expansion
Page 22 of 50

--- Page 25 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
will continue—much less strengthen—as contributing significantly to the weakness in
household spending and to firms’ continuing reluctance to hire new workers, they may
judge that the policy actions in Alternative A, in combination, would reinforce the
public’s confidence in the Committee’s commitment to strengthen the recovery.
As noted in the discussion of Alternative B, staff analysis of various asset
purchase programs suggests that the program in Alternative A might be expected to ease
financial conditions enough to reduce the unemployment rate by ¼ to ½ percentage point
at the end of 2013, and to increase PCE inflation by about ¼ percentage point over the
medium run. Adding the estimated effects of the asset purchase program to the extended
version of the staff’s baseline forecast results in projected paths for unemployment and
inflation that have the unemployment rate at or above 6 percent at the end of 2015 and
s
that leave PCE inflation somewhat below 2 percent. These estimates and the staff e
v
i
t
forecast are, of course, subject to considerable uncertainty, and there clearly is some risk a
n
r
that inflation could rise above 2 percent over the medium run. Policymakers may find e
t
l
A
that risk acceptable if they project that inflation is more likely to decline than to increase,
and that progress toward maximum employment is likely to be unacceptably slow, in the
absence of further monetary stimulus.
Staff analysis suggests that forward guidance could provide significant additional
stimulus if it credibly signaled that the Committee would be more accommodative than
the public already anticipated. To a degree, more stimulus could result from giving
economic agents information that changes their views about the conditions that will
govern the onset of tightening, if that additional information leads them to anticipate a
more prolonged period of near-zero rates than they now expect. (Forward guidance could
reduce longer-term yields more, and thus have larger macroeconomic effects, if the
Committee also were to indicate that, once it begins to tighten, it intends to raise rates
less rapidly than the public now anticipates.) Although the staff forecast of economic
activity and inflation, in combination with the estimated outcomes-based rule, suggests
that the target range for the federal funds rate will be unchanged through mid-2014, more
than half of the respondents to the Desk survey indicated that they expect the first
increase in the federal funds rate target to occur by the end of 2013. On average,
respondents to the latest dealer survey indicated that they expected the unemployment
rate to be 8 percent and the 12-month PCE inflation rate to be a bit above 2 percent when
the Committee first raises its target for the funds rate. Thus, if the Committee were to
state that it currently does not anticipate raising the federal funds rate before the
Page 23 of 50

--- Page 26 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
unemployment rate reaches 7 percent or the inflation rate reaches 2½ percent, and that it
does not expect those thresholds to be breached before the end of 2014, as in the draft of
Alternative A, that announcement could lower market expectations of short-term interest
rates beyond 2013 and so put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and
upward pressure on asset prices. In addition, by giving market participants greater clarity
about the economic conditions that the Committee judges would be likely to warrant
raising the target for the federal funds rate, a statement along the lines of Alternative A
could prevent medium- and longer-term rates from rising too soon or too quickly as the
recovery progresses.
The combination of more aggressive forward guidance and the initiation of
another unsterilized large-scale asset purchase program would come as a significant
s
e surprise to market participants. Respondents to the Desk’s dealer survey saw a roughly
v
i
t
a 30 percent chance of a substantial change in the Committee’s forward guidance within a
n
r
e year, and they assigned a probability of about 40 percent to the Committee undertaking a
t
l
A
new large-scale asset-purchase program over the same period. Moreover, conditional on
the FOMC adopting an unsterilized asset-purchase program, respondents expected, on
average, that purchases would total about $600 billion, significantly less than the $1
trillion in Alternative A. Accordingly, the combination of policy actions in Alternative A
likely would result in a drop in longer-term yields, although the decline might be
restrained if investors perceived the statement as adding to the upside risks to inflation.
Equity prices probably would rise, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar likely
decline. The asset purchase program alone likely would have much smaller effects, given
that investors appear to have already priced in a maturity extension program that would
reduce the average duration of the publicly held debt nearly as much as would the asset
purchases contained in Alternative A.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE C
Although information received since the August meeting suggests that the pace of
recovery has picked up only modestly, Committee members may see the increase in
motor vehicle production and sales that accompanied the easing of supply side constraints
as supporting the view that growth will increase more substantially as the temporary
factors that damped growth earlier in the year continue to fade. In particular, they may
continue to think it highly likely that output and employment growth will strengthen
more than projected in the staff’s baseline forecast, perhaps along the lines of the “Faster
Page 24 of 50

--- Page 27 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
Snapback” alternative simulation, though perhaps not as quickly as they had anticipated
at the time of the August FOMC meeting. Alternatively, they may judge that it would be
prudent to gauge the extent to which growth picks up before deciding whether to
undertake new asset purchases.
Even if policymakers see the downside risks to the outlook for economic growth
as having increased, they may believe that it is prudent to wait for additional information
bearing on the medium-term outlook before acting to increase the degree of policy
accommodation. Moreover, Committee members may judge that liquidity facilities are
better tools for addressing financial strains and the downside risks that such strains pose
to the economy than are asset purchases or forward guidance about monetary policy. If
so, they may judge that further monetary policy stimulus is, currently, not appropriate and
s
so favor a statement along the lines of Alternative C. e
v
i
t
a
n
Policymakers may believe that monetary policy actions taken over the past year r
e
t
l
have already put in place sufficient support for the economic recovery. Moreover, they A
might be concerned that a significant further expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance
sheet and the supply of reserve balances would pose too large a risk that the Committee
might be unable to withdraw accommodation in a timely fashion. In addition, some
Committee members may see a sizable risk that further monetary stimulus would be more
likely to result in higher inflation than in faster growth because they judge that the
housing and financial shocks the economy suffered in recent years have resulted in a
persistent structural mismatch in labor markets that has made both the level of potential
output and its growth rate over the medium term lower than the staff estimates, as in the
“Greater Supply-Side Damage” simulation. Some members might see the increase in
measures of core inflation earlier this year as consistent with this assessment. Some may
also be concerned that additional monetary accommodation would result in distortions of
asset prices that could have adverse consequences for monetary and financial stability.
Committee members may judge that the most important contribution monetary
policy can make at this point is to ensure that longer-term inflation expectations remain
stable. They may see this as helping not only to ensure that inflation is at mandate-
consistent levels over the medium term but also to provide a stable background for a
sustainable recovery in real activity. Moreover, they may judge that the Committee’s
past actions are likely to leave inflation, over the medium run, at the high end of the
range that is consistent with the dual mandate. And they may conclude that further large­
Page 25 of 50

--- Page 28 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
scale asset purchases, whether sterilized or not, or statements indicating that the
Committee will accept higher than 2 percent inflation even temporarily, would pose an
unacceptably large risk to the stability of inflation expectations, as in the “Greater
Supply-Side Damage with Higher Inflation Expectations” alternative simulation.
Some Committee members may believe that maintaining the current stance of
policy is appropriate even though they anticipate only a gradual recovery. They might
judge that the potential costs of providing more specific forward guidance or of
increasing the size or average maturity of the SOMA portfolio, outweigh the likely
benefits. Even if the Committee’s forward guidance contained numerical thresholds,
policymakers might be concerned that extending the date in that forward guidance could
make it difficult to adjust policy sufficiently rapidly if growth picks up quickly and
s
e inflation does not decline as expected. Similarly, they may worry that it would be
v
i
t
a difficult to reverse a new asset purchase program or a maturity extension program in such
n
r
e circumstances.
t
l
A
If Committee members anticipate a stronger medium-term pickup in real activity
than envisioned by the staff’s baseline scenario, or if they judge it likely that the level and
growth rate of potential output are appreciably lower than the staff estimates, they may
see a significant risk that inflation will increase even without further monetary stimulus.
If so, they may judge it appropriate to modify the statement so as to provide a greater
degree of flexibility to tighten policy in response to economic developments. In
particular, if growth picks up strongly and rates of resource utilization increase steadily,
some members may judge it appropriate to begin withdrawing monetary policy
accommodation well before mid-2013 even though unemployment, at the time, might not
yet be approaching the staff’s estimate of its longer-run, mandate-consistent level. These
policymakers may favor a statement that includes the final sentence of Alternative C, in
which the Committee would state that it “will regularly assess the implications of
incoming information for the economic outlook and will employ its policy tools as
necessary to foster maximum employment and price stability,” rather than a statement
that indicates the Committee is prepared to employ its policy tools to promote a stronger
recovery.
A statement like that in Alternative C would surprise market participants, who
appear to expect that the Committee will either act to provide more stimulus or indicate
that it is preparing to take such action soon unless the recovery strengthens. Longer-term
Page 26 of 50

--- Page 29 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
interest rates likely would increase. Stock prices likely would decline, and the foreign
exchange value of the dollar probably would increase.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
Page 27 of 50

--- Page 30 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
LONG-RUN PROJECTIONS OF THE BALANCE SHEET AND MONETARY BASE
The staff has prepared three scenarios for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet that
correspond to the policy alternatives presented above: A baseline scenario corresponding
to Alternative B, and two additional scenarios corresponding to Alternatives A and C.
Projections under each scenario are based on assumptions about various components of
the balance sheet. Details of these assumptions, as well as projections for each major
component of the balance sheet, can be found in Explanatory Note C. Consistent with
the staff’s forecast, the three scenarios assume that the target federal funds rate lifts off in
the third quarter of 2014.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
For the scenario that corresponds to Alternative B, the Committee is assumed to
sell $400 billion (par value) of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or
less and purchase the same amount of securities with remaining maturities of 6 years or
more over a nine-month period. It is also assumed that the Committee reinvests the
proceeds from principal repayments from its holdings of agency securities into Treasury
securities with remaining maturities of 6 years or more, while Treasury securities that
mature are reinvested at auction following the Desk’s current practice to purchase
proportionally across all securities that are being issued until March 2014. Until that
time, System Open Market Account (SOMA) security holdings remain constant at
roughly $2.6 trillion, and the size of the balance sheet, which includes other assets in
addition to the SOMA portfolio, holds roughly steady at about $2.9 trillion. In March
2014, six months before the assumed first increase in the target federal funds rate,
reinvestment ceases, and the balance sheet begins to contract. In March 2015, roughly
Page 28 of 50

--- Page 31 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
six months after the assumed first increase in the target federal funds rate, the Committee
begins to sell its remaining holdings of agency MBS and agency debt securities at a pace
that reduces the amount of these securities in the portfolio to zero in five years—that is,
by February 2020.7,8 This action, along with the cessation of reinvestment, normalizes
the size of the balance sheet by March 2018.9
After reserve balances have reached the assumed $25 billion floor, the balance
sheet begins to expand, with increases in holdings of Treasury securities essentially
matching the growth of Federal Reserve capital and notes in circulation. The balance
sheet reaches a size of $2 trillion by the end of 2020.
In the scenario corresponding to Alternative A, the Committee is assumed to
purchase an additional $1 trillion of longer-term Treasury securities over twelve months. s
e
v
In addition, until six months prior to the lift off in the target federal funds rate, it is t i
a
n
assumed that principal payments on agency securities are reinvested in longer-term r
e
t
l
Treasuries, while Treasury securities that mature are reinvested at auction. Sales of A
agency securities commence six months after the lift off in the target federal funds rate
and reduce holdings to zero over five years. As a result of this policy action, SOMA
holdings peak at $3.6 trillion and total assets reach $4 trillion in September 2012. The
higher path for SOMA under Alternative A postpones the normalization of the size of the
balance sheet relative to the baseline.
For the scenario that corresponds to Alternative C, we assume that the Committee
continues to reinvest the proceeds from maturing Treasury securities at auction and
reinvests payments of principal from agency securities in Treasury securities using the
Desk’s current maturity distribution for purchases. Reinvestment of principal from
maturing or prepaying securities ends at the same time as in the baseline. Likewise, sales
of agency securities under Alternative C commence at the same time as in the baseline,
7 Given the maturity schedule for agency debt securities, the volume of sales necessary to reduce
holdings of these securities to zero over the five-year period is minimal.
8 The tools to drain reserve balances (reverse repurchase agreements and the Term Deposit Facility) are
not modeled in any of the scenarios presented. Use of these tools would result in a shift in the composition
of Federal Reserve liabilities—a decline in reserve balances and a corresponding increase in term reverse
repurchase agreements or term deposits—but would not produce an overall change in the size of the
balance sheet.
9 The assumed timing of the normalization of the size of the balance sheet depends importantly on the
assumed level of reserve balances that is consistent with the conduct of monetary policy, which we take as
$25 billion. A higher level of such reserve balances would, all else equal, lead to an earlier normalization
of the size of the balance sheet.
Page 29 of 50

--- Page 32 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
and these sales also last for five years. However, because the portfolio is made up of
relatively shorter-term Treasury securities under Alternative C than in the baseline, the
pace at which securities roll off the portfolio is a bit faster. The normalization of the size
of the balance sheet occurs in March 2017, twelve months sooner than in the baseline.
Compared with the August Tealbook baseline projection, total assets in the
current projections do not begin to decline noticeably until March 2014, thirteen months
later than the August baseline, because of the projected later lift off of the target federal
funds rate, which determines when reinvestment of principal is assumed to cease and
when asset sales are assumed to begin. For Alternative C, the path for total assets
roughly parallels that of the August Tealbook baseline. Under Alternative B, the
Treasury portfolio has a longer weighted average maturity and therefore runs off more
s
e slowly than in the August Tealbook. Finally, the path for total assets under Alternative
v
i
t
a A remains noticeably above the trajectory in the August Tealbook because of the large
n
r
e scale asset purchase program. From June 2018 onward, the paths for total assets in the
t
l
A
current projections align with the path in the August Tealbook.
Consistent with the higher level of assets, on the liability side of the balance sheet,
the forecasted paths for reserve balances are higher in the current projections than in the
previous Tealbook until reserve balances fall to $25 billion. Under Alternative A, reserve
balances peak at $2.7 trillion—roughly $1 trillion higher than in all other scenarios—by
the end of the large scale asset purchase program. Subsequently, the path for reserve
balances under Alternative A falls to $25 billion in May 2018—three months later than
under Alternative B and fifteen months later than under Alternative C.
In the scenario corresponding to Alternative B, the monetary base is projected to
start contracting in the fourth quarter of 2012 and it continues to contract through the
second quarter of 2018, reflecting the decline in reserve balances. Starting in the middle
of 2018, after reserve balances are assumed to have stabilized at $25 billion, the monetary
base expands again, in line with the growth of Federal Reserve capital and notes in
circulation.
Page 30 of 50

--- Page 33 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
Growth Rates for the Monetary Base
Memo :
Date Alternative B Alternative A Alternative C August
Tealbook
Percent, annual rate
Monthly
Aug-10 -2.4 -2.4 -2.4 -2.4
Sep-10 -10.2 -10.2 -10.2 -10.2
Oct-10 -9.8 -9.8 -9.8 -9.8
Nov-10 3.2 3.2 3.2 3.2
Dec-10 16.8 16.8 16.8 16.8
Jan-11 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3
Feb-11 57.6 57.6 57.6 57.6
s
Mar-11 97.8 97.8 97.8 97.8 e
v
Apr-11 74.4 74.4 74.4 74.4 t i
a
n
May-11 42.1 42.1 42.1 42.1 r
e
Jun-11 35.9 35.9 35.9 35.9 l t
A
Jul-11 27.0 27.0 27.0 26.9
Aug-11 3.6 3.6 3.6 16.2
Sep-11 -10.3 -9.9 -10.2 -0.5
Oct-11 2.2 23.4 1.0 -2.9
Nov-11 15.2 55.3 12.1 10.2
Dec-11 4.5 42.2 0.7 -1.0
Quarterly
2010 Q3 -6.4 -6.4 -6.4 -6.4
2010 Q4 -3.2 -3.2 -3.2 -3.2
2011 Q1 36.8 36.8 36.8 36.8
2011 Q2 69.4 69.4 69.4 69.4
2011 Q3 21.4 21.5 21.5 25.5
2011 Q4 2.7 23.4 1.2 2.9
2012 Q1 12.5 49.4 8.6 6.6
2012 Q2 7.7 39.1 4.2 3.9
Annual - Q4 to Q4
2009 52.5 52.5 52.5 52.5
2010 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9
2011 35.9 42.9 35.4 37.3
2012 5.0 37.0 2.6 2.3
2013 -1.2 -1.2 -1.2 -12.5
2014 -4.9 -8.3 -9.4 -15.4
2015 -9.3 -13.2 -15.0 -22.1
Note: Not seasonally adjusted.
Page 31 of 50

--- Page 34 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
DEBT, BANK CREDIT, AND MONEY FORECASTS
Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to increase at an annual rate of
about 5 percent over the second half of the year, driven by significant expansion in
federal government debt and a modest rise in private nonfinancial debt. Over 2012 and
2013, domestic nonfinancial sector debt is expected to rise at about a 4½ percent pace, on
average, led by 8 percent growth in government debt (federal and state and local).
Nonfinancial business debt is forecasted to rise at a moderate pace over the projection
period, in part reflecting further increases in capital expenditures. Despite low mortgage
rates, home mortgage debt is projected to contract further in 2011 and then to be about
flat through 2013. The outlook for mortgage debt reflects the expected continued
weakness in the housing sector and tight lending standards that are anticipated to ease
s
e only slowly. Consumer credit is projected to post small gains this quarter and next,
v
i
a t limited by tepid growth in consumer durables expenditures, but then to gradually
n
r
e accelerate over the remainder of the forecast period.
t
l
A
Commercial bank credit is expected to increase modestly over the second half of
2011, supported by a moderate expansion in banks’ securities holdings and somewhat
weaker growth in loans. Core loans—which include commercial and industrial (C&I)
loans, real estate loans, and consumer loans—are expected to expand very slowly until
the middle of 2012. The sluggish expansion in core loans reflects weakness in real estate
lending that partially offsets moderate gains in C&I and consumer loans against the
backdrop of ongoing balance sheet adjustments, still-stringent lending standards, and a
lack of loan demand from high-quality borrowers. Over the rest of the forecast period,
however, these restraining factors are expected to abate, supporting a gradual acceleration
of bank credit. C&I loans are projected to increase steadily through 2013 as a result of a
continued rise in outlays on equipment and software as well as a further gradual easing of
banks’ lending standards and terms for such loans. In contrast, lending to businesses
backed by commercial real estate is expected to contract through 2013, primarily
reflecting poor market fundamentals and the weak credit quality of existing loans that is
projected to improve only slowly over time. Turning to household lending, residential
real estate loans are expected to remain about flat through 2012 and to edge up in 2013
amid continued weakness in housing demand and relatively tight lending standards.
Consumer loans are projected to increase modestly through 2012 and to strengthen over
the rest of the forecast horizon, driven largely by a pickup in spending on consumer
Page 32 of 50

--- Page 35 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
durables. Banks’ securities holdings are anticipated to expand at a moderate pace
through the forecast period.
After growing rapidly in July and August, mostly because of factors that are
expected to reverse eventually (as discussed in the Financial Developments section in
Tealbook Book A), M2 is projected to grow at an annual rate of about 2½ percent over
the forecast period. This forecast assumes that households, institutional investors, and
asset managers slowly shift their portfolios away from M2 assets and toward riskier
assets outside of M2 as the economic recovery gains traction. However, continued
turmoil in global financial markets could slow projected flows out of monetary assets and
into riskier investments over the next several months. Within M2, liquid deposits are
projected to expand at a moderate pace over the forecast period, while retail money
s
market mutual funds and small time deposits are anticipated to contract. Currency is e
v
i
t
expected to expand at around its long-run average rate over the forecast period. a
n
r
e
t
l
A
Page 33 of 50

--- Page 36 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
M2 Growth Rates
(percent, seasonally adjusted annual rate)
Monthly Growth Rates Tealbook Forecast*
Jan-11 3.3
Feb-11 8.4
Mar-11 3.8
Apr-11 4.8
May-11 7.5
Jun-11 12.2
Jul-11 26.6
Aug-11 29.8
s
e Sep-11 3.9
v
i
a t Oct-11 -2.1
n
r Nov-11 -2.2
e
t
A l Dec-11 -2.1
Quarterly Growth Rates
2011 Q1 5.0
2011 Q2 6.4
2011 Q3 19.8
2011 Q4 2.7
Annual Growth Rates
2010 3.2
2011 8.7
2012 1.9
2013 3.2
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the
Tealbook forecast. Actual data through August 2011; projections thereafter.
Page 34 of 50

--- Page 37 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
DIRECTIVE
The August directive appears below. Drafts for a September directive
corresponding to each of the three policy alternatives appear on subsequent pages. The
directive for Alternative A would instruct the Desk to purchase longer-term Treasury
securities to increase the total face value of domestic securities holdings to approximately
$3.6 trillion. The Directive for Alternative B would instruct the Desk to take appropriate
steps to purchase $400 billion of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 to 30
years and to sell an equal amount of existing Treasury holdings with remaining maturities
of 3 years or less so as to increase the average maturity of the SOMA portfolio while
leaving the total face value of domestic securities in the SOMA about unchanged. The
Directives for Alternatives A and B also would instruct the Desk to continue the current
practice of rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues at auction, but would e s
v
i
instruct the Desk to reinvest principal payments from agency MBS in longer-term t
a
n
Treasury securities. The directive for Alternative C would instruct the Desk to keep the e r
t
l
total face value of domestic securities holdings at approximately $2.6 trillion and to A
continue the current policy of reinvesting principal payments.
August 2011 FOMC Directive
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to 1/4 percent. The Committee also directs the
Desk to maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments on all domestic
securities in the System Open Market Account in Treasury securities in order to maintain
the total face value of domestic securities at approximately $2.6 trillion. The System
Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of
ongoing developments regarding the System's balance sheet that could affect the
attainment over time of the Committee's objectives of maximum employment and price
stability.
Page 35 of 50

--- Page 38 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
September 2011 FOMC Directive — Alternative A
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to 1/4 percent. The Committee directs the Desk
to purchase, by the end of September 2012, longer-term Treasury securities with a
total face value of $1 trillion in order to increase the total face value of domestic
securities in the System Open Market Account to approximately $3.6 trillion. The
Committee also directs the Desk to maintain its existing policy of rolling over maturing
Treasury securities into new issues and to reinvest principal payments on all agency
securities in the System Open Market Account in longer-term Treasury securities. The
s
e System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee
v
i
a t informed of ongoing developments regarding the System's balance sheet that could affect
n
r
e the attainment over time of the Committee's objectives of maximum employment and
t
l
A
price stability.
Page 36 of 50

--- Page 39 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
6HSWHPEHU 2011 FOMC Directive — Alternative B
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to 1/4 percent. The Committee directs the Desk
to purchase, by the end of June 2012, Treasury securities with remaining maturities
of approximately 6 years to 30 years with a total face value of $400 billion, and to
sell Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less with a total face
value of $400 billion. The Committee also directs the Desk to maintain its existing
policy of rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues and to reinvest
principal payments on all agency securities in the System Open Market Account in
Treasury securities with remaining maturities of approximately 6 years to 30 years in e s
v
i
order to maintain the total face value of domestic securities at approximately $2.6 trillion. t
a
n
The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee e r
t
l
informed of ongoing developments regarding the System's balance sheet that could affect A
the attainment over time of the Committee's objectives of maximum employment and
price stability.
OR
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to 1/4 percent. The Committee directs the Desk
to purchase approximately $45 billion (face value) per month of Treasury securities
with remaining maturities of approximately 6 years to 30 years, and to sell
approximately the same amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of
3 years or less. The Committee also directs the Desk to maintain its existing policy of
rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues and to reinvest principal
payments on all agency securities in the System Open Market Account in Treasury
securities with remaining maturities of approximately 6 years to 30 years in order to
maintain the total face value of domestic securities at approximately $2.6 trillion. The
System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee
informed of ongoing developments regarding the System's balance sheet that could affect
the attainment over time of the Committee's objectives of maximum employment and
price stability.
Page 37 of 50

--- Page 40 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
September 2011 FOMC Directive — Alternative C
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to 1/4 percent. The Committee also directs the
Desk to maintain its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments on all domestic
securities in the System Open Market Account in Treasury securities in order to maintain
the total face value of domestic securities at approximately $2.6 trillion. The System
Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of
ongoing developments regarding the System's balance sheet that could affect the
s attainment over time of the Committee's objectives of maximum employment and price
e
v
t i stability.
a
n
r
e
l
t
A
Page 38 of 50

--- Page 41 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
Explanatory Notes
A. Measures of the Equilibrium Real Rate
The concepts of the equilibrium real rate reported in the exhibit “Equilibrium Real
Federal Funds Rate,” are defined as the level of the real federal funds rate that is consistent with
output at potential within a specified time horizon. The short-run equilibrium rate is defined as
the rate that would close the output gap in twelve quarters given the corresponding model’s
projection of the economy. The medium-run concept is the value of the real federal funds rate
projected to prevail in seven years, under the assumption that monetary policy acts to bring actual
and potential output into line in the short run and then keeps them equal thereafter.
Measure Description
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is
Single-equation based on an estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current
Model value of the output gap and its lagged values as well as the lagged values of
the real federal funds rate.
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for six
Small
variables: the output gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus,
Structural
the trend growth rate of output, the real bond yield, and the real federal
Model
funds rate.
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using EDO—an estimated dynamic-
stochastic-general-equilibrium (DSGE) model of the U.S. economy— s
e
EDO Model depend on data for major spending categories, prices and wages, and the t
o
federal funds rate as well as the model’s structure and estimate of the output N
gap. y
r
o
t
a
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale n
a
econometric model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of p l
FRB/US Model x
economic factors, some of which take the form of projected values of the E
model’s exogenous variables.
Two measures are presented based on the FRB/US and the EDO models.
Tealbook- Both models are matched to the extended Tealbook forecast. Model
consistent simulations determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the
output gap conditional on the extended baseline.
Page 39 of 50

--- Page 42 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
Measure Description
Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) reflect investors’
expectations of the future path of real interest rates. The TIPS-based
measure of the equilibrium real rate is constructed using the seven-year-
TIPS-based ahead instantaneous real forward rate derived from TIPS yields as of the
Factor Model Tealbook publication date. This forward rate is adjusted to remove
estimates of the term and liquidity premiums based on a three-factor,
arbitrage-free term-structure model applied to TIPS yields, nominal yields,
and inflation.
The actual real federal funds rate is constructed as the difference between the federal
funds rate and the trailing four-quarter change in the core PCE price index. The federal funds rate
is specified as the target federal funds rate on the Tealbook Book B publication date.
Estimates of the real federal funds rate depend on the proxies for expected inflation used.
The table below shows estimates of the real federal funds rates using alternative proxies: lagged
core PCE inflation, which is used to construct the actual real federal funds rate shown in the table
that displays the r* measures; lagged four-quarter headline PCE inflation; and projected four-
quarter headline PCE inflation beginning with the next quarter. The table also displays the
Tealbook-consistent FRB/US-based measure of the short-run equilibrium real rate and the
average of the projected real federal funds rate over the next twelve quarters using each of the
different proxies for expected inflation.
Tealbook-consistent
Projected real
Actual real federal FRB/US-based
Proxy used for funds rate
e s funds rate measure of the
t expected inflation (twelve-quarter-
o (current value) equilibrium real funds
N ahead average)
rate (current value)
y
r
o
t Lagged core inflation 1.1 3.5 1.4
a
n
a Lagged headline
l
p inflation 2.4 3.7 1.5
x
E
Projected headline
inflation 1.0 3.4 1.2
Page 40 of 50

--- Page 43 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
B. Analysis of Policy Paths and Confidence Intervals
RULE SPECIFICATIONS
For the following rules,݅ denotes the federal funds rate for quarter t, while the right-
௧
hand-side variables include the staff’s projection of trailing four-quarter core PCE inflation (ߨ ),
௧
inflation two and three quarters ahead (ߨ and ߨ ), the output gap in the current period and
௧ାଶ|௧ ௧ାଷ|௧
one quarter ahead ( ݕ െ ݕכ and ݕ െ ݕכ ), and the forecast of three-quarter-ahead annual
௧ ௧ ௧ାଵ|௧ ௧ାଵ|௧
average GDP growth relative to potential (Δସݕ െ Δସݕכ ), and π* denotes an assumed value
௧ାଷ|௧ ௧ାଷ|௧
of policymakers’ long-run inflation objective. The outcome-based and forecast-based rules were
estimated using real-time data over the sample 1988:12006:4; each specification was chosen
using the Bayesian information criterion. Each rule incorporates a 75 basis point shift in the
intercept, specified as a sequence of 25 basis point increments during the first three quarters of
1998. The first two simple rules were proposed by Taylor (1993, 1999). The prescriptions of the
first-difference rule do not depend on assumptions regarding r* or the level of the output gap; see
Orphanides (2003).
݅ ൌ 1.20݅ െ 0.39݅ ൅0.19ሾ1.17 ൅ 1.73ߨ
௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ିଶ ௧
Outcome-based rule
൅ 3.66ሺݕ െ ݕכሻെ2.72ሺݕ െݕכ ሻሿ
௧ ௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ିଵ
݅ ൌ 1.18݅ െ 0.38݅ ൅ 0.20ሾ0.98 ൅ 1.72ߨ
௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ିଶ ௧ାଶ|௧
Forecast-based rule
൅2.29൫ݕ െ ݕכ ൯െ 1.37ሺݕ െݕכ ሻሿ
௧ାଵ|௧ ௧ାଵ|௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ିଵ
Taylor (1993) rule ݅ ൌ 2൅ߨ ൅0.5ሺߨ െ ߨכሻ൅0.5ሺݕ െ ݕכሻ
௧ ௧ ௧ ௧ ௧
s
Taylor (1999) rule ݅ ൌ 2൅ߨ ൅0.5ሺߨ െ ߨכሻ൅ሺݕ െ ݕכሻ t e
௧ ௧ ௧ ௧ ௧ o
N
First-difference rule ݅ ൌ ݅ ൅ 0.5൫ߨ െߨכ൯൅0.5ሺ߂ସݕ െ ߂ସݕכ ሻ y
௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ାଷ|௧ ௧ାଷ|௧ ௧ାଷ|௧ r
o
t
a
n
FRB/US MODEL SIMULATIONS
l
a
p
x
E
Prescriptions from the outcome-based rule are computed using dynamic simulations of
the FRB/US model, implemented as though the rule were followed starting at this FOMC
meeting. The dotted line labeled “Previous Tealbook” is based on the current specification of the
policy rule, applied to the previous Tealbook projection. Confidence intervals are based on
stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model with shocks drawn from the estimated residuals over
19692008.
Page 41 of 50

--- Page 44 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
INFORMATION FROM FINANCIAL MARKETS
The expected funds rate path is based on quotes for federal funds and Eurodollar futures
as well as implied three-month forward rates from swaps, and the confidence intervals for this
path are constructed using prices of interest rate caps. The computations use the staff’s baseline
assumptions about term premiums.
NEAR-TERM PRESCRIPTIONS OF SIMPLE POLICY RULES
These prescriptions are calculated using Tealbook projections for inflation and the output
gap. The first-difference rule, the estimated outcome-based rule, and the estimated forecast-based
rule include the lagged policy rate as a right-hand-side variable. When the Tealbook is published
early in the quarter, the lines denoted “Previous Tealbook” report rule prescriptions based on the
previous Tealbook’s staff outlook, jumping off from the actual value of the lagged funds rate in
the previous quarter. When the Tealbook is published late in the quarter, the lines denoted
“Previous Tealbook Outlook” report rule prescriptions based on the previous Tealbook’s staff
outlook, but jumping off from the average value for the policy rate thus far this quarter
REFERENCES
Taylor, John B. (1993). “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195214.
————— (1999). “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B.
Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules. University of Chicago Press, pp. 319341.
s
e
t
o Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor
N
Rule,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (July), pp. 9831022.
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
Page 42 of 50

--- Page 45 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
C. Long-Run Projections of the Balance Sheet and Monetary Base
This explanatory note presents the assumptions underlying the projections provided in the
section titled “Long-Run Projections of the Balance Sheet and Monetary Base,” as well as
projections for each major component of the balance sheet.
GENERAL ASSUMPTIONS
The balance sheet projections are constructed at a monthly frequency from September
2011 to December 2020. The few balance sheet items that are not discussed below are assumed
to be constant over the projection period at the level observed on August 31, 2011. The
projections for all major asset and liability categories under each scenario are summarized in the
tables that follow the bullet points.
The Tealbook projection assumes that the target federal funds rate begins to increase in
September 2014, thirteen months later than in the August Tealbook. The balance sheet
projections assume that no use of short-term draining tools is necessary to achieve the projected
path for the federal funds rate.1
ASSETS
Treasury Securities, Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS), and Agency Debt
Securities
 The assumptions under Alternative B are:
o Beginning in October 2011, the FOMC is assumed to sell $400 billion in par
s
e
value of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less and to t
o
purchase the same par amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of N
y
6 years or more. This activity takes place over 9 months. It is also assumed that r
o
t
the FOMC will reinvest the proceeds from principal repayments from its agency a
n
securities holdings into Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 years a
l
p
or more, while Treasury securities are rolled over at auction. x
E
o Principal payments from Treasury securities and agency MBS and agency debt
securities are reinvested in longer-term Treasury securities until March 2014—
six months prior to the assumed increase in the target federal funds rate.2
o The Federal Reserve begins to sell agency MBS and agency debt securities in
March 2015, roughly six months after the assumed date of the first increase in the
1 If term deposits or reverse repurchase agreements were used to drain reserves prior to raising the
federal funds rate, the composition of liabilities would change: Reserve balances would fall as term
deposits and reverse repurchase agreements rose. Presumably, these draining tools would be wound down
as the balance sheet returned to its steady state growth path, so that the projected paths for Treasury
securities presented in the Tealbook remain valid.
2 Projected prepayments of agency MBS reflect interest rates as of September 14, 2011.
Page 43 of 50

--- Page 46 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
target federal funds rate. Holdings of agency securities are reduced over five
years and reach zero by February 2020.
o For agency MBS, the rate of prepayment is based on estimates of housing market
factors from one of the program’s investment managers and interest rate
projections from the Tealbook. The projected rate of prepayment is sensitive to
these underlying assumptions.
 In the scenario corresponding to Alternative A, the Committee is assumed to purchase an
additional $1 trillion of longer-term Treasury securities over twelve months. In addition,
it is assumed that the principal payments on agency MBS and agency debt securities are
reinvested in longer-term Treasury securities, while Treasury securities that mature are
reinvested at auction.
 In the scenario corresponding to Alternative C, principal payments from Treasury
securities continue to be reinvested at auction and principal payments from agency MBS
and agency debt securities are reinvested in Treasury securities using the Desk’s current
maturity distribution for purchases.
 Because current and expected near-term rates are below the average coupon rate on
outstanding Treasury securities, the market value at which these securities are purchased
will generally exceed their face value. As a result, although the par value of securities
holdings remains constant under Alternative B, total assets, which include the premiums
associated with the securities, will rise by about $50 billion. Reserve balances will
increase by the same amount.
 The lower paths for interest rates under the scenarios corresponding to Alternatives A and
B implies more MBS prepayments and therefore reduced MBS holdings over the forecast
s
e
t period relative to Alternative C. The lower paths for interest rates also implies that
o
N
purchases of Treasury securities in Alternatives A and B will be made at prices that
y
r include a premium above their face value that exceeds the premium under Alternative C.
o
t
a
n  In all scenarios, a minimum level of $25 billion is set for reserve balances. Once reserve
a
p l balances drop to this level, the Desk first purchases Treasury bills to maintain this level
x
E going forward. Purchases of bills continue until these securities comprise one-third of the
Federal Reserve’s total Treasury security holdings–about the average share prior to the
crisis. Once this level is reached, the Federal Reserve buys notes and bonds in addition to
bills to maintain an approximate composition of the portfolio of one-third bills and two-
thirds coupon securities.
Liquidity Programs and Credit Facilities
 Loans through the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) peaked at $48
billion in December 2009. Credit extended through this facility declines to zero by the
end of 2015, reflecting loan maturities and prepayments.
 The assets held by TALF LLC remain at about $1 billion through 2014 before declining
to zero the following year. Assets held by TALF LLC consist of investments of
Page 44 of 50

--- Page 47 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
commitment fees collected by the LLC and the U.S. Treasury’s initial funding. In this
projection, the LLC does not purchase any asset-backed securities received by the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York in connection with a decision of a borrower to not
repay a TALF loan.
 The assets held by Maiden Lane LLC and Maiden Lane III LLC decline gradually over
time. The assets of Maiden Lane II LLC are assumed to be constant at the level as of
August 31, 2011; sales of assets in the LLC’s portfolio is assumed to resume after the
first increase in the target federal funds rate, and holdings gradually fall to zero by June
2015.
LIABILITIES AND CAPITAL
 Federal Reserve notes in circulation grow in line with the staff forecast for money stock
currency through the last quarter of 2013. Afterwards, Federal Reserve notes in
circulation grow at the same rate as nominal GDP, as projected in the extended Tealbook
projection.
 Over the next six months, the level of reverse repurchase agreements is assumed to
decline to $70 billion, about the average level observed over the past three years.
 The U.S. Treasury’s General Account (TGA) follows the staff forecast through
December 2011.3 Then, the TGA slowly drops back to its historical target level of $5
billion by March 2012 as it is assumed that the Treasury will implement a new cash
management system and invest funds in excess of $5 billion. The TGA remains constant
at $5 billion over the remainder of the forecast period.
 We maintain the Supplementary Financing Account (SFA) balance at its current level of
s
e
zero throughout the forecast. t
o
N
 Federal Reserve capital grows 15 percent per year, in line with the average rate of the
y
r
past ten years. o
t
a
n
 In general, increases in the level of Federal Reserve assets are matched by higher levels a
l
p
of reserve balances. Increases in the levels of liability items, such as Federal Reserve x
E
notes in circulation or other liabilities, or increases in the level of Reserve Bank capital,
drain reserve balances. When increases in these liability or capital items would otherwise
cause reserve balances to fall below $25 billion, purchases of Treasury securities are
assumed in order to maintain that level of reserve balances.
 In the event that a Federal Reserve Bank’s earnings fall short of the amount necessary to
cover operating costs, pay dividends, and equate surplus to capital paid-in, a deferred
asset will be recorded. This deferred asset is recorded in lieu of reducing the Reserve
3 The staff forecast for end-of-month U.S. Treasury operating cash balances includes forecasts of both
the TGA and balances associated with the U.S. Treasury’s Tax and Loan program. Because balances
associated with the Tax and Loan program are only $2 billion, for the time being, this forecast is used as a
proxy for the level of TGA balances.
Page 45 of 50

--- Page 48 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
Bank’s capital and is reported on the liability side of the balance sheet as “Interest on
Federal Reserve notes due to U.S. Treasury.” This liability takes on a positive value
when weekly cumulative earnings have not yet been distributed to the Treasury, while
this liability takes on a negative value when earnings fall short of the expenses listed
above. In the projections, System-wide earnings are always sufficient to cover these
expenses and this line item is set to zero.
s
e
t
o
N
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
Page 46 of 50

--- Page 49 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Alternative A
Billions of dollars
Aug 31, 2011 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
Total assets 2,857 3,946 3,563 2,512 1,785 1,987
Selected assets
Liquidity programs for financial firms 0 0 0 0 0 0
Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 0 0 0 0 0 0
Lending through other credit facilities 12 4 0 0 0 0
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 12 4 0 0 0 0
Support for specific institutions 50 48 34 18 7 4
Credit extended to AIG 0 0 0 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, 50 48 34 18 7 4
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC
Securities held outright 2,647 3,639 3,334 2,348 1,660 1,879
U.S. Treasury securities 1,652 2,982 2,828 2,039 1,550 1,879
Agency debt securities 110 77 39 16 2 0
Agency mortgage-backed securities 885 579 468 293 108 0
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1 1 1 0 0 0
Total other assets 148 254 193 145 117 104
s
e
t
o
N
Total liabilities 2,806 3,876 3,470 2,389 1,622 1,772
y
r
Selected liabilities o
t
a
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 996 1,080 1,212 1,361 1,504 1,654 n
a
l
Reverse repurchase agreements 105 70 70 70 70 70 p
x
E
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,637 2,708 2,171 942 33 33
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 1,592 2,701 2,164 935 25 25
U.S. Treasury, General Account 42 5 5 5 5 5
U.S. Treasury, Supplementary Financing Account 0 0 0 0 0 0
Other balances 3 3 3 3 3 3
Interest on Federal Reserve Notes due 1 0 0 0 0 0
to U.S. Treasury
Total capital 52 70 93 123 162 215
Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
Page 47 of 50

--- Page 50 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Alternative B
Billions of dollars
Aug 31, 2011 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
Total assets 2,857 2,902 2,740 2,130 1,785 1,987
Selected assets
Liquidity programs for financial firms 0 0 0 0 0 0
Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 0 0 0 0 0 0
Lending through other credit facilities 12 4 0 0 0 0
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 12 4 0 0 0 0
Support for specific institutions 50 48 34 18 7 4
Credit extended to AIG 0 0 0 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, 50 48 34 18 7 4
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC
Securities held outright 2,647 2,639 2,532 1,975 1,667 1,886
U.S. Treasury securities 1,652 1,982 2,026 1,666 1,557 1,886
Agency debt securities 110 77 39 16 2 0
Agency mortgage-backed securities 885 579 468 293 108 0
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1 1 1 0 0 0
Total other assets 148 210 173 137 111 97
s
e
t
o
N
Total liabilities 2,806 2,832 2,648 2,007 1,622 1,772
y
r
o Selected liabilities
t
a
n Federal Reserve notes in circulation 996 1,080 1,212 1,361 1,504 1,654
a
l
p
Reverse repurchase agreements 105 70 70 70 70 70
x
E
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,637 1,664 1,349 560 33 33
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 1,592 1,657 1,341 553 25 25
U.S. Treasury, General Account 42 5 5 5 5 5
U.S. Treasury, Supplementary Financing Account 0 0 0 0 0 0
Other balances 3 3 3 3 3 3
Interest on Federal Reserve Notes due 1 0 0 0 0 0
to U.S. Treasury
Total capital 52 70 93 123 162 215
Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
Page 48 of 50

--- Page 51 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Alternative C
Billions of dollars
Aug 31, 2011 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
Total assets 2,857 2,826 2,533 1,694 1,785 1,987
Selected assets
Liquidity programs for financial firms 0 0 0 0 0 0
Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 0 0 0 0 0 0
Lending through other credit facilities 12 4 0 0 0 0
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 12 4 0 0 0 0
Support for specific institutions 50 48 34 18 7 4
Credit extended to AIG 0 0 0 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, 50 48 34 18 7 4
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC
Securities held outright 2,647 2,639 2,388 1,588 1,700 1,910
U.S. Treasury securities 1,652 1,950 1,840 1,252 1,580 1,910
Agency debt securities 110 77 39 16 2 0
Agency mortgage-backed securities 885 612 510 319 118 0
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1 1 1 0 0 0
Total other assets 148 135 109 88 77 73
s
e
t
o
N
Total liabilities 2,806 2,756 2,440 1,572 1,622 1,772
y
r
Selected liabilities o
t
a
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 996 1,080 1,212 1,361 1,504 1,654 n
a
l
Reverse repurchase agreements 105 70 70 70 70 70 p
x
E
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,637 1,589 1,141 125 33 33
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 1,592 1,581 1,134 117 25 25
U.S. Treasury, General Account 42 5 5 5 5 5
U.S. Treasury, Supplementary Financing Account 0 0 0 0 0 0
Other balances 3 3 3 3 3 3
Interest on Federal Reserve Notes due 1 0 0 0 0 0
to U.S. Treasury
Total capital 52 70 93 123 162 215
Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
Page 49 of 50

--- Page 52 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 15, 2011
(This page is intentionally blank.)
s
e
t
o
N
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
Page 50 of 50

# Tables

## Page_11_Table_1


| Table 1: Overview of Alternatives for the Sept. 21 FOMC Statement   |                   |                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                              |                                                                                                                                                        |    |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----|
| Key
Components                                                      |                   | August
Statement                                                                                                                                       | September Alternatives                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                              |                                                                                                                                                        |    |
|                                                                     |                   |                                                                                                                                                        | A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | B                            | C                                                                                                                                                      |    |
|                                                                     | Economic Activity |                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                              |                                                                                                                                                        |    |
| Economic
Recovery                                                   |                   | economic growth so far
this year has been
considerably slower than
Committee had expected                                                              | economic growth
remains quite slow                                                                                                                                                                                                  | economic growth remains slow |                                                                                                                                                        |    |
| Labor
Market                                                        |                   | indicators suggest
deterioration in overall
labor market conditions                                                                                    | indicators point to continuing weakness in overall labor market conditions, and
unemployment rate remains elevated                                                                                                                  |                              |                                                                                                                                                        |    |
| Temporary
Factors
Influencing
Recovery                              |                   | appear to account for only
some of the recent
weakness in economic
activity                                                                            | some recovery in sales of motor vehicles as
supply-chain disruptions eased                                                                                                                                                          |                              | sales of new motor
vehicles recovering after
auto manufacturers made
progress in restoring
supply chains and
increased production                      |    |
| Household
Spending                                                  |                   | has flattened out                                                                                                                                      | has been increasing at only a modest pace in recent
months                                                                                                                                                                          |                              | increased at a modest pace
in recent months                                                                                                            |    |
| Inflation                                                           |                   |                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                              |                                                                                                                                                        |    |
| Recent
Developments                                                 |                   | Inflation picked up earlier
in the year, mainly
reflecting higher prices for
some commodities and
imported goods, as well as
supply chain disruptions. | n.a.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | n.a.                         | Inflation picked up earlier
in the year, mainly
reflecting higher prices for
some commodities and
imported goods, as well as
supply chain disruptions. |    |
|                                                                     |                   | More recently, inflation has
moderated as prices of
energy and some
commodities have declined
from their earlier peaks.                                | Inflation has moderated since earlier in the year as
prices of energy and some commodities have
declined from their peaks.                                                                                                          |                              | More recently, inflation has
moderated as prices of
energy and some
commodities have declined
from their peaks.                                        |    |
| Longer-term
expectations                                            |                   | Longer-term inflation
expectations have remained
stable                                                                                                | Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable                                                                                                                                                                             |                              |                                                                                                                                                        |    |
| Longer-run Goals                                                    |                   |                                                                                                                                                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                              |                                                                                                                                                        |    |
| Inflation                                                           |                   | n.a.                                                                                                                                                   | The Committee judges
that inflation of 2 percent
as measured by the price
index for personal
consumption
expenditures is most
consistent, over the
longer run, with the dual
mandate.                                               | n.a.                         | n.a.                                                                                                                                                   |    |
| Employment                                                          |                   | n.a.                                                                                                                                                   | Currently, the Committee
projects that, in the
absence of further shocks
to the economy, the
unemployment rate would
converge over time to a
level around [5 to 6]
percent; this projection is
subject to considerable
uncertainty. | n.a.                         | n.a.                                                                                                                                                   |    |


## Page_12_Table_1


| Key
Components      |                                 | August
Statement                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | September Alternatives                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                      |    |
|---------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----|
|                     |                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | C                                                                                                                                                    |    |
|                     | Outlook                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                      |    |
| Economic Activity   |                                 | The Committee now
expects a somewhat
slower pace of recovery
over coming quarters
and anticipates that the
unemployment rate will
decline only gradually                                                                                                            | Committee continues to
expect some pickup in
pace of recovery over
coming quarters but
anticipates that the
unemployment rate will
decline only slowly                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | Committee continues to
expect some pickup in
pace of recovery over
coming quarters but
anticipates that the
unemployment rate will
decline only gradually                                                                                                         | Committee continues to expect
some pickup in pace of
recovery over coming quarters
and anticipates that the
unemployment rate will decline
gradually |    |
| Inflation           |                                 | The Committee also
anticipates that inflation
will settle, over coming
quarters, at or below
levels consistent with
the dual mandate as the
effects of past energy
and other commodity
price increases dissipate
further.                                           | The Committee also anticipates that inflation will settle, over coming quarters, at or
below levels consistent with the dual mandate as the effects of past energy and other
commodity price increases dissipate further.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                      |    |
|                     |                                 | the Committee will
continue to pay close
attention to the evolution
of inflation and inflation
expectations                                                                                                                                                         | the Committee will continue to pay close attention to the evolution of inflation and
inflation expectations                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                      |    |
|                     | Federal Funds Rate Target Range |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                      |    |
| Intermeeting
Period |                                 | 0 to ¼ percent                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 0 to ¼ percent                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                                                                                      |    |
| Forward Guidance    |                                 | Committee currently
anticipates that
economic conditions—
including low rates of
resource utilization and
a subdued outlook for
inflation over the
medium-term—are
likely to warrant
exceptionally low levels
for the federal funds rate
at least through mid­
2013 | Committee anticipates
that this exceptionally
low range for the federal
funds rate will be
appropriate at least as
long as unemployment
exceeds [ 7 ] percent,
inflation is projected to
remain at or below [ 2½ ]
percent in the medium
term, and longer-term
inflation expectations
continue to be well
anchored at mandate-
consistent levels. On the
basis of currently
available information,
the Committee expects
these conditions to
prevail [ at least through
2014 ]. | Committee currently anticipates that economic
conditions—including low rates of resource utilization and
a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium-term—are
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal
funds rate at least through mid-2013 |                                                                                                                                                      |    |


## Page_13_Table_1


| Key
Components             | August
Statement                                                                                                                   | September Alternatives                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|----------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                            |                                                                                                                                    | A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | B                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | C                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| SOMA Portfolio Policy      |                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Asset
purchases/holdings   | n.a.                                                                                                                               | The Committee decided
to expand its holdings of
longer-term Treasury
securities by [ by a
further $1 trillion ] at a
pace of $80 to $85
billion over the next [12]
months.                                                           | The Committee intends to
purchase, over 9 months,
$400 billion of Treasury
securities with maturities of
6 to 30 years and to sell an
equal amount with
maturities of 3 years or less.
OR
The Committee is initiating
purchases of Treasury
securities with remaining
maturities of 6 years to 30
years at a pace of about $45
billion per month and will
sell Treasury securities with
remaining maturities of 3
years or less at the same
pace; the Committee
anticipates continuing this
maturity-extension program
for up to 9 months. | n.a.                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Reinvestment
Policy        | maintain existing
reinvestment policy                                                                                              | maintain existing policy
of rolling over maturing
Treasury securities at
auction; reinvest MBS
principal in longer-term
Treasury securities                                                                                          | maintain existing policy of
rolling over maturing
Treasury securities at
auction; reinvest MBS
principal in Treasury
securities with remaining
maturities of 6 to 30 years                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | maintain existing
reinvestment policy                                                                                                                                                  |
| Future Policy Action       |                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Asset Purchases /
Holdings | will regularly review
size and composition of
securities holdings and
is prepared to adjust as
appropriate                         | will regularly review the
pace of its securities
purchases and the overall
size of the purchase
program in light of
incoming information
and will adjust the
program as needed to
best foster maximum
employment and price
stability | will regularly review the
pace of its securities
transactions and the overall
size of the maturity
extension program in light
of incoming information
and will adjust the program
as needed to best foster
maximum employment and
price stability                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | n.a.                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Overall                    | will continue to assess
the economic outlook in
light of incoming
information and is
prepared to employ
these tools as
appropriate | will continue to assess
the economic outlook in
light of incoming
information and is
prepared to employ its
policy tools as
appropriate                                                                                              | will continue to assess the
economic outlook in light of
incoming information and is
prepared to employ its
policy tools as appropriate                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | will regularly assess the
implications of incoming
information for the economic
outlook and will employ its
policy tools as necessary to
foster maximum
employment and price
stability |