# 20111102_tealbook.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:40:16*
*Pages: 56, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that
material was received on a confidential basis. Redacted material is indicated by
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content. All redacted
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of
Information Act.
Content last modified 02/03/2017.

--- Page 2 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR)
Report to the FOMC
on Economic Conditions
and Monetary Policy
Book B
Monetary Policy:
Strategies and Alternatives
October 27, 2011
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
by the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

--- Page 3 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
Monetary Policy Strategies
s
e
i
g
With one exception, the staff’s estimates of short-run r*—the real federal funds e
t
a
rate that, if maintained, would return output to its potential in 12 quarters—did not change r
t
S
significantly over the intermeeting period. All of the estimates of the equilibrium real
federal funds rate remain negative and low by historical standards, and all except the EDO
model’s estimate of short-run r* are below the estimated actual real federal funds rate. As
shown in the first two columns of the table in the exhibit, “Equilibrium Real Federal
Funds Rate,” the estimates of short-run r* generated by the FRB/US model and the EDO
model that are conditioned on the staff’s outlook for the economy (that is, the “Tealbook-
consistent” measures) were unrevised, as the staff’s assessment of the medium-term
outlook for economic activity is little changed relative to September. The r* estimates
produced by these models based on their own projections declined slightly or were
unchanged; the estimate from the single-equation model was little changed as well. In
contrast, the estimate of r* from the small structural model fell 40 basis points. This
model places greater weight on its projections of the equity premium, which have
increased since the September Tealbook, inducing a relatively large drop in the model’s
forecast for aggregate demand.1
The staff’s outlook for inflation and resource utilization over the medium-term has
changed little over the intermeeting period. Consequently, policy prescriptions from
optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model are very similar to those reported in the
September Tealbook.2 This result is shown in the exhibit “Constrained vs. Unconstrained
Monetary Policy.” In these simulations, policymakers are assumed to place equal weights
on keeping headline PCE inflation close to a 2 percent inflation goal, on keeping the
unemployment rate close to the staff’s estimate of the effective natural rate of
unemployment, and on minimizing changes in the federal funds rate.
1 Although the staff projects higher stock prices this quarter than in the September Tealbook, the
equity premium forecasts of the small structural model are conditioned on stock prices in the third quarter of
2011, which are nearly 5 percent below their value in the previous Tealbook. These lower stock prices
translate into an increase in the model’s equity premium.
2 The staff’s baseline forecast incorporates the effects of the large-scale asset purchase program that
was completed at the end of June, as well as the effects of the maturity extension program announced in
September. As a result, these effects have been incorporated into the optimal policy simulations.
Page 1 of 54

--- Page 4 ---

Authorized for Public Release

--- Page 5 ---

Authorized for Public Release

--- Page 6 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
The simulations indicate that the optimal path for the federal funds rate does not
begin to rise appreciably above zero until the end of 2015, about the same time as in the
s previous Tealbook.3 By committing to keep the funds rate near zero for such a long
e
i
g
e stretch of time, optimal policy would promote a faster pace of economic recovery than
t
a
r under the baseline and somewhat higher inflation over the medium run.4 Specifically, the
t
S
unemployment rate would fall to 5 percent in 2016 (compared with 6 percent in the
baseline (not shown)), while headline inflation would average about 2¼ percent in the
latter half of the decade (compared with 1¾ percent in the baseline).
If the nominal funds rate could fall below zero, the optimal federal funds rate
would decline to minus 3 percent in the first quarter of 2013 and would not turn positive
until early in 2015. Under this unconstrained policy, the unemployment rate would fall
below the staff’s medium-run estimate of the effective natural rate of unemployment in
the third quarter of 2014—more than a year earlier than under the constrained policy—and
then settle around 5¼ percent by the middle of 2015. In contrast, the inflation outlook
through mid-decade is broadly similar under the unconstrained and constrained policies,
although inflation exceeds the assumed 2 percent goal a bit more in 2014 and 2015 under
the unconstrained policy. However, under the constrained policy, inflation stays above
target longer after 2016, and the credible promise to produce this somewhat elevated
future inflation helps boost inflation expectations and lower real rates in the early part of
the simulation.
As shown in the upper left panel of the exhibit “Policy Rules and Market-Based
Expectations for the Federal Funds Rate,” the expected funds rate implied by the
estimated outcome-based policy rule is little changed relative to the September Tealbook.
According to this rule, the funds rate is expected to move above its effective lower bound
in the third quarter of 2014 and then to rise to 3 percent by the end of 2016.5
3 Although the loss function uses headline inflation instead of core inflation, the real federal funds
rate shown in the upper right panel of the exhibit is calculated as the difference between the nominal funds
rate and a four-quarter moving average of core PCE inflation. Core PCE inflation is used to compute the
real rate because it provides a less volatile measure of inflation expectations than a four-quarter moving
average of headline inflation, and because it makes the results in this exhibit easier to compare with
measures of the real rate reported elsewhere.
4 These simulations assume that policymakers can credibly commit to a policy path that extends
many years into the future, conditional on underlying economic conditions unfolding as expected.
5 The confidence interval implies a 14 percent chance that the federal funds rate is above 25 basis
points this quarter. However, the estimated rule depends on the lagged federal funds rate, defined as the
actual policy rate observed in the previous quarter. If instead the lagged values used in generating these
Page 4 of 54

--- Page 7 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
Policy Rules and Market-Based Expectations for the Federal Funds Rate
s
e
FRB/US Model Simulations of Market-Based Expectations i
g
Estimated Outcome-Based Rule for the Federal Funds Rate e
Percent Percent t
8 8 8 8 r
a
Current Tealbook Current Tealbook t
S
Previous Tealbook Previous Tealbook
7 7 7 7
6 6 6 6
5 5 5 5
4 4 4 4
3 3 3 3
2 2 2 2
1 1 1 1
0 0 0 0
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Note: The staff baseline projection for the federal funds rate is derived from the outcome-based policy rule shown in
the top-left panel. The top-right panel depicts the mean path and confidence intervals of future federal funds rates
derived from market quotes as of October 26. In both panels, dark and light shadings represent the 70 and 90 percent
confidence intervals respectively. Explanatory Note B provides further background information.
Near-Term Prescriptions of Simple Policy Rules
Constrained Policy Unconstrained Policy
2011Q4 2012Q1 2011Q4 2012Q1
Taylor (1993) rule 0.81 0.86 0.81 0.86
Previous Tealbook 0.72 0.74 0.72 0.74
Taylor (1999) rule 0.13 0.13 -2.17 -2.09
Previous Tealbook 0.13 0.13 -2.37 -2.35
Estimated outcome-based rule 0.13 0.13 -0.12 -0.36
Previous Tealbook 0.13 0.13 -0.23 -0.57
Estimated forecast-based rule 0.13 0.13 -0.20 -0.58
Previous Tealbook 0.13 0.13 -0.30 -0.77
First-difference rule 0.13 0.13 0.03 -0.02
Previous Tealbook 0.13 0.13 -0.07 -0.14
Memo 2011Q4 2012Q1
Staff assumption 0.08 0.13
Fed funds futures 0.08 0.10
Median expectation of primary dealers 0.13 0.13
Blue Chip forecast (October 1, 2011) 0.10 0.10
Note: In calculating the near-term prescriptions of these simple policy rules, policymakers’ long-run inflation objective is
assumed to be 2 percent. Explanatory Note B provides further background information.
Page 5 of 54

--- Page 8 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
As shown to the right, information from financial markets suggests that investors’
expectations for the path of the federal funds rate also have changed little relative to the
s September Tealbook. Market participants expect the funds rate to remain within its
e
i
g
e current target range until mid-2013 before rising gradually to 2.4 percent by the end of
t
a
r 2016.
t
S
The lower panel of the exhibit provides near-term prescriptions from simple policy
rules.6 As shown in the left-hand columns, prescriptions for the federal funds rate from
most of the rules remain at or near the effective lower bound. The right-hand columns
display the prescriptions that would arise from these rules in the absence of the lower-
bound constraint.7 Because the staff foresees a modest improvement in the near-term
output gap, all of the unconstrained rules prescribe a slightly higher federal funds rate
compared with the September Tealbook.
probabilities had not been constrained by the effective lower bound from being negative in 2009 and 2010,
this probability would be negligible.
6 In contrast to the optimal control simulations, which use headline inflation in the policymakers’
objective function, the policy rule prescriptions use core inflation as the measure of inflation. This choice of
rule specification was made in light of the tendency for current and near-term core inflation rates to
outperform headline inflation rates as predictors of the medium-term behavior of headline inflation. Thus,
the use of headline inflation in the optimal control simulations and of core inflation in the policy rules are
both consistent with the notion that policymakers are concerned with the medium-term behavior of headline
inflation.
7 Prescriptions from the estimated outcome-based rule, the estimated forecast-based rule, and the
first-difference rule depend on the lagged federal funds rate, defined as the actual policy rate observed in the
previous quarter. If the lagged values used in generating the rule prescriptions had not been constrained by
the effective lower bound from becoming negative in 2009 and 2010, the prescriptions from all three rules
would be further below zero both in the fourth quarter of 2011 and the first quarter of 2012.
Page 6 of 54

--- Page 9 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
Monetary Policy Alternatives
This Tealbook presents four policy alternatives—labeled A1, A2, B, and C—for the
Committee’s consideration. As always, the Committee could mix components of the various
alternatives to construct its desired statement.
The alternatives provide a range of options regarding the management of the balance
sheet. Alternatives A1and B maintain the maturity extension program the Committee announced
at its September meeting and involve no additional balance sheet actions. In addition to the
maturity extension program, Alternative A2 introduces a new $600 billion asset-purchase
program consisting either entirely of longer-term Treasury securities or an equal mix of s
e
v
Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS). Alternative C announces a reduction t i
a
n
by half in the size of the maturity extension program and an intention to complete it sooner, by r
e
t
the end of March 2012 (which would involve a moderate slowing of the pace of purchases and A l
sales). All four alternatives maintain the Committee’s existing policies of reinvesting principal
payments on agency debt and MBS into MBS and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction.
The alternatives also provide a range of options regarding forward guidance for the future
path of the federal funds rate. Alternative B makes no substantive changes to the Committee’s
forward guidance, keeping the specification that economic conditions are likely to warrant
exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate “at least through mid-2013.” Alternative A1
proposes several options for lengthening the anticipated period of near-zero rates in order to
provide further policy accommodation. Specifically, it suggests either extending the date
through which the Committee projects it would keep the federal funds rate target unchanged to
“at least through mid-2014,” or instead using quantitative information on the economic
conditions that would be consistent with a commencement of tightening. Two possibilities for
characterizing these economic conditions are presented: One specifies an expected date for the
first increase in the target federal funds rate together with forecasts for unemployment and
inflation at that time; the other specifies conditional thresholds for unemployment and inflation
and indicates when the Committee expects one or both thresholds to be reached.1 Alternative C
shortens the projected time until the first increase in the target federal funds rate to the end of
1 These features of Alternative A1 reflect the illustrative language on clarifying forward guidance presented
in the memo “Approaches to Clarifying the Conditionality in the Committee’s Forward Guidance,” sent to the
Committee on September 12, 2011.
Page 7 of 54

--- Page 10 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
2012. When providing information on the timing of liftoff, both Alternatives B and C also offer
the possibility of changing the language of the conditional guidance so that it refers to a specific
number of quarters into the future rather than a particular date.
Alternative A2 raises the possibility of reducing the interest rate paid on required and
excess reserve balances from 25 basis points to 10 basis points in order to align those rates with
current and projected levels of overnight market rates.
Regarding the characterization of recent economic conditions, the first paragraph of each
alternative acknowledges the somewhat stronger tone of the data received over the intermeeting
period. However, alternatives A1, A2, and B attribute much of the recent improvement to a
reversal of temporary factors that had been dampening growth. All of the alternatives note that
s
e
v household spending has picked up in recent months and also the continuing weakness in the
i
t
a
n labor market; the tone of Alternative C is slightly more encouraging with respect to economic
r
e
t developments. Regarding inflation, Alternatives A1 and A2 state that it “has moderated” since
l
A
earlier in the year, while Alternative B repeats the language of the September statement, saying
that it “appears to have moderated.” Alternative C says that inflation appears to have moderated
“only somewhat.”
Turning to the outlook, alternatives A1, B, and C state that the Committee continues to
expect a “moderate” pace of growth over coming quarters, while alternative A2 indicates that the
Committee expects growth to be “relatively modest.” Alternatives A1, A2, and B note that the
Committee consequently anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline “only gradually;”
Alternative C offers a more positive tone by omitting “only” from this phrase. Alternatives A1,
A2, and B continue to highlight downside risks to the economic outlook, including strains in
global financial markets, although Alternative B no longer characterizes these risks as
“significant.” Alternative C drops the reference to downside risks. As in September,
Alternatives A1, A2, and B project that inflation will settle “at levels at or below those consistent
with the Committee’s dual mandate.” Alternative C modifies this projection to “levels consistent
with the Committee’s dual mandate.”
Page 8 of 54

--- Page 11 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
The following table shows key elements of the policy actions contained in the
alternatives. (Due to the complexity of the alternatives at this meeting, the comparisons of the
other aspects of the statements that are usually included in this table are omitted for ease of use.)
The table is followed by complete draft statements, then by a summary of the arguments for each
alternative.
Table 1: Overview of Alternatives for the November 2 FOMC Statement
November Alternatives
Selected September
Elements Statement
A1 A2 B C
s
e
v
Balance Sheet i
t
a
n
$400 billion; cut to $200 billion; r
MEP complete by unchanged unchanged unchanged complete by t e
l
end of June 2012 end of March 2012 A
payments of agency
debt and MBS into
Reinvestments agency MBS; unchanged unchanged unchanged unchanged
Treasuries into
Treasuries
$600 billion of
Treasuries
by end of Sept. 2012
Additional OR
none none none none
Purchases $300 billion each of
Treasuries and
agency MBS
by end of June 2012
Forward Guidance
at least through at least through at least through
First Option unchanged unchanged
mid-2013 mid-2014 2012
through end of 2014
and forecasts of at least for the next at least for the next
Second Option
unemployment and six to seven quarters four quarters
inflation at that time
at least as long as
unemployment and
inflation conditions
Third Option
hold; expect such
conditions to prevail
through end of 2014
Page 9 of 54

--- Page 12 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
SEPTEMBER FOMC STATEMENT
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in August indicates that
economic growth remains slow. Recent indicators point to continuing weakness in overall
labor market conditions, and the unemployment rate remains elevated. Household spending
has been increasing at only a modest pace in recent months despite some recovery in sales of
motor vehicles as supply-chain disruptions eased. Investment in nonresidential structures is
still weak, and the housing sector remains depressed. However, business investment in
equipment and software continues to expand. Inflation appears to have moderated since
earlier in the year as prices of energy and some commodities have declined from their peaks.
Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment
and price stability. The Committee continues to expect some pickup in the pace of recovery
over coming quarters but anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline only gradually
e s toward levels that the Committee judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. Moreover,
v
i there are significant downside risks to the economic outlook, including strains in global
t
a
n financial markets. The Committee also anticipates that inflation will settle, over coming
r
e quarters, at levels at or below those consistent with the Committee's dual mandate as the
t
l
A effects of past energy and other commodity price increases dissipate further. However, the
Committee will continue to pay close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation
expectations.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at
levels consistent with the dual mandate, the Committee decided today to extend the average
maturity of its holdings of securities. The Committee intends to purchase, by the end of June
2012, $400 billion of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years and
to sell an equal amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less.
This program should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and help make
broader financial conditions more accommodative. The Committee will regularly review the
size and composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as
appropriate.
4. To help support conditions in mortgage markets, the Committee will now reinvest principal
payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities. In addition, the Committee will maintain its existing policy of
rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction.
5. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of resource
utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are likely to warrant
exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013.
6. The Committee discussed the range of policy tools available to promote a stronger economic
recovery in a context of price stability. It will continue to assess the economic outlook in
light of incoming information and is prepared to employ its tools as appropriate.
Page 10 of 54

--- Page 13 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
NOVEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A1
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in August September
indicates that economic growth remains slow strengthened somewhat in the third quarter,
but the pickup was due predominantly to a reversal of the temporary factors that had
weighed on growth earlier in the year. Recent indicators point to continuing weakness in
overall labor market conditions, and the unemployment rate remains elevated. Household
spending has been increaseding at only a modest a somewhat faster pace in recent months
despite some recovery in sales of motor vehicles as supply-chain disruptions have eased.
However, Business investment in equipment and software has continueds to expand, but
investment in nonresidential structures is still weak and the housing sector remains
depressed. Inflation appears to have has moderated since earlier in the year as prices of
energy and some commodities have declined from their peaks. Longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment s
e
v
and price stability. The Committee continues to expect some pickup in the a moderate pace i
t
a
of recovery economic growth over coming quarters but and consequently anticipates that n
r
the unemployment rate will decline only gradually toward levels that the Committee judges e
t
l
to be consistent with its dual mandate. Moreover However, there are significant downside A
risks to the economic outlook, including strains in global financial markets. The Committee
also anticipates that inflation will settle, over coming quarters, at levels at or below those
consistent with the Committee's dual mandate as the effects of past energy and other
commodity price increases dissipate further. However, The Committee will continue to pay
close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation expectations.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at
levels consistent with the dual mandate, the Committee decided today to continue its
program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in
September. The Committee intends to purchase, by the end of June 2012, $400 billion of
Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years and to sell an equal
amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less. This program
should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and help make broader financial
conditions more accommodative. To help support conditions in mortgage markets, The
Committee will now is maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-
backed securities. In addition the Committee will maintain its existing policy and of rolling
over maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee will regularly review the size
and composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as
appropriate.
4. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent. and currently The Committee now anticipates that economic conditions—including
low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—
are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-
2013 mid-2014.
OR
Page 11 of 54

--- Page 14 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
4´. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent. and currently The Committee now anticipates that economic conditions—including
low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—
are likely to warrant this exceptionally low levels range for the federal funds rate at least
through mid-2013 through the end of 2014. On the basis of currently available
information, the Committee projects the unemployment rate to be about [ 6½ to 7 ]
percent and the inflation rate (as measured by the price index for Personal
Consumption Expenditures) to be around [ 1¾ to 2¼ ] percent at that time.
OR
4´´. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent. and currently The Committee anticipates that economic conditions—including low
rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are
likely to warrant this exceptionally low levels range for the federal funds rate will be
s appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate exceeds [ 7 ] percent, inflation (as
e
v measured by the price index for Personal Consumption Expenditures) is projected to be
i
t
a at or below [ 2½ ] percent in the medium term, and longer-term inflation expectations
n
e r continue to be well anchored. On the basis of currently available information, the
t
A l Committee expects these conditions to prevail through the end of 2014.
5. The Committee discussed the range of policy tools available will continue to assess the
economic outlook in light of incoming information and is prepared to employ its tools as
appropriate to promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability.
Page 12 of 54

--- Page 15 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
NOVEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A2
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in August September
indicates that economic growth remains slow strengthened somewhat in the third quarter,
but the pickup was due predominantly to a reversal of the temporary factors that had
weighed on growth earlier in the year. Recent indicators point to continuing weakness in
overall labor market conditions, and the unemployment rate remains elevated. Household
spending has been increaseding at only a modest a somewhat faster pace in recent months
despite some recovery in sales of motor vehicles as supply-chain disruptions have eased.
However, Business investment in equipment and software has continueds to expand, but
investment in nonresidential structures is still weak and the housing sector remains
depressed. Inflation appears to have has moderated since earlier in the year as prices of
energy and some commodities have declined from their peaks. Longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment s
e
v
and price stability. The Committee continues to expects some pickup in the pace of recovery i
t
a
economic growth over coming quarters to be relatively modest but and consequently n
r
anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline only gradually toward levels that the e
t
l
Committee judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. Moreover However, there are A
significant downside risks to the economic outlook, including strains in global financial
markets. The Committee also anticipates that inflation will settle, over coming quarters, at
levels at or below those consistent with the Committee's dual mandate as the effects of past
energy and other commodity price increases dissipate further. However, The Committee
will continue to pay close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation expectations.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at
levels consistent with the dual mandate, the Committee decided today to continue its
program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in
September. The Committee intends to purchase, by the end of June 2012, $400 billion of
Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years and to sell an equal
amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less. In addition, the
Committee intends to purchase a further [ $600 billion of longer-term Treasury
securities by the end of September 2012 | $300 billion of longer-term Treasury securities
and $300 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities by the end of June 2012 ]. This
These programs should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and help make
broader financial conditions more accommodative. To help support conditions in mortgage
markets, The Committee will now is maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting
principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities
in agency mortgage-backed securities. In addition the Committee will maintain its existing
policy and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee will
regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust
those holdings as appropriate.
4. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of resource
utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are likely to warrant
exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013.
Page 13 of 54

--- Page 16 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
5. The Committee discussed the range of policy tools available will continue to assess the
economic outlook in light of incoming information and is prepared to employ its tools as
appropriate to promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability.
Note: If policymakers decide it is appropriate to reduce the remuneration rate on reserve
balances, the Board of Governors would issue an accompanying statement that might read:
s
e In a related action, the Board of Governors voted today to reduce the interest rate paid on
v
i
t required and excess reserve balances from 25 basis points to 10 basis points effective with the
a
n
r reserve maintenance period that begins on November 17, 2011.
e
t
l
A
Page 14 of 54

--- Page 17 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
NOVEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in August September
indicates that economic growth remains slow strengthened somewhat in the third quarter,
reflecting in part a reversal of the temporary factors that had weighed on growth
earlier in the year. Nonetheless, recent indicators point to continuing weakness in overall
labor market conditions, and the unemployment rate remains elevated. Household spending
has been increaseding at only a modest a somewhat faster pace in recent months despite
some recovery in sales of motor vehicles as supply-chain disruptions have eased. However,
Business investment in equipment and software has continueds to expand, but investment in
nonresidential structures is still weak, and the housing sector remains depressed. Inflation
appears to have moderated since earlier in the year as prices of energy and some commodities
have declined from their peaks. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment
and price stability. The Committee continues to expect some pickup in the a moderate pace s
e
v
of recovery economic growth over coming quarters but and consequently anticipates that i
t
a
the unemployment rate will decline only gradually toward levels that the Committee judges n
r
to be consistent with its dual mandate. Moreover, there are significant downside risks to the e
t
l
economic outlook remain, including strains in global financial markets. The Committee also A
anticipates that inflation will settle, over coming quarters, at levels at or below those
consistent with the Committee's dual mandate as the effects of past energy and other
commodity price increases dissipate further. However, the Committee will continue to pay
close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation expectations.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at
levels consistent with the dual mandate, the Committee decided today to continue its
program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in
September. The Committee intends to purchase, by the end of June 2012, $400 billion of
Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years and to sell an equal
amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less. This program
should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and help make broader financial
conditions more accommodative. To help support conditions in mortgage markets, The
Committee will now is maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-
backed securities. In addition the Committee will maintain its existing policy and of rolling
over maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee will regularly review the size
and composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as
appropriate.
4. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of resource
utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are likely to warrant
exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least [ through mid-2013 | for the next
six to seven quarters ].
Page 15 of 54

--- Page 18 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
5. The Committee discussed the range of policy tools available will continue to assess the
economic outlook in light of incoming information and is prepared to employ its tools to
promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
Page 16 of 54

--- Page 19 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
NOVEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in August September
indicates that economic growth remains slow of late has been somewhat stronger than the
Committee had expected. Recent indicators point to continuing weakness in overall labor
market conditions, and Although the unemployment rate remains elevated, household
spending has been increaseding at only a modest a faster pace in recent months despite some
recovery in sales of motor vehicles as supply-chain disruptions have eased. However,
Business investment in equipment and software continues to expand, and investment in
nonresidential structures is still weak has increased. and The housing sector remains
depressed. Inflation appears to have moderated only somewhat since earlier in the year,
despite a decline in the as prices of energy and some commodities have declined from their
peaks. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum employment
and price stability. The Committee continues to expect some pickup in the a moderate pace s
e
v
of recovery growth over coming quarters but and anticipates that the unemployment rate i
t
a
will decline only gradually toward levels that the Committee judges to be consistent with its n
r
dual mandate. Moreover, there are significant downside risks to the economic outlook, e
t
l
including strains in global financial markets. The Committee also anticipates that inflation A
will settle, over coming quarters, at levels at or below those consistent with the Committee's
dual mandate as the effects of past energy and other commodity price increases dissipate
further. However, the Committee will continue to pay close attention to the evolution of
inflation and inflation expectations.
3. T o support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at
levels consistent with the dual mandate In light of the recent improvement in the economic
outlook, the Committee decided today to reduce by half the size of the program to extend
the average maturity of its holdings of securities that it announced in September. The
Committee intends to purchase, by the end of June 2012, $400 billion of Treasury securities
with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years and to sell an equal amount of Treasury
securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less. This program should put downward
pressure on longer-term interest rates and help make broader financial conditions more
accommodative. In particular, the Committee intends to limit purchases and sales of
securities under this program to $200 billion each and to complete these operations by
the end of March 2012. To help support conditions in mortgage markets, The Committee
will now is maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal payments from its
holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
securities. In addition the Committee will maintain its existing policy and of rolling over
maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee will regularly review the size and
composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate.
4. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and currently, now anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of
resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are likely to
warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least [ through 2012 mid-2013 |
for the next four quarters ].
Page 17 of 54

--- Page 20 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
5. The Committee discussed the range of policy tools available to promote a stronger economic
recovery in the context of price stability. It will continue to assess the economic outlook in
light of incoming information and is prepared to employ its tools as appropriate to promote
its objectives of maximum employment and stable prices.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
Page 18 of 54

--- Page 21 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B
The Committee may see the information received during the intermeeting period as
pointing to essentially the same path of economic activity and unemployment over the medium
run that it expected at the time of the September meeting. In particular, policymakers may note
that, leaving aside the unwinding of temporary factors that were restraining activity earlier in the
year, economic growth has continued at a modest pace. Although they may interpret the
somewhat stronger-than-expected economic data received over the period as suggesting that the
odds of a new recession have diminished, they may view the strains in global financial markets
as still posing downside risks to the economic outlook. Moreover, they may judge that, with the
U.S. economy operating well below potential, and with energy and commodity prices generally
having declined from their earlier peaks, inflation is likely to subside to levels at or below those
s
e
v
most consistent with the dual mandate. Furthermore, policymakers may believe that monetary i
t
a
policy actions taken to date have put in place sufficient support for the economic recovery. n
r
e
t
Indeed, members may note that the staff’s estimates of the equilibrium real federal funds rate are l
A
largely unchanged from the previous Tealbook and so see no reason to adjust policy further at
this meeting. If so, members may wish to adopt a statement like Alternative B, which contains
no new policy action and language similar to that of the September statement.
Some members may note that the outlook has not improved markedly relative to the
forecast that they judged warranted further easing at the September meeting, or they may view
the current staff forecast of economic activity as too optimistic; in either case, they may be
inclined toward further policy measures to make faster progress toward the dual mandate.
Nevertheless, they may judge that it would be prudent to gauge the extent to which growth picks
up in response to policy actions already in place before deciding whether to engage in new asset
purchases or take other accommodative steps, particularly if they see the downside risks to
growth as having diminished somewhat. In addition, members may anticipate that coming
months will bring forth important information on the direction of the European situation, the
persistence of the recent uptick in domestic economic growth, and the direction of core inflation.
Policymakers might prefer to await the accrual of this information and, accordingly, agree to stay
their hand at this meeting. In addition, the Committee may wish to complete its discussions of
policy frameworks and communications before undertaking additional policy actions.
Some Committee members may believe that maintaining the current stance of policy is
appropriate even though they anticipate only a gradual recovery. Specifically, they might judge
that the potential costs of providing more specific forward guidance or engaging in additional
Page 19 of 54

--- Page 22 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
asset purchases, as in Alternatives A1 and A2, outweigh the likely benefits. Even if the
Committee’s forward guidance contained numerical thresholds, policymakers might be
concerned that an extension of the date used in the forward guidance could pose an obstacle to
rapid policy adjustment should economic conditions warrant. Moreover, members may question
whether the numerical thresholds proposed in Alternative A1 can adequately reflect the diversity
of views among policymakers. Thus, while they may be well disposed to the spirit of Alternative
A1, members may view other communications tools, such as the Summary of Economic
Projections, as a superior way of conveying their expectations to the public. With regard to the
possibility of additional asset purchases, as laid out in Alternative A2, members might be
concerned that a significant further expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and the
corresponding supply of reserve balances could pose an upside risk to inflation expectations
s because it might make the public doubt that the Committee will be able to withdraw
e
v
i
t accommodation in a timely fashion. In addition, policymakers might view as undesirable the
a
n
r increase in the Federal Reserve’s exposure to capital losses that would result from a further
e
t
l
A expansion of the SOMA portfolio.
Committee members may interpret the incoming economic data or the recently improved
tone in financial markets as indicating that the outlook has improved and that downside risks
have receded somewhat, but they may still project unemployment to decline only gradually and
inflation to settle at or below levels consistent with their mandate. Thus, they may find the early
cessation of the maturity extension program suggested in Alternative C to be premature.
Members may prefer to await further data to confirm that the recovery has strengthened and that
unemployment has begun to decline before concluding that the full amount of the policy
accommodation provided in September was not needed. They may also want greater clarity
about further policy actions to be undertaken by the European authorities.
Some policymakers may find it awkward to change the projected date in the forward
guidance, potentially frequently, in order to maintain what they view as a constant stance of
policy. Those members might view language that specifies a period of time for the low level of
the federal funds rate, rather than a date, as a clearer way of communicating their intentions to
the public. If so, they may see merit in the option in Alternative B (a modified version of which
is also included in Alternative C) that indicates that the federal funds rate is likely to remain in its
exceptionally low range “for at least the next six to seven quarters.” On the other hand, if the
economy evolves about as expected—and if the Committee consequently continues over time to
see the date on which it now anticipates raising the federal funds rate target as still appropriate—
then the Committee would need to reduce incrementally the number of quarters it would specify.
Page 20 of 54

--- Page 23 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
This reasoning might suggest that stating the date of liftoff, rather than the duration of the period
at the effective lower bound, could be the simpler and clearer approach.
A statement along the lines of Alternative B would be broadly in line with market
expectations. Neither the information from market data nor that from the Desk’s survey of
primary dealers indicates a large change in expectations for the path of the federal funds rate
since September, and both continue to place the expected date of liftoff significantly beyond
mid-2013. Thus, any reaction in short-term interest rates to the forward guidance contained in
Alternative B would likely be muted. Moreover, dealers placed low odds on any change in the
Committee’s asset-purchase programs at this meeting, so Alternative B would also be unlikely to
result in much change in longer-term interest rates. Similarly, there would probably be little
reaction in equity prices or in the foreign exchange value of the dollar.
s
e
v
i
t
a
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A1 OR A2 n
r
e
t
l
A
Policymakers may view the information received since the September meeting as
confirming that additional policy accommodation is needed to promote outcomes that are more
consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate. In particular, they may regard the recent
data on labor markets and on household and business confidence as evidence that the reasons for
slow economic growth in 2011 go well beyond the transitory factors noted earlier in the year.
They may also see a tightening of fiscal policy as likely and be concerned about the resulting
adverse effects on economic activity and employment in the medium run, or they may view the
downside risks to the economic outlook posed by financial strains in Europe as significant.
Against this backdrop, policymakers may continue to view the near- and medium-term economic
outlook as unacceptably weak and the downside risks as unacceptably high, perhaps even to the
point of projecting that the U.S. economy could slip into a new downturn, as in the “Recession”
alternative simulation of Tealbook Book A. Such an assessment could lead the Committee to
provide additional accommodation, as in Alternative A1 or A2.
In addition, some participants may see the main risk to inflation over the projection
period as being to the downside—for example, if they anticipate little reduction in the existing
slack in labor markets over coming quarters or see large negative risks to the outlook for growth.
Indeed, members may note that survey measures of inflation expectations have moved lower of
late and that market-based estimates of deflation probabilities remain elevated, and they might
therefore judge that the odds that inflation will fall below mandate-consistent levels and remain
there for a substantial period of time are unacceptably high.
Page 21 of 54

--- Page 24 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
Accordingly, policymakers may conclude that both the maximum employment and price
stability elements of the dual mandate justify further policy accommodation at this time. They
may judge that, with the federal funds rate constrained by the zero lower bound and with
elevated downside risks to both output and inflation, it would be prudent to issue stronger
forward guidance, along the lines presented in Alternative A1, or to undertake additional asset
purchases, as in Alternative A2. If policymakers see growing public uncertainty that the
expansion will continue—much less strengthen—as contributing significantly to the weakness in
household spending and to firms’ continuing reluctance to hire new workers, they may judge that
the language in Alternative A1 or the new balance sheet expansion in Alternative A2 would
bolster the public’s confidence in the Committee’s commitment to support a stronger recovery
and guard against deflationary pressures.
s
e
v
i Important factors that might guide policymakers’ preference for one of the A alternatives
t
a
n
r over the other could include their assessments of the degree to which additional transparency by
e
t
A l the FOMC will be viewed as a credible commitment and thereby translate into meaningful
economic effects, and the extent to which they are concerned about the size of the Federal
Reserve’s balance sheet and its possible implications for the timely removal of policy
accommodation. Of course, if they wished, policymakers could also combine elements of the
proposed enhanced forward guidance with additional balance sheet expansion.
Alternative A1
Alternative A1 includes several possibilities for altering the forward guidance about the
expected timing of the first increase in the federal funds rate target. The most straightforward
change would be to extend the conditional lower bound on this date—given as mid-2013 in the
previous two FOMC statements—to a significantly later date, such as mid-2014. Policymakers
might prefer this option if they do not expect to need to begin the removal of policy
accommodation for several years but do not at this time wish to provide numerical information
about the economic conditions that would lead them to increase the target, perhaps because they
are concerned that an articulation of those conditions might be interpreted by the public as a
statement about the Committee’s longer-run objectives. Although the staff forecast of economic
activity and inflation, in combination with the estimated outcomes-based rule, suggests that the
target range for the federal funds rate will be unchanged through mid-2014, the Desk’s most
recent survey indicated that more than half of the primary dealers expect the first increase in the
federal funds rate target to occur by the end of the first quarter of 2014. Given these
expectations, if the Committee were to state that it currently does not anticipate raising the
Page 22 of 54

--- Page 25 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
federal funds rate before mid-2014, that announcement could lower market expectations of short-
term interest rates beyond 2013 and so put downward pressure on medium- and longer-term
interest rates and upward pressure on asset prices.
Alternatively, policymakers might prefer to provide an expectation for the date of policy
liftoff, rather than a lower bound, using language like “through the end of 2014” instead of “at
least through mid-2014.” In this case, they may prefer to include forecasts of the economic
conditions they expect to prevail at that time in order to clarify the conditional nature of the
projected date, as in paragraph 4´ of Alternative A1. Or policymakers may wish to emphasize
the levels of unemployment and inflation that they see as consistent with the removal of policy
accommodation, in which case they may find paragraph 4´´ a more appealing option. That
formulation characterizes the Committee’s reaction function in terms of sufficient conditions for
s
e
v
continued low levels of the federal funds rate, while still providing an expectation (rather than an i
t
a
expected lower bound) for the date at which the target rate will first be raised. n
r
e
t
l
A
Members may find attractive the additional transparency associated with the conditional
forward guidance contained in the latter two versions of Alternative A1. To the extent that the
quantitative guidance specified in Alternative A1 reduced the public’s uncertainty about the
Committee’s economic outlook and its policy reaction function, a statement along those lines
could reduce market volatility, and, in current circumstances, foster more accommodative
financial conditions. By giving market participants greater clarity about the economic conditions
that the Committee judges would be likely to warrant raising the target for the federal funds rate,
a statement using the sort of conditional forward guidance contained in paragraphs 4´ and 4´´
could also reduce the chance that medium- and longer-term rates will rise too soon or too quickly
as the recovery progresses.
Any of the changes in forward guidance considered in Alternative A1 would be
somewhat, but not altogether, unexpected by market participants. Respondents to the Desk’s
dealer survey placed only about 25 percent odds on a substantial change in the Committee’s
forward guidance at this meeting, but they saw more than a 50 percent chance of a change in the
guidance within the next year. Treasury yields would likely move lower, particularly around the
two- to five-year sector, as investors priced in lower expected short-term rates for a longer period
and possibly lower term premiums in response to reduced uncertainty about the path for policy.
If the inclusion of threshold values for inflation were read as suggesting that the Committee
might be comfortable with levels of inflation above 2 percent for a significant period of time,
Page 23 of 54

--- Page 26 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
medium-term inflation compensation could increase. In either case, equity prices would
probably rise, and the exchange value of the dollar would likely decline.
Alternative A2
Policymakers may view additional large-scale asset purchases, rather than changes to the
forward-guidance language, as the better means of providing additional stimulus. Staff estimates
suggest that purchases of $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities, one of the possibilities
presented in Alternative A2, would push down the level of medium- and longer-term private
interest rates and might ease financial conditions enough to reduce the unemployment rate by ¼
percentage point at the end of 2013. Staff also estimates that such a program would increase
PCE inflation by about ¼ percentage point over time. These estimates are subject to
s considerable uncertainty, but would be in addition to the effects the staff believes will ultimately
e
v
t i be produced by the completion of the Committee’s maturity extension program announced in
a
n
r September. Because of operational constraints, and the overlapping purchases being conducted
e
t
l
A under the maturity extension program, the additional Treasury purchases likely could not be
completed until September 2012. If the Committee split its purchases between longer-term
Treasuries and agency MBS, as in the other option in Alternative A2, then the purchases could
be completed by the end of June 2012. The Committee might prefer some MBS purchases if it is
concerned about the possible effects on the functioning of the Treasury market of $600 billion of
additional Treasury purchases. In addition, some participants may see the moribund conditions
in the housing sector as a critical contributor to the weak economic recovery and so want to
purchase some MBS as a way of providing support to that sector. In contrast, other participants
may prefer to purchase only Treasury securities, perhaps because they see MBS purchases as
causing an undesirable distortion in the allocation of credit.
Some policymakers may see potential benefits from reducing the interest rate paid on
required and excess reserve balances (referred to collectively here as the IOER rate) to 10 basis
points. 2 Doing so would put downward pressure on a range of money market rates, and so
lower longer-term rates, at least to some degree. In addition, lower money market rates could
prompt investors to shift their holdings toward riskier assets, pushing down risk premiums and
adding to monetary stimulus. Such a reduction in the IOER rate also could mitigate concern
about the Federal Reserve appearing to subsidize banks by paying an overnight rate that is
noticeably above other risk-free, short-term rates. However, other participants may see a further
2 Additional considerations related to possible changes in the remuneration rate on excess reserves can be
found in the memo, “Reconsidering Lowering the IOER Rate,” sent to the Committee on October 25, 2011.
Page 24 of 54

--- Page 27 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
reduction in money market rates as likely to accelerate outflows from money market mutual
funds and be concerned that if that adjustment were sufficiently rapid there might be disruptions
in short-term credit intermediation that could adversely affect the economy. This risk would be
reduced, but not eliminated, by a decision to keep the IOER rate at 10 basis points rather than
reducing it to zero. Cutting the IOER rate also would damp depository institutions’ incentive to
borrow and hold excess reserves, likely resulting, in particular, in a further reduction in trading
volume in the federal funds market and potentially in greater volatility in the effective federal
funds rate. Moreover, banks might impose greater fees on deposit accounts, a development that
could lead to a negative response by the public. If participants generally thought that a reduction
in the IOER rate would be helpful, on balance, the Board could adopt such a reduction, and that
step could be noted in the press release containing the FOMC statement.
s
e
v
An additional asset purchase program, like those offered in Alternative A2, would come i
t
a
as a surprise to market participants at this time; in the Desk’s survey, primary dealers assigned n
r
e
t
less than a 10 percent chance to further securities purchases being announced at this meeting. l
A
Longer-term interest rates would decline notably, and shorter-term interest rates would probably
move a bit lower as well, since market participants would likely associate the action with a
longer duration of a near-zero target federal funds rate, even if the date specified in the statement
was left unchanged. If the additional purchase program included a significant amount of MBS,
the spread on those securities would likely narrow somewhat with respect to Treasuries. Primary
dealers, on average, saw about a 20 percent probability of a cut in the remuneration rate on
required and excess reserves at some point within the next two years, but the probability of such
a change at the November meeting was notably smaller. Thus, if the interest rate on excess
reserves were reduced, shorter-term yields would likely decline a few basis points, in addition to
the effects of any other actions the Committee announced. The effect could be amplified by the
increase in reserve balances generated by the new purchase program. With any combination of
the options in Alternative A2, equity prices would probably increase, and the exchange value of
the dollar would likely decline.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE C
Some Committee members may see the level of potential output as significantly below
the level in the staff’s baseline scenario and may thus view additional policy accommodation—
or even the accommodation currently in place—as more likely to result in inflationary pressures
than in significant improvements in output and employment. Indeed, those members might note
that measures of core inflation have moved appreciably higher over the last year, and they may
Page 25 of 54

--- Page 28 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
be concerned that inflation, over the medium term, could run above levels consistent with the
dual mandate unless action is taken to reduce monetary accommodation. They may also
conclude that the current stance of monetary policy, including the maturity extension program,
poses an unacceptably large risk to the stability of inflation expectations.
Moreover, members may judge that information received since the September meeting
indicates that the recent increase in economic growth only partly reflects the reversal of
transitory factors and that the underlying pace of recovery is stronger than projected in the staff’s
baseline forecast, perhaps along the lines of the “Faster Snapback” alternative simulation. They
may also view the downside risks to growth posed by the strains in global financial markets as
having moderated in recent weeks, and they may believe that liquidity facilities are a better tool
s than monetary policy for addressing the potential difficulties those strains might create for the
e
v
i U.S. financial system. Against this backdrop, members may judge that the most appropriate step
t
a
n
r at this stage is to scale back the pace and magnitude of the maturity extension program as
e
t
A l outlined in Alternative C.
If Committee members believe that the level of potential output is appreciably lower than
the staff estimates, or if they anticipate a stronger medium-term pickup in real activity than
envisioned in the staff’s baseline scenario, they may see a significant risk that inflation will
increase even if the maturity extension program is reduced in size. If so, they may also judge it
to be appropriate to change the forward guidance to provide a greater degree of flexibility to
begin removing policy accommodation in response to economic developments, as in paragraph 4
of Alternative C. In particular, if economic growth picks up strongly and rates of resource
utilization increase steadily, some members may judge it appropriate to begin withdrawing
monetary policy accommodation well before mid-2013 even though unemployment, at the time,
might be well above the staff’s estimate of its longer-run, mandate-consistent level. These
policymakers may be more comfortable stating a projection of the end of 2012, rather than mid-
2013, as the earliest likely date for an increase in the target federal funds rate. Alternatively,
they could specify an expected duration of exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate of at
least “four quarters,” rather than the “six to seven quarters” proposed in Alternative B. Some
participants may also favor a statement that includes the balanced final sentence in Alternative C,
in which the Committee would state that it “will continue to assess the economic outlook in light
of incoming information and is prepared to employ its tools as appropriate to promote its
objectives of maximum employment and stable prices,” rather than a statement that indicates the
Committee is prepared to employ its policy tools “to promote a stronger economic recovery in a
context of price stability”.
Page 26 of 54

--- Page 29 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
A statement like that in Alternative C would come as a considerable surprise to market
participants, who appear to be expecting no change in the policy stance at this meeting and who
seem to place very low odds on the maturity extension program not being completed as
announced in September. Longer-term interest rates would likely rise further, and shorter-term
rates would also move higher as market participants priced in a faster exit from the current
accommodative policy stance. Equity prices would likely fall, and the exchange value of the
dollar would probably rise, although the increase could be tempered if the retreat of policy were
viewed as severely contractionary.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
Page 27 of 54

--- Page 30 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
LONG-RUN PROJECTIONS OF THE BALANCE SHEET AND MONETARY BASE
The staff has prepared three scenarios for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet that
correspond to the policy alternatives A1, A2, B, and C; although the language in the statements
differs, Alternatives A1 and B share the same baseline balance sheet projection. Projections
under each scenario are based on assumptions about the trajectory of various components of the
balance sheet. Details of these assumptions, as well as projections for each major component of
the balance sheet, can be found in Explanatory Note C.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
For the balance sheet scenario that corresponds to Alternatives A1 and B (the baseline),
the Committee is assumed to continue the Maturity Extension Program (MEP) announced in
September, in which it will sell $400 billion (par value) of Treasury securities with remaining
maturities of 3 years or less and purchase the same amount of securities with remaining
maturities of 6 years or more by the end of June 2012. It is also assumed that the Committee
reinvests the proceeds from principal repayments of its holdings of agency debt and MBS into
agency MBS, while Treasury securities that mature are reinvested at auction according to the
Desk’s current practice (reinvesting roughly proportionally across all Treasury securities that are
being issued on those dates). These assumptions imply that the System Open Market Account
(SOMA) security holdings remain constant at about $2.6 trillion, and the size of the balance
sheet, which includes other assets in addition to the SOMA portfolio, holds roughly steady at
about $2.9 trillion. In March 2014, six months before the assumed first increase in the target
Page 28 of 54

--- Page 31 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
federal funds rate, all security reinvestment ceases, and the balance sheet begins to contract
appreciably. In March 2015, roughly six months after the assumed first increase in the target
federal funds rate, the Committee begins to sell its remaining holdings of agency MBS and
agency debt securities at a pace that reduces the amount of these securities in the portfolio to
zero in five years—that is, by February 2020.3, 4 This action, along with the cessation of
reinvestment, normalizes the size of the balance sheet by August 2017. 5,6
After reserve balances have reached the assumed $25 billion floor, the balance sheet
begins to expand, with increases in holdings of Treasury securities essentially matching the
growth of Federal Reserve capital and notes in circulation. The balance sheet reaches a size of
$2 trillion by the end of 2020.
s
e
In the scenario corresponding to Alternative A2, the Committee is also assumed to v
i
t
a
continue the MEP announced in September. In addition, the Committee is assumed to decide to n
r
e
purchase a further $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of September t
l
A
2012.7 Furthermore, it is assumed that, until six months prior to the liftoff in the target federal
funds rate, principal payments on agency securities are reinvested in agency MBS, while
principal payments from Treasury securities that mature are reinvested at auction. As in
Alternatives A1 and B, the target federal funds rate is assumed to lift off in the third quarter of
2014. Sales of agency securities commence six months after the liftoff in the target federal funds
rate and reduce holdings to zero over five years. As a result of this policy action, SOMA
security holdings peak at $3.2 trillion and total assets peak at $3.6 trillion in September 2012.
The higher path for SOMA under Alternative A2, primarily reflecting the $600 billion additional
3 Given the maturity schedule of the agency debt securities held in the SOMA, the volume of sales
necessary to reduce holdings of these securities to zero over the five-year period is minimal.
4 It is possible that the communication strategy in Alternative A1 would induce the path of the 10-year
Treasury yield to be slightly lower than what is in Alternative B through the medium term. If so, this could result in
slightly higher prepayments for agency MBS in Alternative A1, which would change the mix of prepayments and
sales that would be required to reduce the amount of MBS in the portfolio to zero over the five year period.
5 The tools to drain reserve balances (reverse repurchase agreements and the Term Deposit Facility) are not
modeled in any of the scenarios presented. Use of these tools would result in a shift in the composition of Federal
Reserve liabilities—a decline in reserve balances and a corresponding increase in term reverse repurchase
agreements or term deposits—but would not produce an overall change in the size of the balance sheet.
6 The projected timing of the normalization of the size of the balance sheet depends importantly on the
assumed level of reserve balances that is consistent with the conduct of monetary policy, which we take as $25
billion. A higher level of such reserve balances would, all else equal, lead to an earlier normalization of the size of
the balance sheet.
7 The projections presented here are based on the $600 billion Treasury purchase program. Alternative A2
also offered an option under which the Federal Reserve would purchase $300 billion of agency MBS and $300
billion of Treasury securities by the end of June 2012.
Page 29 of 54

--- Page 32 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
purchases of Treasury securities, postpones the normalization of the size of the balance sheet
until the second quarter of 2018, two quarters later than under the baseline.
For the scenario that corresponds to Alternative C, the Committee is assumed to modify
the MEP that began in September by limiting the program to $200 billion—half its announced
size—and to complete these operations by the end of March 2012. In addition, we assume that
the Committee continues to reinvest the proceeds from maturing Treasury securities at auction
and reinvest payments of principal from agency securities in agency MBS. In this scenario, the
federal funds rate is assumed to lift off at the beginning of 2013, more than a year-and-a-half
earlier than assumed in Alternatives A1, A2, and B.8 Reinvestment of principal from maturing
or prepaying securities ends six months prior to federal funds rate liftoff, in mid-2012. Likewise,
s sales of agency securities under Alternative C commence in mid-2013, also earlier than in the
e
v
i baseline, and these sales also last for five years. The normalization of the size of the balance
t
a
n
r sheet occurs in mid-2016, more than a year sooner than in the baseline, primarily reflecting the
e
t
A l earlier liftoff date of the federal funds rate.
Under Alternatives A1 and B, the size of the balance sheet normalizes earlier than in the
September Tealbook baseline projection. The baseline projections in both the current and
previous Tealbooks assume agency securities will be sold over five years so that these holdings
fall to zero by early 2020. However, in the last Tealbook, principal payments of agency
securities in the near term were reinvested in longer-term Treasury securities, some of which
mature and roll off the balance sheet after 2020, while in the current Tealbook, principal
payments of agency securities are reinvested in agency MBS, which roll off the balance sheet or
are sold by 2020. Under Alternative A2, the path for total assets remains noticeably above the
baseline trajectory in the September Tealbook because of the additional large-scale asset
purchase program. Finally, for Alternative C, the balance sheet normalizes nearly two years
earlier than the September Tealbook baseline due to the projected earlier liftoff of the target
federal funds rate, the associated halt in the reinvestment of principal payments on securities
holdings, and the commencement of asset sales. From May 2018 onward, the paths for total
assets in the current projections align with the baseline path in the September Tealbook.
8 The prepayment paths for agency MBS holdings and premiums calculations in Alternative C are based on
the interest rate path used in Alternatives A1 and B. This assumption may cause both prepayments and premiums to
be somewhat overstated in Alternative C. If so, the estimate of the size of the balance sheet will be biased upward
and the date of normalization will be pushed a bit later, but likely not by an appreciable amount.
Page 30 of 54

--- Page 33 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
On the liability side of the balance sheet, the forecasted paths for reserve balances for
Alternatives A1 and B are lower after redemptions begin than in the previous Tealbook until
reserve balances fall to $25 billion. Under Alternative A2, reserve balances peak at $2.3
trillion—more than $500 billion higher than in all other scenarios—by the end of the large scale
asset purchase program. Subsequently, the path for reserve balances under Alternative A2 falls
to $25 billion in May 2018—roughly three quarters later than under Alternatives A1 and B, and
nearly two years later than under Alternative C.
In the scenario corresponding to Alternatives A1 and B, the monetary base is projected to
start contracting in the second quarter of 2013 and it continues to do so through the fourth
quarter of 2017, reflecting the decline in reserve balances. Starting in the beginning of 2018,
after reserve balances are assumed to have stabilized at $25 billion, the monetary base expands
s
e
v
again, in line with the growth of Federal Reserve notes in circulation. i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
Page 31 of 54

--- Page 34 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
Growth Rates for the Monetary Base
Memo :
Alternatives B
Date Alternative A2 Alternative C September
and A1
Tealbook
Percent, annual rate
Monthly
Aug-10 -2.4 -2.4 -2.4 -2.4
Sep-10 -10.2 -10.2 -10.2 -10.2
Oct-10 -9.8 -9.8 -9.8 -9.8
Nov-10 3.2 3.2 3.2 3.2
Dec-10 16.8 16.8 16.8 16.8
Jan-11 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3
s Feb-11 57.6 57.6 57.6 57.6
e
v
i Mar-11 97.8 97.8 97.8 97.8
t
a
n Apr-11 74.4 74.4 74.4 74.4
r
e May-11 42.1 42.1 42.1 42.1
t
l
A
Jun-11 35.9 35.9 35.9 35.9
Jul-11 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0
Aug-11 2.0 2.0 2.0 3.6
Sep-11 -10.5 -10.5 -10.5 -10.3
Oct-11 1.5 1.4 1.1 2.2
Nov-11 10.6 24.6 9.7 15.2
Dec-11 0.8 28.7 -0.1 4.5
Quarterly
2010 Q3 -6.4 -6.4 -6.4 -6.4
2010 Q4 -3.2 -3.2 -3.2 -3.2
2011 Q1 36.8 36.8 36.8 36.8
2011 Q2 69.4 69.4 69.4 69.4
2011 Q3 21.1 21.1 21.1 21.4
2011 Q4 0.8 7.0 0.4 2.7
2012 Q1 2.4 28.5 1.5 12.5
2012 Q2 7.1 31.9 5.4 7.7
Annual - Q4 to Q4
2009 52.5 52.5 52.5 52.5
2010 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9
2011 35.2 37.3 35.0 35.9
2012 3.1 26.3 -2.6 5.0
2013 -0.8 -0.9 -10.3 -1.2
2014 -6.1 -5.4 -14.9 -4.9
2015 -12.2 -12.7 -16.5 -9.3
Note: Not seasonally adjusted.
Page 32 of 54

--- Page 35 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
DEBT, BANK CREDIT, AND MONEY FORECASTS
Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to increase at an annual rate of 5 percent
in the fourth quarter of 2011, driven by continued rapid expansion in federal government debt
and a modest rise in private nonfinancial debt, before slowing to a 4¼ percent pace in 2012 and
2013. This moderation in debt growth reflects the projected slowdown in the rise in federal debt
that begins in the first quarter of 2012 and extends through the projection period. Nonfinancial
business debt is forecast to continue rising moderately over the forecast period, in part due to
further increases in capital expenditures. Despite historically low mortgage rates, home
mortgage debt is projected to contract further in the next two quarters and then to stay about flat
through 2013. Consumer credit is forecast to rise moderately into early next year, and to
gradually accelerate over the medium term. The expansion in consumer credit is expected to
s
e
outweigh slightly the contraction in mortgage debt in the near term. The growth in household v
i
t
a
debt is then expected to pick up very slowly over the forecast horizon, reaching a pace of only n
r
e
1¾ percent in 2013, still quite low by historical standards. l t
A
Commercial bank credit is projected to increase moderately in the fourth quarter of 2011,
and that pace is expected to persist for the rest of the forecast period. Core loans—which include
commercial and industrial (C&I), real estate, and consumer loans—are generally expected to
expand very modestly for most of 2012 and then accelerate gradually through 2013 as the
restraint from still-stringent lending standards, weak demand from high-quality borrowers, and
ongoing balance sheet adjustments in the household sector is expected to slowly ease over the
forecast horizon. C&I loans are projected to increase steadily over the next two years while
lending to businesses backed by commercial real estate is expected to contract, primarily due to
poor market fundamentals and the weak credit quality of existing loans. With respect to lending
to households, residential real estate loans outstanding on banks’ books are projected to remain
largely unchanged through 2012 and to rise only slightly in 2013, reflecting subdued housing
demand along with the factors noted above that are generally restraining core loan growth.
Consumer loans are projected to increase moderately through the forecast period supported by
the rise in spending on consumer durables. Banks’ securities holdings are anticipated to expand
at a moderate pace that decreases gradually in the latter part of the forecast horizon as loan
growth strengthens.
After a robust increase in 2011, M2 is projected to expand at an average annual rate of
about 2½ percent over the forecast period, well below the pace that would be predicted by the
historical relationships of M2 with nominal income and opportunity cost. In the near term,
Page 33 of 54

--- Page 36 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
money growth is held down by the assumption that households, institutional investors, and asset
managers gradually begin to shift their portfolios away from safe M2 assets toward riskier assets
outside of M2, as some of the financial market strains that contributed to rapid money growth
this summer begin to fade. Later in the forecast period, improvements in both financial market
conditions and the economic outlook are expected to lead households and businesses to continue
shifting their portfolios toward riskier assets, further damping the rise in M2. Over the forecast
period, liquid deposits are projected to expand at a solid rate, albeit well below the pace observed
in recent years, while retail money market mutual funds and small time deposits are projected to
contract. Currency is expected to expand at its historical average rate.
Growth Rates for M2
(Percent, seasonally adjusted annual rate)
s
e
v
i
t
a Monthly Growth Rates Tealbook Forecast*
n
r
e Jan-11 3.3
t
l
A Feb-11 8.3
Mar-11 3.8
Apr-11 4.3
May-11 6.9
Jun-11 11.7
Jul-11 26.6
Aug-11 30.0
Sep-11 5.9
Oct-11 4.3
Nov-11 3.0
Dec-11 2.0
Quarterly Growth Rates
2011 Q1 5.0
2011 Q2 6.1
2011 Q3 19.8
2011 Q4 6.9
Annual Growth Rates
2010 3.2
2011 9.8
2012 1.9
2013 3.0
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Tealbook
forecast. Actual data through October 2011; projections thereafter.
Page 34 of 54

--- Page 37 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
DIRECTIVE
The September directive appears below. Drafts for a November directive corresponding
to each of the four policy alternatives appear on subsequent pages. The directive for Alternatives
A1 and B would instruct the Desk to take appropriate steps to continue to purchase, by the end of
June 2012, $400 billion of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 to 30 years and to
sell an equal amount of existing Treasury holdings with remaining maturities of 3 years or less so
as to increase the average maturity of the SOMA portfolio while leaving the total face value of
domestic securities in the SOMA about unchanged. The directive for Alternative C would
instruct the Desk to reduce the amount of these purchases and sales to a total level of $200
billion each and to conduct these operations by the end of March 2012. The directive for
Alternative A2 would instruct the Desk to continue conducting the maturity extension program
s
e
announced in September and to take appropriate steps to raise the total face value of domestic v
i
t
a
securities holdings to about $3.3 trillion, either by purchasing sufficient longer-term Treasury n
r
e
securities by the end of September 2012 or by purchasing an equal mix of longer-term Treasuries l t
A
and agency MBS by the end of June 2012. The Directives for all of the alternatives would
instruct the Desk to continue the current practice of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction and of reinvesting principal payments on all agency debt and agency MBS in agency
MBS.
September 2011 FOMC Directive
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will
foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run objectives,
the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal funds trading in a
range from 0 to 1/4 percent. The Committee directs the Desk to purchase, by the end of June
2012, Treasury securities with remaining maturities of approximately 6 years to 30 years with a
total face value of $400 billion, and to sell Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3
years or less with a total face value of $400 billion. The Committee also directs the Desk to
maintain its existing policy of rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues and to
reinvest principal payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in the
System Open Market Account in agency mortgage-backed securities in order to maintain the
total face value of domestic securities at approximately $2.6 trillion. The Committee directs the
Desk to engage in dollar roll transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal
Reserve's agency MBS transactions. The System Open Market Account Manager and the
Secretary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System's
Page 35 of 54

--- Page 38 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee's objectives of
maximum employment and price stability.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
Page 36 of 54

--- Page 39 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
November 2011 FOMC Directive — Alternative A1
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will
foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run objectives,
the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal funds trading in a
range from 0 to 1/4 percent. The Committee directs the Desk to continue the maturity
extension program it began in September to purchase, by the end of June 2012, Treasury
securities with remaining maturities of approximately 6 years to 30 years with a total face value
of $400 billion, and to sell Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less with a
total face value of $400 billion. The Committee also directs the Desk to maintain its existing
policyies of rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues and to of reinvesting
principal payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in the System
s
Open Market Account in agency mortgage-backed securities in order to maintain the total face e
v
i
value of domestic securities at approximately $2.6 trillion. The Committee directs the Desk to a t
n
r
engage in dollar roll transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve's e
t
l
A
agency MBS transactions. The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will
keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System's balance sheet
that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee's objectives of maximum
employment and price stability.
Page 37 of 54

--- Page 40 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
November 2011 FOMC Directive — Alternative A2
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will
foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run objectives,
the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal funds trading in a
range from 0 to 1/4 percent. The Committee directs the Desk to continue the maturity
extension program it began in September to purchase, by the end of June 2012, Treasury
securities with remaining maturities of approximately 6 years to 30 years with a total face value
of $400 billion, and to sell Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less with a
total face value of $400 billion. The Committee also directs the Desk to execute purchases of
longer-term Treasury securities in order to increase the total face value of domestic
securities held in the System Open Market Account to approximately $3.3 trillion by the
s
e end of September 2012. The Committee also directs the Desk to maintain its existing policyies
v
i
a t of rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues and to of reinvesting principal
n
r
e payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in the System Open Market
t
l
A
Account in agency mortgage-backed securities in order to maintain the total face value of
domestic securities at approximately $2.6 trillion. The Committee directs the Desk to engage in
dollar roll transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve's agency MBS
transactions. The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the
Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System's balance sheet that could
affect the attainment over time of the Committee's objectives of maximum employment and price
stability.
OR
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will
foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run objectives,
the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal funds trading in a
range from 0 to 1/4 percent. The Committee directs the Desk to continue the maturity
extension program it began in September to purchase, by the end of June 2012, Treasury
securities with remaining maturities of approximately 6 years to 30 years with a total face value
of $400 billion, and to sell Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less with a
total face value of $400 billion. The Committee also directs the Desk to execute purchases of
longer-term Treasury securities and of agency mortgage-backed securities of
approximately equal face amounts in order to increase the total face value of domestic
securities held in the System Open Market Account to approximately $3.3 trillion by the
Page 38 of 54

--- Page 41 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
end of June 2012. The Committee also directs the Desk to maintain its existing policyies of
rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues and to of reinvesting principal
payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in the System Open Market
Account in agency mortgage-backed securities in order to maintain the total face value of
domestic securities at approximately $2.6 trillion. The Committee directs the Desk to engage in
dollar roll transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve's agency MBS
transactions. The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the
Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System's balance sheet that could
affect the attainment over time of the Committee's objectives of maximum employment and price
stability.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
Page 39 of 54

--- Page 42 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
November 2011 FOMC Directive — Alternative B
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will
foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run objectives,
the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal funds trading in a
range from 0 to 1/4 percent. The Committee directs the Desk to continue the maturity
extension program it began in September to purchase, by the end of June 2012, Treasury
securities with remaining maturities of approximately 6 years to 30 years with a total face value
of $400 billion, and to sell Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less with a
total face value of $400 billion. The Committee also directs the Desk to maintain its existing
policyies of rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues and to of reinvesting
principal payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in the System
s
e Open Market Account in agency mortgage-backed securities in order to maintain the total face
v
i
a t value of domestic securities at approximately $2.6 trillion. The Committee directs the Desk to
n
r
e engage in dollar roll transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve's
t
l
A
agency MBS transactions. The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will
keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System's balance sheet
that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee's objectives of maximum
employment and price stability.
Page 40 of 54

--- Page 43 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
November 2011 FOMC Directive — Alternative C
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will
foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run objectives,
the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with federal funds trading in a
range from 0 to 1/4 percent. The Committee directs the Desk to modify the maturity extension
program it began in September so as to purchase, by the end of March June 2012, Treasury
securities with remaining maturities of approximately 6 years to 30 years with a total face value
of $200 $400 billion, and to sell Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less
with a total face value of $200 $400 billion. The Committee also directs the Desk to maintain its
existing policyies of rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues and to of
reinvesting principal payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in the
s
System Open Market Account in agency mortgage-backed securities in order to maintain the e
v
i
total face value of domestic securities at approximately $2.6 trillion. The Committee directs the a t
n
r
Desk to engage in dollar roll transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal e
t
l
A
Reserve's agency MBS transactions. The System Open Market Account Manager and the
Secretary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System's
balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee's objectives of
maximum employment and price stability.
Page 41 of 54

--- Page 44 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
(This page is intentionally blank.)
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
Page 42 of 54

--- Page 45 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
Explanatory Notes
A. Measures of the Equilibrium Real Rate
The concepts of the equilibrium real rate reported in the exhibit “Equilibrium Real
Federal Funds Rate,” are defined as the level of the real federal funds rate that is consistent with
output at potential within a specified time horizon. The short-run equilibrium rate is defined as
the rate that would close the output gap in twelve quarters given the corresponding model’s
projection of the economy. The medium-run concept is the value of the real federal funds rate
projected to prevail in seven years, under the assumption that monetary policy acts to bring actual
and potential output into line in the short run and then keeps them equal thereafter.
Measure Description
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is
Single-equation based on an estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current
Model value of the output gap and its lagged values as well as the lagged values of
the real federal funds rate.
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for six
Small
variables: the output gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus,
Structural
the trend growth rate of output, the real bond yield, and the real federal
Model
funds rate.
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using EDO—an estimated dynamic-
stochastic-general-equilibrium (DSGE) model of the U.S. economy— s
e
EDO Model depend on data for major spending categories, prices and wages, and the t
o
federal funds rate as well as the model’s structure and estimate of the output N
gap. y
r
o
t
a
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale n
a
econometric model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of p l
FRB/US Model x
economic factors, some of which take the form of projected values of the E
model’s exogenous variables.
Two measures are presented based on the FRB/US and the EDO models.
Both models are matched to the extended Tealbook forecast. Model
Tealbook-
simulations determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the
consistent
output gap conditional on the exogenous variables in the extended baseline
forecast.
Page 43 of 54

--- Page 46 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
Measure Description
Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) reflect investors’
expectations of the future path of real interest rates. The TIPS-based
measure of the equilibrium real rate is constructed using the seven-year-
TIPS-based ahead instantaneous real forward rate derived from TIPS yields as of the
Factor Model Tealbook publication date. This forward rate is adjusted to remove
estimates of the term and liquidity premiums based on a three-factor,
arbitrage-free term-structure model applied to TIPS yields, nominal yields,
and inflation.
The actual real federal funds rate is constructed as the difference between the federal
funds rate and the trailing four-quarter change in the core PCE price index. The federal funds rate
is specified as the target federal funds rate on the Tealbook Book B publication date.
Estimates of the real federal funds rate depend on the proxies for expected inflation used.
The table below shows estimates of the real federal funds rates using alternative proxies: lagged
core PCE inflation, which is used to construct the actual real federal funds rate shown in the table
that displays the r* measures; lagged four-quarter headline PCE inflation; and projected four-
quarter headline PCE inflation beginning with the next quarter. The table also displays the
Tealbook-consistent FRB/US-based measure of the short-run equilibrium real rate and the
average of the projected real federal funds rate over the next twelve quarters using each of the
different proxies for expected inflation.
Tealbook-consistent
Projected real
Actual real federal FRB/US-based
Proxy used for funds rate
s funds rate measure of the
e
t expected inflation (twelve-quarter-
o (current value) equilibrium real funds
N ahead average)
rate (current value)
y
r
o Lagged core inflation 1.5 3.3 1.4
t
a
n Lagged headline
l
a
2.7 3.5 1.5
p inflation
x
E Projected headline
1.2 3.2 1.3
inflation
Page 44 of 54

--- Page 47 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
B. Analysis of Policy Paths and Confidence Intervals
RULE SPECIFICATIONS
For the following rules, ݅ denotes the federal funds rate for quarter t, while the right-
௧
hand-side variables include the staff’s projection of trailing four-quarter core PCE inflation (ߨ ),
௧
inflation two and three quarters ahead (ߨ and ߨ ), the output gap in the current period and
௧ାଶ|௧ ௧ାଷ|௧
one quarter ahead ( ݕ െ ݕכ and ݕ െ ݕכ ), and the forecast of three-quarter-ahead annual
௧ ௧ ௧ାଵ|௧ ௧ାଵ|௧
average GDP growth relative to potential (Δସݕ െ Δସݕכ ), and π* denotes an assumed value
௧ାଷ|௧ ௧ାଷ|௧
of policymakers’ long-run inflation objective. The outcome-based and forecast-based rules were
estimated using real-time data over the sample 1988:12006:4; each specification was chosen
using the Bayesian information criterion. Each rule incorporates a 75 basis point shift in the
intercept, specified as a sequence of 25 basis point increments during the first three quarters of
1998. The first two simple rules were proposed by Taylor (1993, 1999). The prescriptions of the
first-difference rule do not depend on assumptions regarding r* or the level of the output gap; see
Orphanides (2003).
݅ ൌ 1.20݅ െ 0.39݅ ൅ 0.19ሾ1.17 ൅ 1.73ߨ
௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ିଶ ௧
Outcome-based rule
൅ 3.66ሺݕ െ ݕכ ሻ െ 2.72 ሺݕ െݕ כ ሻሿ
௧ ௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ିଵ
݅ ൌ 1.18݅ െ 0.38݅ ൅ 0.20ሾ0.98 ൅ 1.72ߨ
௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ିଶ ௧ାଶ|௧
Forecast-based rule
൅2.29൫ݕ െ ݕכ ൯െ 1.37 ሺݕ െݕ כ ሻሿ
௧ାଵ|௧ ௧ାଵ|௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ିଵ
Taylor (1993) rule ݅ ൌ 2 ൅ߨ ൅ 0.5 ሺߨ െ ߨ כ ሻ ൅ 0.5 ሺݕ െ ݕכ ሻ
௧ ௧ ௧ ௧ ௧
s
Taylor (1999) rule ݅ ൌ 2 ൅ߨ ൅ 0.5 ሺߨ െ ߨ כ ሻ ൅ ሺݕ െ ݕכ ሻ t e
௧ ௧ ௧ ௧ ௧ o
N
First-difference rule ݅ ൌ ݅ ൅ 0.5൫ߨ െߨ כ ൯൅0 .5ሺ ߂ସݕ െ ߂ସݕכ ሻ y
௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ାଷ|௧ ௧ାଷ|௧ ௧ାଷ|௧ r
o
a
t
n
FRB/US MODEL SIMULATIONS
l
a
p
x
E
Prescriptions from the outcome-based rule are computed using dynamic simulations of
the FRB/US model, implemented as though the rule were followed starting at this FOMC
meeting. The dotted line labeled “Previous Tealbook” is based on the current specification of the
policy rule, applied to the previous Tealbook projection. Confidence intervals are based on
stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model with shocks drawn from the estimated residuals over
19692009.
Page 45 of 54

--- Page 48 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
INFORMATION FROM FINANCIAL MARKETS
The expected funds rate path is based on quotes for federal funds and forward rate
agreements as well as implied three-month forward rates from swaps, and the confidence
intervals for this path are constructed using prices of interest rate caps. The computations use the
staff’s baseline assumptions about term premiums.
NEAR-TERM PRESCRIPTIONS OF SIMPLE POLICY RULES
These prescriptions are calculated using Tealbook projections for inflation and the output
gap. The first-difference rule, the estimated outcome-based rule, and the estimated forecast-based
rule include the lagged policy rate as a right-hand-side variable. When the Tealbook is published
early in the quarter, the lines denoted “Previous Tealbook” report rule prescriptions based on the
previous Tealbook’s staff outlook, jumping off from the actual value of the lagged funds rate in
the previous quarter. When the Tealbook is published late in the quarter, the lines denoted
“Previous Tealbook Outlook” report rule prescriptions based on the previous Tealbook’s staff
outlook, but jumping off from the average value for the policy rate thus far this quarter
REFERENCES
Taylor, John B. (1993). “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195214.
————— (1999). “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B.
Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules. University of Chicago Press, pp. 319341.
s
e
t
o Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor
N
Rule,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (July), pp. 9831022.
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
Page 46 of 54

--- Page 49 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
C. Long-Run Projections of the Balance Sheet and Monetary Base
This explanatory note presents the assumptions underlying the projections provided in the
section titled “Long-Run Projections of the Balance Sheet and Monetary Base,” as well as
projections for each major component of the balance sheet.
GENERAL ASSUMPTIONS
The balance sheet projections are constructed at a monthly frequency from October 2011
to December 2020. The few balance sheet items that are not discussed below are assumed to be
constant over the projection period at the level observed on September 30, 2011. The projections
for all major asset and liability categories under each scenario are summarized in the tables that
follow the bullet points.
The Tealbook projections for the scenarios corresponding to Alternatives A1, A2, and B
assume that the target federal funds rate begins to increase in September 2014, consistent with the
monetary policy path in the Tealbook extension derived from the outcome-based rule, while the
projection for the scenario corresponding to Alternative C assumes the target rate lifts off in
January 2013. The balance sheet projections assume that no use of short-term draining tools is
necessary to achieve the projected path for the federal funds rate.1
ASSETS
Treasury Securities, Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS), and Agency Debt
Securities
s
 The assumptions under Alternatives A1 and B are: e
t
o
o Beginning in October 2011, the FOMC is assumed to sell $400 billion in par value of N
Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less and to purchase the y
r
o
same par amount of Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 6 years or more. t
a
This activity takes place over 9 months. n
a
l
o The FOMC will reinvest the proceeds from principal payments from its agency p
x
E
securities holdings primarily in newly issued agency MBS in the To-Be-Announced
(TBA) market. Consistent with current practice, Treasury securities are rolled over at
auction.
o Principal payments from Treasury securities and agency MBS and agency debt
securities are reinvested until March 2014—six months prior to the assumed increase
in the target federal funds rate.2
1 If term deposits or reverse repurchase agreements were used to drain reserves prior to raising the
federal funds rate, the composition of liabilities would change: Reserve balances would fall as term
deposits and reverse repurchase agreements rose. Presumably, these draining tools would be wound down
as the balance sheet returned to its steady state growth path, so that the projected paths for Treasury
securities presented in the Tealbook remain valid.
2 Projected prepayments of agency MBS reflect interest rates as of October 25, 2011.
Page 47 of 54

--- Page 50 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
o The Federal Reserve begins to sell agency MBS and agency debt securities in March
2015, roughly six months after the assumed date of the first increase in the target
federal funds rate. Holdings of agency securities are reduced over five years and
reach zero by February 2020.
o For agency MBS, the rate of prepayment is based on staff models using estimates of
housing market factors from one of the program’s investment managers, long-run
average prepayment speeds of MBS, and interest rate projections from the Tealbook.3
The projected rate of prepayment is sensitive to these underlying assumptions.
 In the scenario corresponding to Alternative A2, the Committee is assumed to begin
purchasing longer-term Treasury securities at a rate of about $55 billion per month over
eleven months in addition to those planned to be purchased in the MEP program.4 In
addition, the Committee is expected to maintain its policies of reinvesting principal
payments from its holdings of agency securities into agency MBS and of rolling over
maturing Treasury securities at auction.
 In the scenario corresponding to Alternative C, the Committee is expected to limit its
previously announced MEP program so that it purchases $200 billion in long-term
securities and sells $200 billion in short-term securities, with operations completed by
March 2012. Principal payments from Treasury securities continue to be reinvested at
auction and principal payments from agency MBS and agency debt securities are
reinvested in agency MBS until July 2012.
 Because current and expected near-term rates are below the average coupon rate on
outstanding Treasury securities, the market value at which these securities are purchased
will generally exceed their face value. As a result, although the par value of securities
s
e holdings remains constant under Alternatives A1 and B, total assets, which include the
t
o
N premiums associated with the securities, will rise by about $40 billion. Reserve balances
y will increase by the same amount.
r
o
t
a  The large-scale asset purchase program in Alternative A2 would put downward pressure
n
l a on the 10-year Treasury yield and result in more MBS prepayments than in the baseline.5
p
x
E The lower path for the interest rate would also imply that purchases of Treasury securities
would be made at prices that include a premium above their face value that exceeds the
premium in the baseline.
3 Projected prepayments on the existing stock of agency MBS are from a new FRBNY staff model
that is based on the prepayment model of one of the investment managers; projected prepayments
associated with expected future purchased agency MBS relies on a Board model that is based on the Bond
Market Association prepayment model.
4 The projections presented here are based on the $600 billion Treasury purchase program.
Alternative A2 also offered an option under which the Federal Reserve would purchase $300 billion of
agency MBS and $300 billion of Treasury securities.
5 See the memo “Possible Large-Scale Asset Purchase Program in the Treasury Market” by Board
and FRBNY staff for more details of the estimated term premium effect associated with the $600 billion
large-scale asset purchase program.
Page 48 of 54

--- Page 51 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
 In all scenarios, a minimum level of $25 billion is set for reserve balances. Once reserve
balances drop to this level, the Desk first purchases Treasury bills to maintain this level
going forward. Purchases of bills continue until these securities comprise one-third of the
Federal Reserve’s total Treasury security holdings—about the average share prior to the
crisis. Once this share is reached, the Federal Reserve buys notes and bonds in addition
to bills to maintain an approximate composition of the portfolio of one-third bills and
two-thirds coupon securities.
Liquidity Programs and Credit Facilities
 Loans through the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) peaked at $48
billion in December 2009. Credit extended through this facility declines to zero by the
end of 2015, reflecting loan maturities and prepayments.
 The assets held by TALF LLC remain at about $1 billion through 2014 before declining
to zero the following year. Assets held by TALF LLC consist of investments of
commitment fees collected by the LLC and the U.S. Treasury’s initial funding. In this
projection, the LLC does not purchase any asset-backed securities received by the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York in connection with a decision of a borrower to not
repay a TALF loan.
 The assets held by Maiden Lane LLC and Maiden Lane III LLC decline gradually over
time. The assets of Maiden Lane II LLC are assumed to roll off modestly through the
first increase in the federal funds rate; sales of assets in Maiden Lane II LLC’s portfolio
are assumed to resume subsequently, and holdings gradually fall to zero by June 2015.
LIABILITIES AND CAPITAL
s
 Federal Reserve notes in circulation grow in line with the staff forecast for money stock e
t
o
currency through the last quarter of 2013. Afterwards, Federal Reserve notes in N
circulation grow at the same rate as nominal GDP, as in the extended Tealbook y
r
o
projection. t
a
n
a
 Over the next six months, the level of reverse repurchase agreements is assumed to l
p
x
decline to $70 billion, about the average level observed over the past three years. E
 The U.S. Treasury’s General Account (TGA) follows the staff forecast through March
2012.6 Then, the TGA slowly drops back to its historical target level of $5 billion by
January 2013 as it is assumed that the Treasury will implement a new cash management
system and invest funds in excess of $5 billion. The TGA remains constant at $5 billion
over the remainder of the forecast period.
6 The staff forecast for end-of-month U.S. Treasury operating cash balances includes forecasts of
both the TGA and balances associated with the U.S. Treasury’s Tax and Loan program. Because balances
associated with the Tax and Loan program are only $2 billion, for the time being, this forecast is used as a
proxy for the level of TGA balances.
Page 49 of 54

--- Page 52 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
 We maintain the Supplementary Financing Account (SFA) balance at its current level of
zero throughout the forecast.
 Federal Reserve capital grows 15 percent per year, in line with the average rate of the
past ten years.
 In general, increases in the level of Federal Reserve assets are matched by higher levels
of reserve balances. Increases in the levels of liability items, such as Federal Reserve
notes in circulation or other liabilities, or increases in the level of Reserve Bank capital,
drain reserve balances. When increases in these liability or capital items would otherwise
cause reserve balances to fall below $25 billion, purchases of Treasury securities are
assumed in order to maintain that level of reserve balances.
 In the event that a Federal Reserve Bank’s earnings fall short of the amount necessary to
cover operating costs, pay dividends, and equate surplus to capital paid-in, a deferred
asset will be recorded. This deferred asset is recorded in lieu of reducing the Reserve
Bank’s capital and is reported on the liability side of the balance sheet as “Interest on
Federal Reserve notes due to U.S. Treasury.” This liability takes on a positive value
when weekly cumulative earnings have not yet been distributed to the Treasury, while
this liability takes on a negative value when earnings fall short of the expenses listed
above. In the projections, System-wide earnings are always sufficient to cover these
expenses, and this line item is set to zero.
s
e
t
o
N
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
Page 50 of 54

--- Page 53 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Alternative A2
Billions of dollars
Sep 30, 2011 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
Total assets 2,853 3,546 3,310 2,385 1,778 1,985
Selected assets
Liquidity programs for financial firms 1 0 0 0 0 0
Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 0 0 0 0 0 0
Lending through other credit facilities 11 4 0 0 0 0
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 11 4 0 0 0 0
Support for specific institutions 47 46 32 18 7 4
Credit extended to AIG 0 0 0 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, 47 46 32 18 7 4
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC
Securities held outright 2,644 3,234 3,066 2,198 1,629 1,854
U.S. Treasury securities 1,665 2,255 2,175 1,651 1,432 1,854
Agency debt securities 108 77 39 16 2 0
Agency mortgage-backed securities 871 902 852 531 195 0
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1 1 1 0 0 0
Total other assets 150 261 211 170 142 126
s
e
t
o
N
Total liabilities 2,801 3,476 3,218 2,263 1,616 1,770
y
r
Selected liabilities o
t
a
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 996 1,070 1,203 1,351 1,498 1,652 n
a
l
Reverse repurchase agreements 84 70 70 70 70 70 p
x
E
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,656 2,318 1,928 826 33 33
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 1,597 2,306 1,920 819 25 25
U.S. Treasury, General Account 56 10 5 5 5 5
U.S. Treasury, Supplementary Financing Account 0 0 0 0 0 0
Other balances 3 3 3 3 3 3
Interest on Federal Reserve Notes due 1 0 0 0 0 0
to U.S. Treasury
Total capital 52 70 93 123 162 215
Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
Page 51 of 54

--- Page 54 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Alternatives B and A1
Billions of dollars
Sep 30, 2011 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
Total assets 2,853 2,878 2,681 1,923 1,778 1,985
Selected assets
Liquidity programs for financial firms 1 0 0 0 0 0
Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 0 0 0 0 0 0
Lending through other credit facilities 11 4 0 0 0 0
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 11 4 0 0 0 0
Support for specific institutions 47 46 32 18 7 4
Credit extended to AIG 0 0 0 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, 47 46 32 18 7 4
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC
Securities held outright 2,644 2,634 2,487 1,772 1,657 1,877
U.S. Treasury securities 1,665 1,655 1,597 1,226 1,460 1,877
Agency debt securities 108 77 39 16 2 0
Agency mortgage-backed securities 871 902 852 530 195 0
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1 1 1 0 0 0
Total other assets 150 192 160 133 114 104
s
e
t
o
N
Total liabilities 2,801 2,808 2,588 1,800 1,616 1,770
y
r
o Selected liabilities
t
a
n Federal Reserve notes in circulation 996 1,070 1,203 1,351 1,498 1,652
a
l
p Reverse repurchase agreements 84 70 70 70 70 70
x
E
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,656 1,650 1,299 364 33 33
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 1,597 1,637 1,291 356 25 25
U.S. Treasury, General Account 56 10 5 5 5 5
U.S. Treasury, Supplementary Financing Account 0 0 0 0 0 0
Other balances 3 3 3 3 3 3
Interest on Federal Reserve Notes due 1 0 0 0 0 0
to U.S. Treasury
Total capital 52 70 93 123 162 215
Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
Page 52 of 54

--- Page 55 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Alternative C
Billions of dollars
Sep 30, 2011 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
Total assets 2,853 2,696 2,088 1,592 1,778 1,985
Selected assets
Liquidity programs for financial firms 1 0 0 0 0 0
Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 0 0 0 0 0 0
Lending through other credit facilities 11 4 0 0 0 0
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 11 4 0 0 0 0
Support for specific institutions 47 46 28 18 7 4
Credit extended to AIG 0 0 0 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, 47 46 28 18 7 4
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC
Securities held outright 2,644 2,480 1,924 1,461 1,671 1,888
U.S. Treasury securities 1,665 1,595 1,356 1,218 1,671 1,888
Agency debt securities 108 77 39 16 0 0
Agency mortgage-backed securities 871 809 529 227 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1 1 1 0 0 0
Total other assets 150 164 135 113 100 93
s
e
t
o
N
Total liabilities 2,801 2,625 1,995 1,469 1,616 1,770
y
r
Selected liabilities o
t
a
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 996 1,070 1,203 1,351 1,498 1,652 n
a
l
Reverse repurchase agreements 84 70 70 70 70 70 p
x
E
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,656 1,468 706 33 33 33
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 1,597 1,455 699 25 25 25
U.S. Treasury, General Account 56 10 5 5 5 5
U.S. Treasury, Supplementary Financing Account 0 0 0 0 0 0
Other balances 3 3 3 3 3 3
Interest on Federal Reserve Notes due 1 0 0 0 0 0
to U.S. Treasury
Total capital 52 70 93 123 162 215
Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
Page 53 of 54

--- Page 56 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) October 27, 2011
(This page is intentionally blank.)
s
e
t
o
N
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
Page 54 of 54

# Tables

## Page_11_Table_1


| Selected
Elements    | September
Statement                                                         | November Alternatives                                                                                                 |                                                                                                                       |                                             |                                                    |
|----------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
|                      |                                                                             | A1                                                                                                                    | A2                                                                                                                    | B                                           | C                                                  |
| Balance Sheet        |                                                                             |                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                       |                                             |                                                    |
| MEP                  | $400 billion;
complete by
end of June 2012                                  | unchanged                                                                                                             | unchanged                                                                                                             | unchanged                                   | cut to $200 billion;
complete by
end of March 2012 |
| Reinvestments        | payments of agency
debt and MBS into
agency MBS;
Treasuries into
Treasuries | unchanged                                                                                                             | unchanged                                                                                                             | unchanged                                   | unchanged                                          |
| Additional
Purchases | none                                                                        | none                                                                                                                  | $600 billion of
Treasuries
by end of Sept. 2012
OR
$300 billion each of
Treasuries and
agency MBS
by end of June 2012 | none                                        | none                                               |
| Forward Guidance     |                                                                             |                                                                                                                       |                                                                                                                       |                                             |                                                    |
| First Option         | at least through
mid-2013                                                   | at least through
mid-2014                                                                                             | unchanged                                                                                                             | unchanged                                   | at least through
2012                              |
| Second Option        |                                                                             | through end of 2014
and forecasts of
unemployment and
inflation at that time                                          |                                                                                                                       | at least for the next
six to seven quarters | at least for the next
four quarters                |
| Third Option         |                                                                             | at least as long as
unemployment and
inflation conditions
hold; expect such
conditions to prevail
through end of 2014 |                                                                                                                       |                                             |                                                    |