# 20111213_tealbook.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:40:31*
*Pages: 50, Tables: 0*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that
material was received on a confidential basis. Redacted material is indicated by
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content. All redacted
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of
Information Act.
Content last modified 02/03/2017.

--- Page 2 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR)
Report to the FOMC
on Economic Conditions
and Monetary Policy
Book B
Monetary Policy:
Strategies and Alternatives
December 8, 2011
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
by the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

--- Page 3 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
Monetary Policy Strategies
s
e
i
g
The staff’s estimates of short-run r*—the real federal funds rate that, if e
t
a
maintained, would return output to its potential in 12 quarters—generally have not r
t
S
changed significantly since the October Tealbook. As shown in the exhibit, “Equilibrium
Real Federal Funds Rate,” all but one of the estimates of the equilibrium real federal
funds rate continue to be more negative than the estimated actual real federal funds rate,
and all are low by historical standards. The estimates of short-run r* generated by the
FRB/US model and the EDO model that are conditioned on the staff’s outlook for the
economy (that is, the “Tealbook-consistent” measures) are essentially unrevised. The
reason these r* estimates are largely unchanged despite a downward revision to the staff
outlook for economic activity is that the staff also lowered the past and projected path for
potential GDP. However, the short-run r* estimates derived from the small structural
model and the single-equation model increased by 30 and 40 basis points, respectively.
The r* estimates derived from these models shifted up in response to the staff’s
reassessment of the historical level of potential output, which implied that the current
output gap is narrower than previously estimated. Finally, the r* estimates produced by
the FRB/US model and the EDO model based on their own projections revised up a little,
reflecting small movements since October in the models’ output gap projections over the
medium term.
The staff’s outlook for inflation and resource utilization over the medium-term
has changed little over the intermeeting period. Consequently, the policy prescriptions
from optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model that take account of the
underlying economic conditions in the extended staff baseline projection line up fairly
closely with those reported in the previous Tealbook.1 This result is shown in the exhibit
“Constrained vs. Unconstrained Monetary Policy.” In these simulations, policymakers
are assumed to place equal weights on keeping headline PCE inflation close to a 2
percent inflation goal, on keeping the unemployment rate close to the staff’s estimate of
the effective natural rate of unemployment, and on minimizing changes in the federal
funds rate.
1 The staff’s baseline forecast incorporates the effects of the large-scale asset purchase program that
was completed at the end of June, as well as the effects of the maturity extension program and the
modifications announced in September to the Federal Reserve’s reinvestment policies. As a result, these
effects have been incorporated into the optimal policy simulations.
Page 1 of 48

--- Page 4 ---

Authorized for Public Release

--- Page 5 ---

Authorized for Public Release

--- Page 6 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
The simulations indicate that the optimal path for the federal funds rate does not
begin to rise appreciably above zero until mid-2016, about one quarter later than in the
s previous Tealbook.2 By keeping the funds rate near zero for such a long stretch of time,
e
i
g
e optimal policy would promote a faster pace of economic recovery than under the baseline
t
a
r as well as somewhat higher inflation over the medium run.3 Specifically, the
t
S
unemployment rate would fall to 5¼ percent by 2016 (thereby undershooting the staff’s
estimate of the effective natural rate of unemployment for a time) and headline inflation
would be running at about 2¼ percent. In contrast, the baseline staff forecast shows the
unemployment rate falling to only 6½ percent and inflation running closer to 1½ percent
in 2016 (not shown).
If the nominal federal funds rate could fall below zero, the funds rate under
optimal policy would decline to minus 3 percent in the first half of 2013 and would not
turn positive until the second quarter of 2015. In this case, the unemployment rate would
decline more rapidly than under the constrained policy and would then remain roughly
stable at about 5½ percent after 2015. Under the constrained policy, inflation would stay
above target for longer than under the unconstrained policy, as policymakers are assumed
to respond to the lower bound constraint by credibly promising a period of modestly
elevated future inflation in order to boost inflation expectations and lower real rates over
the early part of the simulation.
As shown in the upper left panel of the exhibit “Policy Rules and Market-Based
Expectations for the Federal Funds Rate,” the funds rate projection implied by the
estimated outcome-based policy rule is little changed relative to the October Tealbook.
According to this rule, the funds rate is expected to move above its effective lower bound
in the fourth quarter of 2014—about one quarter later than in the previous Tealbook—
and then to rise to 2¾ percent by the end of 2016.4 As shown in the upper right panel,
2 Although the loss function uses headline inflation instead of core inflation, the real federal funds rate
shown in the upper right panel of the exhibit is calculated as the difference between the nominal funds rate
and a four-quarter moving average of core PCE inflation. Core PCE inflation is used to compute the real
rate because it provides a less volatile measure of inflation expectations than a four-quarter moving average
of headline inflation, and because it makes the real rate path shown in this exhibit easier to compare with
measures of the real rate reported elsewhere.
3 These simulations embed the assumption that policymakers can credibly commit to a policy rate path
that extends many years into the future, conditional on underlying economic conditions unfolding as
expected.
4 The estimated outcome-based rule depends on the lagged federal funds rate, defined as the actual
policy rate observed in the previous quarter, which has been constrained by its effective lower bound since
Page 4 of 48

--- Page 7 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
Policy Rules and Market-Based Expectations for the Federal Funds Rate
s
e
FRB/US Model Simulations of Market-Based Expectations i
g
Estimated Outcome-Based Rule for the Federal Funds Rate e
Percent Percent t
8 8 8 8 r
a
Current Tealbook Current Tealbook t
S
Previous Tealbook Previous Tealbook
7 7 7 7
6 6 6 6
5 5 5 5
4 4 4 4
3 3 3 3
2 2 2 2
1 1 1 1
0 0 0 0
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Note: The staff baseline projection for the federal funds rate is derived from the outcome-based policy rule shown in
the top-left panel. The top-right panel depicts the mean path and confidence intervals of future federal funds rates
derived from market quotes as of December 7. In both panels, dark and light shadings represent the 70 and 90 percent
confidence intervals respectively. Explanatory Note B provides further background information.
Near-Term Prescriptions of Simple Policy Rules
Constrained Policy Unconstrained Policy
2012Q1 2012Q2 2012Q1 2012Q2
Taylor (1993) rule 0.90 0.59 0.90 0.59
Previous Tealbook 0.86 0.62 0.86 0.62
Taylor (1999) rule 0.13 0.13 -1.82 -2.15
Previous Tealbook 0.13 0.13 -2.09 -2.28
Estimated outcome-based rule 0.13 0.13 -0.11 -0.42
Previous Tealbook Outlook 0.13 0.13 -0.12 -0.39
Estimated forecast-based rule 0.13 0.13 -0.27 -0.61
Previous Tealbook Outlook 0.13 0.13 -0.24 -0.60
First-difference rule 0.13 0.13 -0.02 -0.14
Previous Tealbook Outlook 0.13 0.13 0.03 0.01
Memo 2012Q1 2012Q2
Staff assumption 0.08 0.10
Fed funds futures 0.10 0.13
Median expectation of primary dealers 0.13 0.13
Blue Chip forecast (December 1, 2011 ) 0.10 0.10
Note: In calculating the near-term prescriptions of these simple policy rules, policymakers’ long-run inflation objective is
assumed to be 2 percent. Explanatory Note B provides further background information. For rules which have the lagged
policy rate as a right-hand-side variable, the lines denoted "Previous Tealbook Outlook" report rule prescriptions based
on the previous Tealbook’s staff outlook, but jumping off from the average value for the policy rate thus far in the quarter.
Page 5 of 48

--- Page 8 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
information from financial markets suggests that investors’ expectations for the path of
the federal funds rate have declined only slightly since the October Tealbook. Market
s participants continue to expect the funds rate to remain within its current target range
e
i
g
e until the second half of 2013. Thereafter, funds rate expectations are estimated to rise a
t
a
r bit more gradually than in the previous Tealbook, reaching about 2 percent by the end of
t
S
2016.
The lower panel of the exhibit provides near-term prescriptions from simple
policy rules.5 As shown in the left-hand columns, prescriptions for the federal funds rate
from most of the rules remain at or near the effective lower bound.6 The right-hand
columns display the prescriptions that would arise from these rules in the absence of the
lower-bound constraint. While the staff foresees a narrower output gap over the near-
term than in the October Tealbook, near-term inflation projections have declined a little,
with the consequence that, on net, prescriptions from all rules have remained broadly
unchanged compared with the October Tealbook.
late 2008. See the accompanying box “Policy Rule Prescriptions and the Lower Bound on Interest Rates”
for a discussion of possible responses to this constraint.
5 In contrast to the optimal control simulations, which use headline inflation in the policymakers’
objective function, the policy rule prescriptions use core inflation as the measure of inflation. This choice
of rule specification was made in light of the tendency for current and near-term core inflation rates to
outperform headline inflation rates as predictors of the medium-term behavior of headline inflation. Thus,
the use of headline inflation in the optimal control simulations and of core inflation in the policy rules are
both consistent with the notion that policymakers are concerned with the medium-term behavior of
headline inflation.
6 The Taylor (1993) rule, which places less weight on the output gap, prescribes policy rates above 50
basis points, but below 1 percent, for the first two quarters of 2012.
Page 6 of 48

--- Page 9 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
Policy Rule Prescriptions and the Lower Bound on Interest Rates
s
e
Since late 2008, the lower bound on nominal interest rates has kept the federal funds rate i
g
above the prescriptions of almost all of the simple policy rules reported in the Tealbook. e
t
a
This fact is illustrated in the figures below, which show with blue lines the unconstrained r
t
S
prescriptions of the outcome-based rule (upper-left panel), the first-difference rule (upper­
right panel), and the Taylor 1999 rule (lower-left panel). 1 The unconstrained prescriptions
of these three rules have been markedly below the actual funds rate since early 2009, and
are projected to remain so through 2014. In contrast, the Taylor 1993 rule (the red line in
the lower-left panel), because of its weaker response to economic slack, has consistently
prescribed levels of the funds rate close to actual values.2
In the research literature, a standard response to the lower bound problem is to substitute
future policy accommodation for the easing that would have occurred in the absence of the
lower bound. Prior research suggests that one way to achieve this outcome is to promise
to make up, over time, some or all of the deviations from the rule that result from hitting
the lower bound, as economic circumstances and the easing of the constraint allow.
1 The rules used in this box are described in Explanatory Note B. The unconstrained prescriptions of
the outcome-based and first-difference rules are dynamically simulated from 2008Q4, while those
reported in the Monetary Policy Strategies section of Tealbook B are calculated using the actual lagged
federal funds rate from the most recent quarter.
2 The staff’s baseline forecast incorporates the effects of the large-scale asset purchase program that
was completed at the end of June, as well as the effects of the maturity extension program and the
modifications to the Federal Reserve's investment policies announced in September. No adjustment is
made to the intercept or coefficient terms of the simple rules to account for these policies.
Page 7 of 48

--- Page 10 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
To bring out the implications of such a strategy, the table at the bottom-right of the
previous page reports the cumulative shortfall to date for these four rules. In the case of
s the outcome-based rule, the cumulative shortfall is nearly 7.5 percentage-point years,
e
i
g implying that policymakers would need to keep the federal funds rate 2.5 percentage
e
t
a points below the rule’s prescriptions for three years to completely make up for past
r
S t departures from the rule. Full makeup would involve similarly large adjustments in the case
of the first-difference rule and the Taylor 1999 rule, but would imply almost no modification
to the prescriptions of the Taylor 1993 rule. 3
The first-difference rule responds to projected changes in resource utilization, not the level
of the output gap. This characteristic helps mitigate problems arising from
mismeasurement of economic slack but can also compound the poor performance of the
rule near the effective lower bound. Note, for example, that the constrained first-
difference rule—in contrast to the unconstrained rule—calls for policy restraint relatively
promptly as slack diminishes, both because of the responsiveness of the rule to the
expected change in the output gap and because the lagged level of the federal funds rate is
constrained to be at its effective lower bound. The outcome-based rule exhibits similar
behavior (albeit in a more muted form) because its prescriptions depend not only on
inflation and the level of the output gap, but also on the change in the output gap and
lagged constrained values of the funds rate. Simulation analysis suggests that this type of
dependence may inhibit economic recovery when policy is constrained for a time by the
lower bound. Accordingly, Committee participants who take counsel from rules of this
nature may want to make allowances for the influence of this effect, perhaps by replacing
the actual lagged funds rate in the rule with its unconstrained lagged value, by augmenting
the rule with an additional response to the level of resource utilization, or by pursuing the
“makeup” strategy discussed above.
The general strategy of promising to compensate for past shortfalls in policy rule settings is
similar, in some respects, to one in which the central bank targets the level of nominal
income. The latter strategy involves promising to close, over time, any shortfall from the
target path for nominal income that opens up while policy is constrained by the lower
bound.4 The effectiveness of both approaches depends critically on forward-looking
behavior on the part of the public and the successful communication and credibility of
policy. Each strategy has its merits, and we cannot say which would perform best in
practice. One advantage of the “makeup” strategy may be that it makes clear that policy
setting will return to a more historically typical approach once the cumulative past shortfall
has been made up, whereas nominal-income targeting would likely involve a more distinct
break from past practices. At the same time, research suggests that nominal-income
targeting and related strategies may have especially good properties in stabilizing real
activity and inflation in the face of a range of shocks.
3
For a more extensive discussion of this strategy, see David Reifschneider and John C. Williams
(2000), “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
32(4): 936−966.
4
See, in particular, “Alternative Monetary Policy Frameworks” by Christopher Erceg, Michael Kiley
and David López-Salido (October 6, 2011) and “Adopting an Alternative Monetary Policy Framework” by
Christopher Erceg, David López-Salido and Robert Tetlow (July 29, 2011).
Page 8 of 48

--- Page 11 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
Monetary Policy Alternatives
This Tealbook presents three policy alternatives—labeled A, B, and C—for the
Committee’s consideration. Of course, the Committee could blend components of the various
alternatives to construct its desired statement.
The alternatives provide a number of options regarding balance sheet policies.
Alternative A offers the Committee a choice between two new asset purchase programs: one
that is discrete in nature (buy $500 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) by the
end of December 2012), and one that reflects a more incremental but open-ended approach
(initially buy $40 billion of agency MBS per month, and adjust the program as needed to foster s
e
v
the Committee’s objectives).1 Alternatives A and B maintain the maturity extension program t i
a
n
that the Committee announced at its September meeting, while Alternative C reduces the size of r
e
t
this program by half and draws it to a close three months earlier. All three alternatives continue A l
the Committee’s existing policies of reinvesting principal payments on agency debt and MBS
into MBS and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction.
The draft statements offer several approaches for providing guidance regarding the future
path of the federal funds rate. Alternative B reiterates the Committee’s existing forward
guidance by noting that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for
the federal funds rate “at least through mid-2013.” Alternative C begins to remove policy
accommodation in part by shortening the projected period over which rates will stay low to “at
least through 2012.” Alternative A provides further policy accommodation by lengthening the
anticipated period of near-zero rates to “at least through the end of 2014.” Alternative A also
would clarify the conditional nature of the forward guidance by adding forecasts for
unemployment and inflation at the end of 2014.2
1 For a comparison of the relative merits of specifying a discrete versus an incremental strategy for expanding
the balance sheet, see the memo “Incremental Balance Sheet Policies” (by David Reifschneider, John Roberts, and
Jae Sim of the Federal Reserve Board) that was sent to the Committee on October 24, 2011.
2 For a discussion of alternative forms of forward rate guidance, see the memo “Approaches to Clarifying the
Conditionality in the Committee’s Forward Guidance” (by Brian Doyle, Michael Kiley, Andrew Levin, David
Lopez-Salido, Steve Meyer, Ed Nelson, Matt Raskin, David Reifschneider, and Robert Tetlow of the Federal
Reserve Board, and Spence Hilton of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York) that was sent to the Committee on
September 12, 2011.
Page 9 of 48

--- Page 12 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
The draft statements also differ in their characterizations of economic conditions. In
describing the economy, Alternative B says that it has been expanding “moderately,” while
Alternative A uses “modestly.” Alternative C instead describes the pace of economic activity as
having strengthened somewhat. Alternative B notes that some slowing in global growth is
apparent. In contrast, Alternative A states with a bit more assertion that “global growth appears
to be slowing,” while Alternative C makes no mention of growth abroad. All of the statements
say that the unemployment rate remains elevated, but differ in describing other aspects of labor
market conditions. Alternatives A and B both point to some improvement in overall labor
market conditions, while Alternative C characterizes the unemployment rate as having declined
of late and notes that “employment has continued to increase.” Alternatives A and B state that
inflation has moderated since earlier in the year, while Alternative C says that inflation has
s moderated “only somewhat” over that period.
e
v
i
t
a
n
r Regarding the economic outlook, Alternative B indicates that the Committee expects a
e
t
A l “moderate” pace of growth over coming quarters and sees the unemployment rate declining
“only gradually.” Alternative A says the Committee anticipates that, absent further policy
action, the pace of economic growth would remain “modest” and the unemployment rate would
decline “only very gradually.” In contrast, Alternative C states that the FOMC anticipates “some
strengthening” in economic growth with a gradual decline in the unemployment rate. Turning to
inflation, Alternatives A and B note that it will settle “at or below” mandate-consistent levels,
while Alternative C instead refers to inflation settling “at” mandate-consistent levels.
Alternatives A and B say that strains in global financial markets continue to pose significant
downside risks to the economic outlook. In addition, Alternative A includes the characterization
that “the risks to the outlook for inflation also appear to be tilted to the downside.” Alternative C
makes no mention of risks.
The final paragraph of each statement contains options for language about the
Committee’s future policy actions. Alternatives A and B alter the November statement to say the
Committee will “monitor the economic outlook and financial developments” and is prepared to
employ its tools to promote recovery. Alternative C provides a more neutral final sentence,
noting that the Committee is prepared to employ its tools as appropriate to promote its
objectives.
The following table highlights key elements of the differences in the policy actions
associated with each alternative statement. The table is followed by complete draft statements,
and then by a summary of the arguments for each alternative.
Page 10 of 48

--- Page 13 ---

Authorized for Public Release

--- Page 14 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
NOVEMBER FOMC STATEMENT
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September
indicates that economic growth strengthened somewhat in the third quarter, reflecting in
part a reversal of the temporary factors that had weighed on growth earlier in the year.
Nonetheless, recent indicators point to continuing weakness in overall labor market
conditions, and the unemployment rate remains elevated. Household spending has
increased at a somewhat faster pace in recent months. Business investment in equipment
and software has continued to expand, but investment in nonresidential structures is still
weak, and the housing sector remains depressed. Inflation appears to have moderated
since earlier in the year as prices of energy and some commodities have declined from
their peaks. Longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee continues to expect a moderate pace of
s
e
v economic growth over coming quarters and consequently anticipates that the
i
t
a unemployment rate will decline only gradually toward levels that the Committee judges
n
r to be consistent with its dual mandate. Moreover, there are significant downside risks to
e
t
l the economic outlook, including strains in global financial markets. The Committee also
A
anticipates that inflation will settle, over coming quarters, at levels at or below those
consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate as the effects of past energy and other
commodity price increases dissipate further. However, the Committee will continue to
pay close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation expectations.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at
levels consistent with the dual mandate, the Committee decided today to continue its
program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in
September. The Committee is maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal
payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in
agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its securities
holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate.
4. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of
resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are likely
to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013.
5. The Committee will continue to assess the economic outlook in light of incoming
information and is prepared to employ its tools to promote a stronger economic recovery
in a context of price stability.
Page 12 of 48

--- Page 15 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
DECEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September
November indicates suggests that economic growth strengthened somewhat in the third
quarter, reflecting in part a reversal of the temporary factors that had weighed on growth
earlier in the year the economy has been expanding modestly, while global growth
appears to be slowing. Nonetheless Although recent indicators point to continuing
weakness some improvement in overall labor market conditions, and the unemployment
rate remains elevated. Household spending has increased at a somewhat faster pace in
recent months. continued to advance, but business fixed investment in equipment and
software has continued to expand appears to be increasing less rapidly but investment
in nonresidential structures is still weak, and the housing sector remains depressed.
Inflation appears to have has moderated since earlier in the year, as prices of energy and
some commodities have declined from their peaks. and longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable.
s
e
v
i
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum a t
n
employment and price stability. The Committee continues to expects that, absent r
e
further policy action, a moderate the pace of economic growth would remain modest l t
A
over coming quarters and consequently anticipates that the unemployment rate will
would decline only very gradually toward levels that the Committee judges to be
consistent with its dual mandate. Moreover, there are significant downside risks to the
economic outlook, including strains in global financial markets. the Committee also
anticipates that inflation will would settle, over coming quarters, at levels at or below
those consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate as the effects of past energy and
other commodity price increases dissipate further. Strains in global financial markets
continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook, and the risks to
the outlook for inflation also appear to be tilted to the downside. However, the
Committee will continue to pay close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation
expectations.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at
levels consistent with the dual mandate, the Committee decided today to purchase a
further $500 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities by the end of December
2012. In addition, the Committee intends to continue its program to extend the
average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in September. The
Committee is also maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction.
These programs should put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates,
provide support to mortgage markets, and help make broader financial conditions
more accommodative. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition
of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate.
OR
Page 13 of 48

--- Page 16 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
3′. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at
levels consistent with the dual mandate, the Committee decided today to undertake a
program of purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities. The Committee has
initially authorized purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities of $40 billion
per month, and will adjust this program as needed to foster its objectives of
maximum employment and stable prices. In addition, the Committee will continue
its program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in
September. The Committee is also maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting
principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed
securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury
securities at auction. These programs should put downward pressure on longer-term
interest rates, provide support to mortgage markets, and help make broader
financial conditions more accommodative. The Committee will regularly review the
size and composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as
appropriate.
s
e
v
i
t 4. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
a
n
r percent. and currently The Committee now anticipates that economic conditions—
e
t including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the
l
A
medium run—are likely to warrant this exceptionally low levels range for the federal
funds rate at least through mid-2013 the end of 2014. Specifically, given its anticipated
path for monetary policy, the Committee currently projects that the unemployment
rate will be roughly [ 7 ] percent and the inflation rate (as measured by the price
index for personal consumption expenditures) will be around [ 2 ] percent at the end
of 2014.
5. The Committee will continue to assess monitor the economic outlook in light of
incoming information and financial developments and is prepared to employ its tools to
promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability.
Page 14 of 48

--- Page 17 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
DECEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September
November indicates suggests that economic growth strengthened somewhat in the third
quarter, reflecting in part a reversal of the temporary factors that had weighed on growth
earlier in the year the economy has been expanding moderately, notwithstanding
some apparent slowing in global growth. Nonetheless While recent indicators point to
continuing weakness some improvement in overall labor market conditions, and the
unemployment rate remains elevated. Household spending has increased at a somewhat
faster pace in recent months. continued to advance, but business fixed investment in
equipment and software has continued to expand appears to be increasing less rapidly
but investment in nonresidential structures is still weak, and the housing sector remains
depressed. Inflation appears to have has moderated since earlier in the year, as prices of
energy and some commodities have declined from their peaks. and longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable.
s
e
v
i
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum a t
n
employment and price stability. The Committee continues to expect a moderate pace of r
e
economic growth over coming quarters and consequently anticipates that the l t
A
unemployment rate will decline only gradually toward levels that the Committee judges
to be consistent with its dual mandate. Moreover, there are Strains in global financial
markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook, including
strains in global financial markets. The Committee also anticipates that inflation will
settle, over coming quarters, at levels at or below those consistent with the Committee’s
dual mandate as the effects of past energy and other commodity price increases dissipate
further. However, the Committee will continue to pay close attention to the evolution of
inflation and inflation expectations.
3. To support a stronger economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at
levels consistent with the dual mandate, the Committee decided today to continue its
program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as announced in
September. The Committee is maintaining its existing policies of reinvesting principal
payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in
agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction. The Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its securities
holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate.
4. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and currently anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of
resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are likely
to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013.
5. The Committee will continue to assess monitor the economic outlook in light of
incoming information and financial developments and is prepared to employ its tools to
promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability.
Page 15 of 48

--- Page 18 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
DECEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in September
November indicates suggests that the pace of economic growth activity has
strengthened somewhat in the third quarter, reflecting in part a reversal of the temporary
factors that had weighed on growth earlier in the year. Nonetheless, recent indicators
point to continuing weakness in overall labor market conditions, and Although the
unemployment rate remains elevated, it has declined of late, and employment has
continued to increase. Household spending has increased at a somewhat faster pace in
recent months advanced further, and business fixed investment in equipment and
software has continued to expand, but investment in nonresidential structures is still
weak, and the housing sector remains depressed. Inflation appears to have has
moderated only somewhat since earlier in the year, despite a decline in the as prices of
energy and some commodities have declined from their peaks. Longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable.
s
e
v
i
t
a 2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
n
r employment and price stability. The Committee continues to expects a moderate pace
e
t
l some strengthening of economic growth over coming quarters and consequently
A
anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline only gradually toward levels that the
Committee judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. Moreover, there are significant
downside risks to the economic outlook, including strains in global financial markets.
The Committee also anticipates that inflation will settle, over coming quarters, at levels at
or below those consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate as the effects of past
energy and other commodity price increases dissipate further. However, the Committee
will continue to pay close attention to the evolution of inflation and inflation
expectations.
3. To support a stronger the economic recovery and to while helping to ensure that
inflation, over time, is at does not exceed levels that are consistent with the dual
mandate, the Committee decided today to continue its reduce by half the size of the
program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities as that it announced
in September. In particular, the Committee intends to limit purchases and sales of
securities under this program to $200 billion each and to complete these operations
by the end of March 2012. The Committee is maintaining its existing policies of
reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-
backed securities in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing
Treasury securities at auction. The Committee will regularly review the size and
composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as
appropriate.
4. The Committee also decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and currently now anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of
resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are likely
to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013
2012.
Page 16 of 48

--- Page 19 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
5. The Committee will continue to assess the economic outlook in light of incoming
information and is prepared to employ its tools as appropriate to promote a stronger
economic recovery in a context of price stability its objectives of maximum
employment and stable prices.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
Page 17 of 48

--- Page 20 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B
The Committee may judge that the recent economic data indicates that the economic
recovery has strengthened somewhat since the summer and is likely to remain on track and so
see no need for additional monetary policy action at this time. If so, it may wish to issue a
statement like that of Alternative B, which includes no new policy steps and contains language
that is—aside from updating the description of current economic conditions—quite similar to
that of the November statement. The Committee may see the available information as indicating
that the economy has been expanding moderately and inflation has moderated in recent months.
It may DOVRinterpret the data as pointing to some improvement in overall labor market conditions.
Indeed, although the unemployment rate remains elevated, it moved down noticeably last month,
albeit in part because labor force participation declined. Household spending has continued to
s
e
v
i advance. Moreover, with significant policy easing having been put in place in August and
t
a
n
September, the Committee may see the current outlook—including a moderate pace of economic
r
e
t
A l growth over coming quarters with inflation settling at or below mandate-consistent levels—as
likely to be the best that can be achieved in the face of the headwinds caused by the financial
crisis and bursting of the housing bubble.
Though policymakers may believe that there are significant downside risks to the
economic outlook, they may see no need to take additional steps to address those risks if they
anticipate that other government officials will do so in the relatively near term. In particular,
they may think that the European authorities will soon begin to take significant steps to stabilize
the situation there and also anticipate that the Congress will act to extend the payroll tax cuts and
unemployment insurance benefits in coming weeks, thereby avoiding a hit to economic growth
that would otherwise materialize early next year.3
The Committee also may judge that the uncertainty associated with its current outlook for
the economy is unusually high, and so may wish to await additional information that could bring
greater clarity to the near-term direction of the U.S. economy before deciding whether to take
further policy action. Along with additional data on economic activity and inflation, the
Committee may wish to see what actions the European authorities take to help address the
European fiscal and financial crisis and what steps the Congress takes in coming weeks
regarding payroll tax cuts and extended unemployment insurance benefits. With such
3 Indeed, should the meeting of the European Council on December 9 produce an agreement that embodies
forceful actions to address the problems in the euro-area, the Committee could choose to remove the word
“significant” from SDUDJUDSKRIthe statement.
Page 18 of 48

--- Page 21 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
information in hand, the Committee may be more confident in adjusting its policies, such as by
changing its investment decisions or its forward rate guidance, and be more certain that it could
remain committed to those adjustments over coming quarters.
Some policymakers may see benefits from providing additional policy accommodation at
this meeting in order to hasten progress toward the dual mandate, but judge that the costs and
risks associated with the options available for doing so outweigh the likely gains. Although
current readings of market interest rates suggest that an extension of the Committee’s forward
rate guidance could put downward pressure on interest rates and so provide additional support
for the recovery, policymakers may be concerned that stating that they expect to hold the target
federal funds rate at its lower bound that far in the future—at least through the end of 2014—
would not be viewed as credible and thus would not provide meaningful additional stimulus to
s
e
v
the economy. Indeed, by announcing such guidance, the Committee might undermine i
t
a
confidence in the economic outlook and so weaken rather than strengthen economic growth. In n
r
e
t
addition, members may be skeptical that providing explicit projections of unemployment and l
A
inflation rates in the statement would be all that helpful in clarifying the conditional nature of the
Committee’s forward rate guidance. They might also be concerned that such forecasts would not
adequately reflect the range of views on the Committee. For these reasons, policymakers may
view other communications tools, such as the Summary of Economic Projections, as likely to be
more effective in disseminating additional information to the public about the expected future
stance of monetary policy.
Policymakers may also not wish to engage in additional asset purchases. They might
view the expected improvement in the path of the unemployment rate as being small relative to
their concerns about their ability to normalize the stance of policy in a timely way when doing so
becomes appropriate. Moreover, they may worry that a significant further expansion of the
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and corresponding supply of reserve balances could lead the
public to doubt the Committee’s ability to exit smoothly and in a timely fashion, leading to
undesirably high expected and actual inflation. Given the extraordinarily low interest rate
environment, they may also be concerned that holding an appreciably larger portfolio of longer-
term securities would result in too great a downside risk to the Federal Reserve’s net worth or net
income if interest rates increased unexpectedly rapidly.
Alternatively, policymakers may anticipate somewhat less slack in resource markets than
does the staff, but nonetheless consider it premature to begin reducing monetary policy
accommodation. On the one hand, some participants may expect a relatively rapid rebound in
Page 19 of 48

--- Page 22 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
economic activity, as in the “Faster Snapback” alternative simulation in Tealbook Part A.
Nonetheless, given the current elevated level of unemployment, these participants may anticipate
that the economy will continue to operate noticeably below its potential for a while, and so
choose to make no change to the stance of monetary policy at this meeting. On the other hand,
some policymakers may believe that the financial crisis and deep recession have caused a
significant permanent reduction in the path of potential output. If so, they may be concerned that
the existing level of monetary policy accommodation could eventually prove excessive, with
inflation rising to undesirable levels. However, with inflation having moderated in recent
months, policymakers may judge that these risks remain muted and the Committee can safely
wait for some time before beginning to remove policy accommodation.
s Even if policymakers view economic and financial conditions as potentially justifying an
e
v
i adjustment to the stance of monetary policy, the Committee may prefer to postpone additional
t
a
n
r policy actions until it has provided additional information about its goals and its framework for
e
t
A l making policy decisions. With work on the consensus monetary policy principles document
continuing, and with the possibility that a decision might be reached at the January meeting,
waiting a few weeks to act within an improved communications framework may be seen by the
Committee as being preferable in the current environment.
A statement such as Alternative B would be broadly in line with market expectations.
According to the Desk’s latest survey, the primary dealers continue to anticipate that the first
increase in the target federal funds rate will occur after mid-2013, timing that is roughly in line
with readings of market interest rates. Although the dealers now see a much greater chance that
the Committee will alter its forward rate guidance at some point over the next year in order to
provide additional policy accommodation, their assessment of the odds of such a change at this
meeting are relatively low. The dealers place even lower odds on any changes to the
Committee’s balance sheet policies at this meeting. Therefore, interest rates along the maturity
spectrum would likely be little changed if the Committee issued a statement like Alternative B.
Equity prices and the foreign exchange value of the dollar would likely also exhibit little
reaction.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A
The Committee may interpret the information received since the November meeting,
including the apparently poorer prospects for global economic growth, as pointing to the need for
additional policy accommodation to support the U.S. economic recovery or to address the
Page 20 of 48

--- Page 23 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
downside risks to the U.S. economy, as in Alternative A. Committee participants may now
expect that, in the absence of further policy action, economic growth would remain modest over
coming quarters and the unemployment rate would decline only very gradually. In addition, they
may judge that strains in global financial markets pose significant downside risks to the domestic
economic outlook. With levels of resource slack expected to remain quite high for some time,
policymakers may also see inflation coming in over time at levels at or below those consistent
with the dual mandate, and might see the risks to the outlook for inflation as tilted to the
downside. Policymakers may even place some odds on the U.S. economy entering a new
downturn either because of domestic factors, as in the “Homegrown Recession” alternative
simulation, or because of an intensification of the difficulties in Europe, as in the “European
Crisis with Severe Spillovers” simulation. If policymakers see the economy’s trajectory as likely
to fall short on both the maximum employment and price stability dimensions of the s
e
v
Committee’s dual mandate, and as potentially doing so for a period that extends well into the t i
a
n
medium term, they may be disposed to take action at this meeting. Participants may judge that r
e
t
l
such action would help to shore up the public’s confidence in the Committee’s commitment to A
foster economic recovery and help guard against deflationary pressures.
Under such circumstances, the Committee may choose to issue a statement, like that of
Alternative A, which extends the period over which the Committee anticipates that it will keep
rates exceptionally low, provides additional information regarding the conditionality of that
guidance, and announces an additional asset purchase program. Under Alternative A, the
Committee would extend substantially the period over which it expected to maintain near-zero
rates by replacing “at least through mid-2013,” which has been in the previous three FOMC
statements, with “at least through the end of 2014.” Such an extension would be supported by
the constrained optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model presented in the “Monetary
Policy Strategies” section of Tealbook Part B, which suggest that the Committee could leave the
target federal funds rate unchanged through approximately the end of 2015 in order to foster a
faster pace of recovery without spurring inflation to levels that are significantly above those the
Committee views as being mandate-consistent. Market participants currently appear to see some
chance that the target federal funds rate will rise by early 2014, suggesting that there is scope for
such a change in forward guidance to affect investor expectations and put downward pressure on
medium- and longer-term interest rates.
Under Alternative A, policymakers would combine the date change described above with
an enhancement to its forward rate guidance. Specifically, to emphasize that the date specified
in its forward guidance is conditional on economic outcomes, the Committee would provide its
Page 21 of 48

--- Page 24 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
current projections of unemployment and inflation at the end of 2014. The forecasts would be
conditioned on the Committee’s anticipated path for monetary policy, including the announced
expectation that the target range would be unchanged at least through the end of 2014. Such a
formulation could help increase the public’s understanding of the Committee’s intentions for the
timing and conditionality of the first increase in the target rate, thereby helping to reduce the
chance that medium- and longer-term interest rates will rise too soon or too quickly if the
recovery progresses as anticipated. The statement could be reinforced with other forms of
communication to provide information about the Committee’s objectives and reaction function.
Policymakers may judge that the current economic outlook and attendant downside risks
also warrant undertaking additional asset purchases. Specifically, with the housing sector still
s depressed, policymakers may wish to purchase additional agency MBS, with the aim of reducing
e
v
i longer-term interest rates and providing support to mortgage markets. The Committee could
t
a
n
r choose to execute such purchases in the form of a discrete program, as it has done in the past, by
e
t
A l opting for paragraph 3 of the draft statement. This paragraph specifies that the Committee
intends to purchase $500 billion of agency MBS by the end of December 2012. Staff estimates
that such a purchase program would push down the level of medium- and longer-term private
interest rates by roughly 10 basis points and might ease financial conditions enough to reduce the
unemployment rate by about 0.2 percentage points at the end of 2013, accompanied by an
increase in PCE inflation of about 0.1 percentage point over the next two years.4 These effects
would be somewhat larger to the extent that the purchase program trimmed yields on MBS
relative to those on Treasury securities of comparable maturity. The effects would also be
increased if the public interpreted this policy step as indicating that the Federal Reserve would
likely keep short-term rates lower for a longer period of time than had been expected, or if
concerns about the downside risks to the economic outlook were reduced, bolstering consumer
and business sentiment. To the extent that the Federal Reserve’s resulting larger balance sheet
raised concerns about its ability to reduce policy accommodation sufficiently quickly when
appropriate, this policy step could possibly be accompanied by some boost to inflation
expectations and possibly also to actual inflation.
4 For a discussion of the basis of these estimates, see the memos “Possible Large-Scale Asset Purchase Program
in the Treasury Market” (by Alyssa Cambron, Michelle Ezer, Katherine Femia, Kunal Gooriah, Winston Liu, Jeff
Moore, Lisa Stowe, and Julie Remache of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and Seth Carpenter, Sophia
Castelo, Canlin Li, Laura Lipscomb, Elizabeth Klee, Jane Ihrig, Ari Morse, and Dan Quinn of the Federal Reserve
Board) and “Possible FOMC Actions in the MBS Markets” (by Diana Hancock, Deborah Leonard, and Wayne
Passmore of the Federal Reserve Board) that were sent to the Committee on October 27, 2011.
Page 22 of 48

--- Page 25 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
The Committee could instead choose to adopt paragraph 3′ of the draft statement, under
which it would implement an incremental, open-ended purchase program. Under this approach,
the Committee would specify an initial pace of purchases of agency MBS of $40 billion per
month without providing information about the anticipated total quantity of such purchases. In
its statement, the Committee would say that it “will adjust this program as needed” to foster its
objectives. While the economic effects of an open-ended purchase program are not readily
quantifiable, by definition, such a program should generally also help to put downward pressure
on longer-term interest rates, provide support to mortgage markets, and help make broader
financial conditions more accommodative.
In general, large asset purchase programs of a discrete nature (as in paragraph 3) may be
preferable when the Committee wants to be clear that it is undertaking a policy action of
s
e
v
significant size. In contrast, an incremental, open-ended program (as in paragraph 3′) might give i
t
a
the Committee scope for more nimble adjustment, either up or down, of the overall size of the n
r
e
t
purchase program in light of changes in the Committee’s outlook for real activity and inflation. l
A
Such an open-ended program also could be favored if the Committee were not confident of the
size of purchase program needed to promote its objectives, and so wanted to communicate that it
would “do whatever it takes” to ensure sufficient support for the recovery.5
The primary dealers generally reported in the latest Desk survey that they did not expect
significant changes to the statement at this meeting, and they put the odds that the forward rate
guidance would be changed at this meeting at only about 20 percent. However, they now assign
a much higher probability—about 80 percent—to a change in the FOMC’s communication
strategy in the coming year. Thus an announcement of a longer expected period of near-zero
rates and enhanced forward guidance would not come as a complete surprise. The Committee’s
announcement of additional agency MBS purchases would surprise market participants
somewhat more: The dealers essentially saw no chance of such a step being taken at this
meeting, and they put a probability of about 60 percent on it being taken over the coming year.
Longer-term interest rates would decline following a statement like that of Alternative A, with
the effects of a discrete $500 billion purchase program probably somewhat larger, owing to its
greater clarity. Equity prices would likely increase, although that rise could be tempered if
5 As noted above, a comparison of the merits of specifying a discrete versus an incremental strategy for
expanding the balance sheet is provided in the memo “Incremental Balance Sheet Policies” (by David
Reifschneider, John Roberts, and Jae Sim of the Federal Reserve Board) that was sent to the Committee on October
24, 2011.
Page 23 of 48

--- Page 26 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
investors read the first two paragraphs of the statement as pointing to significantly weaker
underlying economic activity. The foreign exchange value of the dollar would likely decline.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE C
Some Committee members may view the information received since the November
meeting as suggesting that the pace of economic activity has strengthened and so now have
greater confidence that the economic recovery is gaining traction. In particular, although the
unemployment rate remains elevated, it has declined of late, and employment has continued to
increase. In addition, household spending has advanced further, and business fixed investment is
still expanding. Indeed, members may judge that the economy is likely to follow the trajectory
of the “Faster Snapback” alternative simulation. Some members may also view the downside
s
e
v risks to U.S. economic growth posed by the situation in Europe with significantly less trepidation
i
t
a
n than others, perhaps because they place higher odds on European authorities taking forceful
r
e
t actions to address their fiscal and banking problems and to reduce the potential for spillover
l
A
effects on global economic growth. If so, such members may expect medium-run outcomes for
the U.S. economy that are akin to those described in the “Faster European Recovery” alternative
simulation.
In addition, some members may place the level of potential output significantly below
that in the staff’s baseline scenario. If so, they may not see a need for additional policy
accommodation to spur a reduction in resource slack, and may view the monetary
accommodation already in place as more likely to foster higher inflation than stronger economic
growth, as in the “Greater Supply-Side Damage” simulation. Indeed, members may be
uncomfortable with the rise in core inflation over the past year, and may be worried that the
current degree of policy accommodation, including the ongoing maturity extension program, is
posing an unacceptably large risk to the stability of inflation expectations. Accordingly,
members may wish to scale back the pace and magnitude of the maturity extension program, as
in Alternative C. If members are particularly concerned that inflationary pressures could gather
steam in the near term, they may wish to take an additional step to guard against that risk by
changing the forward guidance to indicate that economic conditions are likely to warrant the
current low range for the federal funds rate “at least through 2012” rather than “at least through
mid-2013” as in the November statement. Such a change in language would signal that the
incoming information has brought the Committee significantly closer to beginning the removal
of policy accommodation.
Page 24 of 48

--- Page 27 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
Market participants would greet a statement such as that of Alternative C with
considerable surprise. According to the Desk’s survey, very few of the primary dealers expect
the Committee will adjust any of the elements of its statement in the direction of policy
tightening over the next year. None expects such changes at this meeting. In the event, market
participants would price in a nearer-term onset of the removal of policy accommodation, as well
as the likelihood of a faster exit from the current accommodative policy stance. As a result,
interest rates would likely rise across the yield curve. Equity prices would likely fall, and the
foreign exchange value of the dollar would probably rise.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
Page 25 of 48

--- Page 28 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
LONG-RUN PROJECTIONS OF THE BALANCE SHEET AND MONETARY BASE
The staff has prepared three scenarios for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet that
correspond to the policy alternatives A, B, and C. The scenario for Alternative A reflects
the $500 billion agency MBS purchase program included in paragraph 3, but is consistent
with the open-ended purchase program in paragraph 3’ if purchases last, and are expected
to last, for one year. Projections under each scenario are based on assumptions about the
trajectory of various components of the balance sheet. Details of these assumptions, as
well as projections for each major component of the balance sheet, can be found in
Explanatory Note C.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
For the balance sheet scenario that corresponds to Alternative B, the Committee is
assumed to complete the maturity extension program (MEP) that it announced in
September, purchasing a total of $400 billion (par value) of Treasury securities with
remaining maturities of six years or more and selling the same par amount of securities
with remaining maturities of three years or less by the end of June 2012. The Committee
also continues to reinvest principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and MBS
into agency MBS, while principal from maturing Treasury securities is reinvested at
auction according to the Desk’s current practice (that is, reinvesting roughly
proportionally across all Treasury securities that are being issued on the date the
securities mature). These policy choices would keep System Open Market Account
Page 26 of 48

--- Page 29 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
(SOMA) securities holdings roughly constant at about $2.6 trillion. All reinvestment is
assumed to cease in April 2014, six months before the first increase in the target federal
funds rate in the staff economic forecast, and then the balance sheet begins to contract. In
April 2015, the Committee begins to sell its remaining holdings of agency MBS and
agency debt securities at a pace that reduces the amount of these securities in the
portfolio to zero in five years—that is, by March 2020.1 The combination of no
reinvestment and the sale of agency securities normalize the size of the balance sheet by
September 2017. 2,3 The balance sheet then begins to expand, with increases in SOMA
holdings essentially matching the growth of Federal Reserve capital and notes in
circulation. The balance sheet reaches a size of $2 trillion by the end of 2020.
In the scenario for Alternative A, the Committee is assumed not only to complete
s
the MEP and continue the current reinvestment strategy but also to purchase an additional e
v
i
t
$500 billion of agency MBS by the end of December 2012. In this scenario, SOMA a
n
r
securities holdings peak at $3.1 trillion in February 2014 as total assets near their peak of e
t
l
A
$3.3 trillion. As in Alternative B, reinvestment ends in April 2014, the target federal
funds rate lifts off in October 2014, sales of agency securities commence in April 2015,
and holdings of agency securities fall to zero over five years.4 The additional purchases
of agency MBS under Alternative A postpone the normalization of the size of the balance
sheet until the February 2018, five months later than under Alternative B.
For the scenario that corresponds to Alternative C, the Committee continues its
current reinvestment policy but scales back the MEP to $200 billion and completes these
operations by the end of March 2012. In this scenario, the federal funds rate lifts off at
the beginning of 2013, about a year and a half earlier than assumed in the other
1 Given the maturity schedule of the agency debt securities held in the SOMA, the volume of sales
necessary to reduce holdings of these securities to zero over the five-year period is minimal.
2 The tools to drain reserve balances (reverse repurchase agreements and the Term Deposit Facility) are
not modeled in any of the scenarios presented. Use of these tools would result in a shift in the composition
of Federal Reserve liabilities—a decline in reserve balances and a corresponding increase in term reverse
repurchase agreements or term deposits—but would not produce an overall change in the size of the
balance sheet.
3 The projected timing of the normalization of the size of the balance sheet depends importantly on the
level of reserve balances that is assumed to be necessary to conduct monetary policy; currently we assume
that level of reserve balances to be $25 billion. A higher demand for reserve balances would, all else equal,
lead to an earlier normalization of the size of the balance sheet.
4 Under Reserve Bank accounting, losses on the SOMA portfolio are only realized when securities are
sold. Under the current projections, losses are projected to be smaller than net earnings. Considerable
uncertainty surrounds these projections, however, and under plausible assumptions, losses could exceed
earnings and as such, remittances to the Treasury would cease and a deferred credit asset would be booked.
Page 27 of 48

--- Page 30 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
alternatives and, correspondingly, reinvestment of principal from maturing or prepaying
securities ends earlier, in mid-2012.5 Sales of agency securities also commence earlier, in
mid-2013. The size of the balance sheet is normalized in mid-2016, almost a year and a
half sooner than under Alternative B, primarily reflecting the earlier assumed liftoff date
for the federal funds rate and thus the earlier halt to reinvestment of principal and an
earlier start of asset sales.
The size of the balance sheet normalizes one month later under Alternative B than
in the October Tealbook baseline, reflecting the later liftoff date assumed in the staff
economic forecast. From February 2018 onward, under all scenarios, the paths for total
assets in the current projections align with the baseline path in the October Tealbook.
s On the liability side of the balance sheet, the forecasted path for reserve balances
e
v
i
t for Alternative B is a bit higher from the time that redemptions begin until reserve
a
n
r balances fall to $25 billion than was the case in the previous Tealbook. Under
e
t
l
A Alternative A, reserve balances peak at $2.1 trillion—almost $500 billion higher than in
Alternative B—by the end of the new large scale asset purchase program.
In the scenario corresponding to Alternative B, the monetary base is projected to
begin contracting very slightly in the second quarter of 2013 and to continue shrinking
through the fourth quarter of 2017, reflecting the decline in reserve balances. Starting in
the first quarter of 2018, after reserve balances are assumed to have stabilized at $25
billion, the monetary base expands again, in line with the growth of Federal Reserve
notes in circulation. The monetary base under Alternative A expands along with the rise
in reserve balances that come from the additional asset purchases. As the balance sheet is
normalized, it follows a path similar to that in Alternative B. Under Alternative C, the
contraction in the monetary base begins sooner, mirroring the earlier normalization in the
balance sheet.
5 The prepayment paths for agency MBS holdings and the premiums calculated under Alternative C are
based on the interest rate path used in Alternative B. This simplifying assumption likely overstates
somewhat both prepayments on MBS, which are reinvested into new MBS with longer expected maturities
until the reinvestment policy ceases, and premiums on all securities in Alternative C. As a result, the size
of the balance sheet is likely larger, and the date of normalization is likely later than would be the case if
the interest rate path was recalibrated based on this scenario.
Page 28 of 48

--- Page 31 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
Growth Rates for the Monetary Base
Memo :
Date Alternative B Alternative A Alternative C October
Tealbook
Percent, annual rate
Monthly
Jan-11 23.3 23.3 23.3 23.3
Feb-11 57.6 57.6 57.6 57.6
Mar-11 97.8 97.8 97.8 97.8
Apr-11 74.4 74.4 74.4 74.4
May-11 42.1 42.1 42.1 42.1
Jun-11 35.9 35.9 35.9 35.9
Jul-11 27.0 27.0 27.0 27.0
s
Aug-11 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 e
v
Sep-11 -10.6 -10.6 -10.6 -10.5 t i
a
Oct-11 -4.5 -4.5 -4.5 1.5 n
r
e
Nov-11 -8.0 -8.0 -8.0 10.6 t
l
A
Dec-11 12.1 11.9 11.5 0.8
Jan-12 15.1 16.5 14.0 -8.8
Feb-12 10.3 18.8 9.2 9.8
Mar-12 4.4 19.8 3.4 16.6
Apr-12 -29.5 -12.1 -31.2 3.5
May-12 0.9 18.0 -1.4 3.3
Jun-12 15.4 31.6 13.2 3.2
Quarterly
2011 Q1 36.8 36.8 36.8 36.8
2011 Q2 69.3 69.3 69.3 69.4
2011 Q3 21.0 21.0 21.0 21.1
2011 Q4 -4.1 -4.1 -4.1 0.8
2012 Q1 9.7 13.8 8.8 2.4
2012 Q2 -5.9 10.0 -7.6 7.1
2012 Q3 4.7 21.2 -2.2 2.0
2012 Q4 5.4 20.7 -4.9 0.8
Annual - Q4 to Q4
2010 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.9
2011 33.5 33.5 33.5 35.2
2012 3.5 17.4 -1.5 3.1
2013 0.5 4.7 -10.8 -0.8
2014 -4.8 -4.5 -14.6 -6.1
2015 -11.3 -11.9 -15.8 -12.2
2016 -19.6 -20.1 -11.7 -19.9
Note: Not seasonally adjusted.
Page 29 of 48

--- Page 32 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
DEBT, BANK CREDIT, AND MONEY FORECASTS
The staff projects that domestic nonfinancial sector debt will grow at an annual
rate of 4½ percent in 2012, reflecting continued rapid expansion in federal government
debt and a modest rise in private nonfinancial debt. Debt growth is projected to slow to
4¼ percent in 2013. This slight moderation reflects a projected deceleration in federal
debt. Nonfinancial business debt expands at a modest pace over the forecast period, in
part due to further increases in capital expenditures. We expect growth of household debt
to remain quite sluggish throughout the forecast horizon, reaching only 1½ percent in
2013. Despite historically low mortgage rates, we project home mortgage debt to
contract a bit further in the next two quarters and then to stay about flat through 2013,
reflecting stringent lending standards and a lack of demand from high-quality borrowers.
s
e Consumer credit grows at a moderate pace through early next year and gradually
v
i
a t accelerates over the medium term, supported by rising spending on consumer durables.
n
r
e
t
A l The staff expects that commercial bank credit will increase moderately over the
forecast period. Core loans—which include commercial and industrial (C&I), real estate,
and consumer loans—are projected to expand modestly during 2012 and 2013, consistent
with the anticipated gradual improvements in economic activity, credit quality, and
bank’s willingness to lend over that period. Lending to businesses in the form of C&I
loans increases steadily over the next two years. In contrast, commercial real estate loans
contract, primarily because of high vacancy rates and depressed prices for commercial
properties, and the poor credit quality of existing loans. As for lending to households,
residential real estate loans on banks’ books remain largely unchanged through 2012 and
move up only slightly in 2013. Meanwhile, consumer loans increase moderately
throughout the forecast period. Banks’ securities holdings expand at a moderate pace,
driven by steady growth in core deposits combined with limited expansion in bank loans.
Page 30 of 48

--- Page 33 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
The staff forecasts that M2, which has expanded at a robust rate in 2011, will
grow at a pace broadly in line with that of nominal income in 2012 as heightened
uncertainty about European financial developments, a moderate growth outlook, and very
low short-term market interest rates keep investors from unwinding their current elevated
M2 asset allocations. Subsequently, M2 growth slows to a pace slightly below that of
nominal GDP as financial strains begin to fade and investors slowly shift their portfolios
toward riskier assets. M2 growth in 2013 is also held down by the expiration of
unlimited FDIC insurance on non-interest bearing demand deposits at the end of 2012.
Currency is projected to expand at its historical average rate throughout the forecast
period.
Growth Rates for M2
s
(Percent, seasonally adjusted annual rate) e
v
i
t
a
n
Monthly Growth Rates Tealbook Forecast*
r
e
Apr-11 4.3 l t
A
May-11 6.9
Jun-11 11.6
Jul-11 26.6
Aug-11 30.0
Sep-11 6.0
Oct-11 3.7
Nov-11 4.8
Dec-11 5.0
Jan-12 3.3
Feb-12 3.3
Mar-12 3.3
Quarterly Growth Rates
2011 Q2 6.0
2011 Q3 19.9
2011 Q4 7.5
2012 Q1 3.8
Annual Growth Rates
2010 3.2
2011 9.9
2012 3.9
2013 3.1
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Tealbook
forecast. Actual data through November 2011; projections thereafter.
Page 31 of 48

--- Page 34 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
DIRECTIVE
The directive that was issued in November is given below, followed by drafts for
a December directive that correspond to each of the three policy alternatives. In general,
under the directives for Alternatives B and C, the Desk would be instructed to leave the
total face value of domestic securities in the SOMA about unchanged; under Alternative
A, the Committee would instruct the Desk to increase the face value of domestic
securities in the SOMA portfolio by purchasing agency MBS. Specifically, the directive
for Alternative A would instruct the Desk either to execute purchases of agency MBS in
order to raise the total face value of domestic securities holdings to about $3.1 trillion by
the end of December 2012, or to purchase agency MBS in order to raise the face value of
holdings of domestic securities by approximately $40 billion per month until instructed
s
e otherwise. In addition, the directives for Alternatives A and B would instruct the Desk to
v
i
a t take appropriate steps to complete the $400 billion maturity extension program that was
n
r
e announced in September by the end of June 2012, while the directive for Alternative C
t
l
A
would instruct the Desk to limit the amounts of purchases and sales associated with the
maturity extension program to $200 billion each and to complete these operations by the
end of March 2012. All of the draft directives instruct the Desk to continue the current
practice of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auction and of reinvesting
principal payments on all agency debt and agency MBS in agency MBS.
Page 32 of 48

--- Page 35 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
November 2011 FOMC Directive
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
continue the maturity extension program it began in September to purchase, by the end of
June 2012, Treasury securities with remaining maturities of approximately 6 years to 30
years with a total face value of $400 billion, and to sell Treasury securities with
remaining maturities of 3 years or less with a total face value of $400 billion. The
Committee also directs the Desk to maintain its existing policies of rolling over maturing
Treasury securities into new issues and of reinvesting principal payments on all agency
debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in the System Open Market Account in
s
e
agency mortgage-backed securities in order to maintain the total face value of domestic v
i
t
a
securities at approximately $2.6 trillion. The Committee directs the Desk to engage in n
r
e
dollar roll transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s l t
A
agency MBS transactions. The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary
will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s
balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of
maximum employment and price stability.
Page 33 of 48

--- Page 36 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
December 2011 FOMC Directive—Alternative A
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
continue the maturity extension program it began in September to purchase, by the end of
June 2012, Treasury securities with remaining maturities of approximately 6 years to 30
years with a total face value of $400 billion, and to sell Treasury securities with
remaining maturities of 3 years or less with a total face value of $400 billion. [ The
Committee also directs the Desk to execute purchases of agency mortgage-backed
securities in order to increase the total face value of domestic securities held in the
System Open Market Account to approximately $3.1 trillion by the end of
s
e
v December 2012. | The Committee also directs the Desk to execute purchases of
i
t
a
n agency mortgage-backed securities in order to increase the total face value of
r
e
l t domestic securities held in the System Open Market Account by approximately $40
A
billion per month. ] The Committee also directs the Desk to maintain its existing
policies of rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues and of reinvesting
principal payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in the
System Open Market Account in agency mortgage-backed securities in order to maintain
the total face value of domestic securities at approximately $2.6 trillion. The Committee
directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement
of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions. The System Open Market Account
Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments
regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the
Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
Page 34 of 48

--- Page 37 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
December 2011 FOMC Directive—Alternative B
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
continue the maturity extension program it began in September to purchase, by the end of
June 2012, Treasury securities with remaining maturities of approximately 6 years to 30
years with a total face value of $400 billion, and to sell Treasury securities with
remaining maturities of 3 years or less with a total face value of $400 billion. The
Committee also directs the Desk to maintain its existing policies of rolling over maturing
Treasury securities into new issues and of reinvesting principal payments on all agency
debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in the System Open Market Account in
s
e
agency mortgage-backed securities in order to maintain the total face value of domestic v
i
t
a
securities at approximately $2.6 trillion. The Committee directs the Desk to engage in n
r
e
dollar roll transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s l t
A
agency MBS transactions. The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary
will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s
balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of
maximum employment and price stability.
Page 35 of 48

--- Page 38 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
December 2011 FOMC Directive—Alternative C
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
continue modify the maturity extension program it began in September so as to purchase,
by the end of June March 2012, Treasury securities with remaining maturities of
approximately 6 years to 30 years with a total face value of $400 $200 billion, and to sell
Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3 years or less with a total face value of
$400 $200 billion. The Committee also directs the Desk to maintain its existing policies
of rolling over maturing Treasury securities into new issues and of reinvesting principal
payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in the System Open
s
e
v Market Account in agency mortgage-backed securities in order to maintain the total face
i
t
a
n value of domestic securities at approximately $2.6 trillion. The Committee directs the
r
e
l t Desk to engage in dollar roll transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the
A
Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions. The System Open Market Account
Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments
regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the
Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
Page 36 of 48

--- Page 39 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
Explanatory Notes
A. Measures of the Equilibrium Real Rate
The concepts of the equilibrium real rate reported in the exhibit “Equilibrium Real
Federal Funds Rate,” are defined as the level of the real federal funds rate that is consistent with
output at potential within a specified time horizon. The short-run equilibrium rate is defined as
the rate that would close the output gap in twelve quarters given the corresponding model’s
projection of the economy. The medium-run concept is the value of the real federal funds rate
projected to prevail in seven years, under the assumption that monetary policy acts to bring actual
and potential output into line in the short run and then keeps them equal thereafter.
Measure Description
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is
Single-equation based on an estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current
Model value of the output gap and its lagged values as well as the lagged values of
the real federal funds rate.
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for six
Small
variables: the output gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus,
Structural
the trend growth rate of output, the real bond yield, and the real federal
Model
funds rate.
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using EDO—an estimated dynamic-
stochastic-general-equilibrium (DSGE) model of the U.S. economy— s
e
EDO Model depend on data for major spending categories, prices and wages, and the t
o
federal funds rate as well as the model’s structure and estimate of the output N
gap. y
r
o
t
a
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale n
a
econometric model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of p l
FRB/US Model x
economic factors, some of which take the form of projected values of the E
model’s exogenous variables.
Two measures are presented based on the FRB/US and the EDO models.
Both models are matched to the extended Tealbook forecast. Model
Tealbook-
simulations determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the
consistent
output gap conditional on the exogenous variables in the extended baseline
forecast.
Page 37 of 48

--- Page 40 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
Measure Description
Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) reflect investors’
expectations of the future path of real interest rates. The TIPS-based
measure of the equilibrium real rate is constructed using the seven-year-
TIPS-based ahead instantaneous real forward rate derived from TIPS yields as of the
Factor Model Tealbook publication date. This forward rate is adjusted to remove
estimates of the term and liquidity premiums based on a three-factor,
arbitrage-free term-structure model applied to TIPS yields, nominal yields,
and inflation.
The actual real federal funds rate is constructed as the difference between the federal
funds rate and the trailing four-quarter change in the core PCE price index. The federal funds rate
is specified as the target federal funds rate on the Tealbook Book B publication date.
Estimates of the real federal funds rate depend on the proxies for expected inflation used.
The table below shows estimates of the real federal funds rates using alternative proxies: lagged
core PCE inflation, which is used to construct the actual real federal funds rate shown in the table
that displays the r* measures; lagged four-quarter headline PCE inflation; and projected four-
quarter headline PCE inflation beginning with the next quarter. The table also displays the
Tealbook-consistent FRB/US-based measure of the short-run equilibrium real rate and the
average of the projected real federal funds rate over the next twelve quarters using each of the
different proxies for expected inflation.
Tealbook-consistent
Projected real
Actual real federal FRB/US-based
Proxy used for funds rate
s funds rate measure of the
e
t expected inflation (twelve-quarter-
o (current value) equilibrium real funds
N ahead average)
rate (current value)
y
r
o Lagged core inflation 1.5 3.3 1.4
t
a
n Lagged headline
l
a
2.7 3.4 1.4
p inflation
x
E Projected headline
1.2 3.2 1.2
inflation
Page 38 of 48

--- Page 41 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
B. Analysis of Policy Paths and Confidence Intervals
RULE SPECIFICATIONS
For the following rules, ݅ denotes the federal funds rate for quarter t, while the right-
௧
hand-side variables include the staff’s projection of trailing four-quarter core PCE inflation (ߨ ),
௧
the forecast of inflation two and three quarters ahead (ߨ and ߨ ), the output gap estimate
௧ାଶ|௧ ௧ାଷ|௧
for the current period as well as its one quarter ahead forecast (ݕ െ ݕכ and ݕ െ ݕכ ), and
௧ ௧ ௧ାଵ|௧ ௧ାଵ|௧
the forecast of three-quarter-ahead annual average GDP growth relative to potential (Δସݕ െ
௧ାଷ|௧
Δସݕכ ). The assumed value of policymakers’ long-run inflation objective is denoted π*. The
௧ାଷ|௧
outcome-based and forecast-based rules were estimated using real-time data over the sample
1988:12006:4; each specification was chosen using the Bayesian information criterion. Each
rule incorporates a 75 basis point shift in the intercept, specified as a sequence of 25 basis point
increments during the first three quarters of 1998. The first two simple rules were proposed by
Taylor (1993, 1999). The prescriptions of the first-difference rule do not depend on assumptions
regarding r* or the level of the output gap; see Orphanides (2003).
݅ ൌ 1.20݅ െ 0.39݅ ൅ 0.19ሾ1.17 ൅ 1.73ߨ
௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ିଶ ௧
Outcome-based rule
൅ 3.66ሺݕ െ ݕכ ሻ െ 2.72 ሺݕ െݕ כ ሻሿ
௧ ௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ିଵ
݅ ൌ 1.18݅ െ 0.38݅ ൅ 0.20ሾ0.98 ൅ 1.72ߨ
௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ିଶ ௧ାଶ|௧
Forecast-based rule
൅2.29൫ݕ െ ݕכ ൯െ 1.37 ሺݕ െݕ כ ሻሿ
௧ାଵ|௧ ௧ାଵ|௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ିଵ
Taylor (1993) rule ݅ ൌ 2 ൅ߨ ൅ 0.5 ሺߨ െ ߨ כ ሻ ൅ 0.5 ሺݕ െ ݕכ ሻ
௧ ௧ ௧ ௧ ௧
s
e
Taylor (1999) rule ݅ ൌ 2 ൅ߨ ൅ 0.5 ሺߨ െ ߨ כ ሻ ൅ ሺݕ െ ݕכ ሻ t
௧ ௧ ௧ ௧ ௧ o
N
First-difference rule ݅ ൌ ݅ ൅ 0.5൫ߨ െߨ כ ൯൅0 .5ሺ ߂ସݕ െ ߂ସݕכ ሻ y
௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ାଷ|௧ ௧ାଷ|௧ ௧ାଷ|௧ r
o
t
a
n
FRB/US MODEL SIMULATIONS
l
a
p
x
E
Prescriptions from the outcome-based rule are computed using dynamic simulations of
the FRB/US model, implemented as though the rule were followed starting at this FOMC
meeting. The dotted line labeled “Previous Tealbook” is based on the current specification of the
policy rule, applied to the previous Tealbook projection. Confidence intervals are based on
stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model with shocks drawn from the estimated residuals over
19692009.
Page 39 of 48

--- Page 42 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
INFORMATION FROM FINANCIAL MARKETS
The expected funds rate path is based on quotes for federal funds and forward rate
agreements as well as implied three-month forward rates from swaps, and the confidence
intervals for this path are constructed using prices of interest rate caps. The computations use the
staff’s baseline assumptions about term premiums.
NEAR-TERM PRESCRIPTIONS OF SIMPLE POLICY RULES
These prescriptions are calculated using Tealbook projections for inflation and the output
gap. The first-difference rule, the estimated outcome-based rule, and the estimated forecast-based
rule include the lagged policy rate as a right-hand-side variable. When the Tealbook is published
early in the quarter, the lines denoted “Previous Tealbook” report rule prescriptions based on the
previous Tealbook’s staff outlook, jumping off from the actual value of the lagged funds rate in
the previous quarter. When the Tealbook is published late in the quarter, the lines denoted
“Previous Tealbook Outlook” report rule prescriptions based on the previous Tealbook’s staff
outlook, but jumping off from the average value for the policy rate thus far this quarter
REFERENCES
Taylor, John B. (1993). “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195214.
————— (1999). “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B.
Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules. University of Chicago Press, pp. 319341.
s
e
t
o Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor
N
Rule,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (July), pp. 9831022.
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
Page 40 of 48

--- Page 43 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
C. Long-Run Projections of the Balance Sheet and Monetary Base
This explanatory note presents the assumptions underlying the projections provided in the
section titled “Long-Run Projections of the Balance Sheet and Monetary Base,” as well as
projections for each major component of the balance sheet.
GENERAL ASSUMPTIONS
The balance sheet projections are constructed at a monthly frequency from December
2011 to December 2020. The few balance sheet items that are not discussed below are assumed
to be constant over the projection period at the level observed on November 30, 2011. The
projections for all major asset and liability categories under each scenario are summarized in the
tables that follow the bullet points.
The Tealbook projections for the scenarios corresponding to Alternatives A and B
assume that the target federal funds rate begins to increase in October 2014, consistent with the
monetary policy path in the Tealbook extension derived from the outcome-based rule, while the
projection for the scenario corresponding to Alternative C assumes the target rate lifts off in
January 2013. The balance sheet projections assume that no use of short-term draining tools is
necessary to achieve the projected path for the federal funds rate.1
ASSETS
Treasury Securities, Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities (MBS), and Agency Debt
Securities
s
 The assumptions under Alternative B are: e
t
o
o Over the nine months beginning in October 2011, the FOMC is assumed to N
y
purchase $400 billion in par value of Treasury securities with remaining r
o
t
maturities of six years or more and sell the same par amount of Treasury a
n
securities with remaining maturities of three years or less. The FOMC will a
l
p
reinvest the proceeds from principal payments on its agency securities holdings x
E
primarily in newly issued agency MBS in the To-Be-Announced (TBA) market.
Treasury securities are rolled over at auction according to the Desk’s current
practice (that is, reinvesting roughly proportionally across all Treasury securities
that are being issued on the date the securities mature).
1 If term deposits or reverse repurchase agreements were used to drain reserves prior to raising the
federal funds rate, the composition of liabilities would change: Reserve balances would fall as term
deposits and reverse repurchase agreements rose. Presumably, these draining tools would be wound down
as the balance sheet returned to its steady state growth path, so that the projected paths for Treasury
securities presented in the Tealbook remain valid.
Page 41 of 48

--- Page 44 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
o Principal payments from Treasury securities and agency MBS and agency debt
securities are reinvested until April 2014—six months prior to the assumed
increase in the target federal funds rate.2
o The Federal Reserve begins to sell agency MBS and agency debt securities in
April 2015, roughly six months after the assumed date of the first increase in the
target federal funds rate. Holdings of agency securities are reduced over five
years and reach zero by March 2020.
o For agency MBS, the rate of prepayment is based on staff models using estimates
of housing market factors from one of the program’s investment managers, long-
run average prepayment speeds of MBS, and interest rate projections from the
Tealbook.3 The projected rate of prepayment is sensitive to these underlying
assumptions.
 In the scenario corresponding to Alternative A, the Committee is assumed to begin
purchasing current coupon agency MBS at a rate of about $40 billion per month through
December 2012 for a total $500 billion. In addition, the Committee is expected to
complete the MEP program and maintain its policies of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency securities into agency MBS and of rolling over maturing
Treasury securities at auction. As in the baseline, reinvestment ends in April 2014—six
months prior to the assumed increase in the federal funds rate—and agency securities
sales begin in April 2015, continuing for five years.
 In the scenario corresponding to Alternative C, the Committee is expected to limit its
previously announced MEP program so that it purchases $200 billion in long-term
securities and sells $200 billion in short-term securities, with operations completed by
e s March 2012. Principal payments from Treasury securities continue to be reinvested at
t
o auction, and principal payments from agency MBS and agency debt securities are
N
y reinvested in agency MBS until July 2012, six months prior to the assumed increase in
r
o the federal funds rate. Sales of agency securities begin in July 2013, and continue for
t
a
n five years.
a
l
p
x  Because current and expected near-term rates are below the average coupon rate on
E
outstanding Treasury securities, the market value at which these securities are purchased
will generally exceed their face value, with a larger premium for longer-maturity
securities. As a result, although the par value of securities holdings remains constant
under the MEP, premiums associated with the securities, and hence total assets, will rise
by about $30 billion. Reserve balances will increase by the same amount.
2 Projected prepayments of agency MBS reflect interest rates as of December 6, 2011.
3 Projected prepayments on the existing stock of agency MBS are from an FRBNY staff model that is
based on the prepayment model of one of the investment managers; projected prepayments associated with
agency MBS expected to be purchased in the future rely on a Board model that is based on the Bond
Market Association prepayment model.
Page 42 of 48

--- Page 45 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
 The large-scale asset purchase program in Alternative A would put downward pressure
on market interest rates, in particular mortgage rates, and result in more MBS
prepayments than in the baseline. The lower path for interest rates would also imply that
purchases of Treasury securities would be made at prices that include a greater net
premium relative to their face value than in the baseline.
 The level of central bank liquidity swaps is assumed to be elevated from December
through February, reflecting the results of the recent 84-day foreign central bank swap
auctions, but then return to zero in March 2012.
 In all scenarios, a minimum level of $25 billion is set for reserve balances. Once reserve
balances drop to this level, the Desk first purchases Treasury bills to maintain this level
of reserve balances going forward. Purchases of bills continue until such securities
comprise one-third of the Federal Reserve’s total Treasury securities holdings—about the
average share prior to the crisis. Once this share is reached, the Federal Reserve buys
coupon securities in addition to bills to maintain an approximate composition of the
portfolio of one-third bills and two-thirds coupon securities.
Liquidity Programs and Credit Facilities
 Loans through the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) reached a month-
end high of $48 billion in December 2009. Credit extended through this facility declines
to zero by the end of 2015, reflecting loan maturities and prepayments.
 The assets held by TALF LLC remain at about $1 billion through 2014 before declining
to zero the following year. Assets held by TALF LLC consist of investments of
commitment fees collected by the LLC and the U.S. Treasury’s initial funding. In this
projection, the LLC does not purchase any asset-backed securities received by the
s
e
Federal Reserve Bank of New York in connection with a decision of a borrower to not t
o
repay a TALF loan. N
y
r
 The assets held by Maiden Lane LLC and Maiden Lane III LLC decline gradually over o
t
a
time. The assets of Maiden Lane II LLC are assumed to roll off modestly through the n
a
first increase in the federal funds rate; sales of assets in Maiden Lane II LLC’s portfolio p l
x
are assumed to then resume, and holdings gradually fall to zero over the following eight E
months.
LIABILITIES AND CAPITAL
 Federal Reserve notes in circulation grow in line with the staff forecast for money stock
currency through the last quarter of 2013. Afterwards, Federal Reserve notes in
circulation grow at the same rate as nominal GDP, as in the extended Tealbook
projection.
 Over the next three months, the level of reverse repurchase agreements is assumed to
decline to $70 billion, about the average level observed over the past three years.
Page 43 of 48

--- Page 46 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
 The U.S. Treasury’s General Account (TGA) follows the staff forecast through June
2012.4 Then, the TGA slowly drops back to its historical target level of $5 billion by
January 2013 as it is assumed that the Treasury will implement a new cash management
system and invest funds in excess of $5 billion. The TGA remains constant at $5 billion
over the remainder of the forecast period.
 We maintain the Supplementary Financing Account (SFA) balance at its current level of
zero throughout the forecast.
 Federal Reserve capital grows 15 percent per year, in line with the average rate of the
past ten years.
 In general, increases in the level of Federal Reserve assets are matched by higher levels
of reserve balances. Increases in the levels of liability items, such as Federal Reserve
notes in circulation or other liabilities, or increases in the level of Reserve Bank capital,
drain reserve balances. When increases in these liability or capital items would otherwise
cause reserve balances to fall below $25 billion, purchases of Treasury securities are
assumed in order to maintain that level of reserve balances.
 In the event that a Federal Reserve Bank’s earnings fall short of the amount necessary to
cover operating costs, pay dividends, and equate surplus to capital paid-in, a deferred
asset would be recorded. This deferred asset is recorded in lieu of reducing the Reserve
Bank’s capital and is reported on the liability side of the balance sheet as “Interest on
Federal Reserve notes due to U.S. Treasury.” This liability takes on a positive value
when weekly cumulative earnings have not yet been distributed to the Treasury, while
this liability takes on a negative value when earnings fall short of the expenses listed
above. In the projections, System-wide earnings are always sufficient to cover these
s
e expenses, and this line item is set to zero.
t
o
N
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
4 The staff forecast for end-of-month U.S. Treasury operating cash balances includes forecasts of both
the TGA and balances associated with the U.S. Treasury’s Tax and Loan program. Because balances
associated with the Tax and Loan program are only $2 billion, for the time being, this forecast is used as a
proxy for the level of TGA balances.
Page 44 of 48

--- Page 47 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Alternative A
Billions of dollars
Nov 30, 2011 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
Total assets 2,817 3,252 3,158 2,240 1,793 2,002
Selected assets
Liquidity programs for financial firms 3 0 0 0 0 0
Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 2 0 0 0 0 0
Lending through other credit facilities 10 4 0 0 0 0
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 10 4 0 0 0 0
Support for specific institutions 38 29 21 11 7 4
Credit extended to AIG 0 0 0 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, 38 29 21 11 7 4
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC
Securities held outright 2,605 3,030 2,979 2,098 1,674 1,896
U.S. Treasury securities 1,672 1,662 1,611 1,238 1,347 1,896
Agency debt securities 106 77 39 16 2 0
Agency mortgage-backed securities 827 1,291 1,330 843 324 0
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1 1 1 0 0 0
Total other assets 161 188 157 130 112 103
s
e
t
o
N
Total liabilities 2,763 3,182 3,066 2,117 1,630 1,788
y
r
Selected liabilities o
t
a
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 1,020 1,090 1,217 1,365 1,515 1,673 n
a
l
Reverse repurchase agreements 93 70 70 70 70 70 p
x
E
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,578 2,006 1,762 666 30 30
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 1,492 1,988 1,757 661 25 25
U.S. Treasury, General Account 86 17 5 5 5 5
U.S. Treasury, Supplementary Financing Account 0 0 0 0 0 0
Other balances 0 0 0 0 0 0
Interest on Federal Reserve Notes due 1 0 0 0 0 0
to U.S. Treasury
Total capital 54 70 93 123 162 215
Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
Page 45 of 48

--- Page 48 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Alternative B
Billions of dollars
Nov 30, 2011 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
Total assets 2,817 2,828 2,680 1,934 1,793 2,002
Selected assets
Liquidity programs for financial firms 3 0 0 0 0 0
Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 2 0 0 0 0 0
Lending through other credit facilities 10 4 0 0 0 0
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 10 4 0 0 0 0
Support for specific institutions 38 29 21 11 7 4
Credit extended to AIG 0 0 0 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, 38 29 21 11 7 4
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC
Securities held outright 2,605 2,610 2,504 1,795 1,675 1,897
U.S. Treasury securities 1,672 1,662 1,611 1,238 1,465 1,897
Agency debt securities 106 77 39 16 2 0
Agency mortgage-backed securities 827 871 855 540 208 0
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1 1 1 0 0 0
Total other assets 161 185 154 128 110 101
s
e
t
o
N
Total liabilities 2,763 2,758 2,587 1,811 1,630 1,788
y
r
o Selected liabilities
t
a
n Federal Reserve notes in circulation 1,020 1,090 1,217 1,365 1,515 1,673
a
l
p Reverse repurchase agreements 93 70 70 70 70 70
x
E
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,578 1,582 1,284 361 30 30
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 1,492 1,564 1,279 356 25 25
U.S. Treasury, General Account 86 17 5 5 5 5
U.S. Treasury, Supplementary Financing Account 0 0 0 0 0 0
Other balances 0 0 0 0 0 0
Interest on Federal Reserve Notes due 1 0 0 0 0 0
to U.S. Treasury
Total capital 54 70 93 123 162 215
Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
Page 46 of 48

--- Page 49 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Alternative C
Billions of dollars
Nov 30, 2011 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
Total assets 2,817 2,662 2,038 1,603 1,793 2,002
Selected assets
Liquidity programs for financial firms 3 0 0 0 0 0
Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 2 0 0 0 0 0
Lending through other credit facilities 10 4 0 0 0 0
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 10 4 0 0 0 0
Support for specific institutions 38 29 16 11 7 4
Credit extended to AIG 0 0 0 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, 38 29 16 11 7 4
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC
Securities held outright 2,605 2,469 1,890 1,482 1,689 1,908
U.S. Treasury securities 1,672 1,598 1,338 1,246 1,689 1,908
Agency debt securities 106 77 39 16 0 0
Agency mortgage-backed securities 827 794 513 220 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1 1 1 0 0 0
Total other assets 161 159 131 110 97 90
s
e
t
o
N
Total liabilities 2,763 2,592 1,945 1,481 1,630 1,788
y
r
Selected liabilities o
t
a
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 1,020 1,090 1,217 1,365 1,515 1,673 n
a
l
Reverse repurchase agreements 93 70 70 70 70 70 p
x
E
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,578 1,416 642 30 30 30
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 1,492 1,398 637 25 25 25
U.S. Treasury, General Account 86 17 5 5 5 5
U.S. Treasury, Supplementary Financing Account 0 0 0 0 0 0
Other balances 0 0 0 0 0 0
Interest on Federal Reserve Notes due 1 0 0 0 0 0
to U.S. Treasury
Total capital 54 70 93 123 162 215
Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical releases and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
Page 47 of 48

--- Page 50 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) December 8, 2011
(This page is intentionally blank.)
s
e
t
o
N
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
Page 48 of 48