# 20130320_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:37:13*
*Pages: 24, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
March 19–20, 2013
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover-
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues- nors
day, March 19, 2013, at 10:00 a.m., and continued on
Wednesday, March 20, 2013, at 9:00 a.m. Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability
Policy and Research, Board of Governors
PRESENT:
Ben Bernanke, Chairman James A. Clouse and William Nelson, Deputy Di-
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman rectors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
James Bullard Governors
Elizabeth Duke
Charles L. Evans Jon W. Faust, Special Adviser to the Board, Office
Esther L. George of Board Members, Board of Governors
Jerome H. Powell
Sarah Bloom Raskin Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Eric Rosengren Board Members, Board of Governors
Jeremy C. Stein
Daniel K. Tarullo Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Director, Divi-
Janet L. Yellen sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Christine Cumming, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Ellen M. Meade, Senior Adviser, Division of Mon-
Kocherlakota, Sandra Pianalto, and Charles I. etary Affairs, Board of Governors
Plosser, Alternate Members of the Federal
Open Market Committee Eric M. Engen, Thomas Laubach, David E. Le-
bow, and Michael G. Palumbo, Associate Di-
Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and John C. rectors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Williams, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors
Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francis-
co, respectively William F. Bassett, Deputy Associate Director, Di-
vision of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gover-
William B. English, Secretary and Economist nors
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary Stacey Tevlin, Assistant Director, Division of Re-
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary search and Statistics, Board of Governors; Min
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Wei, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Affairs, Board of Governors
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Steven B. Kamin, Economist Jeremy B. Rudd, Adviser, Division of Research and
David W. Wilcox, Economist Statistics, Board of Governors
Thomas A. Connors, Troy Davig, Michael P. David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of
Leahy, Stephen A. Meyer, David Reifschnei- Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
der, Christopher J. Waller, and William
Wascher, Associate Economists Gregory L. Stefani, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Ac-
count David Altig, Loretta J. Mester, Glenn D. Rude-
busch, and Mark S. Sniderman, Executive Vice

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, The unemployment rate was 7.7 percent in February,
Philadelphia, San Francisco, and Cleveland, re- slightly less than its fourth-quarter average; the labor
spectively force participation rate was also a bit below its fourth-
quarter average. The rate of long-duration unemploy-
Spencer Krane, Lorie K. Logan, Kevin Stiroh, and ment and the share of workers employed part time for
Kei-Mu Yi, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Re- economic reasons were little changed, on net, and both
serve Banks of Chicago, New York, New measures remained high. Initial claims for unemploy-
York, and Minneapolis, respectively ment insurance trended down somewhat over the in-
termeeting period. The rate of private-sector hiring,
Evan F. Koenig, Jonathan P. McCarthy, Giovanni along with indicators of job openings and firms’ hiring
Olivei, and Julie Ann Remache,¹ Vice Presi- plans, were generally subdued and were consistent with
dents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, New continued moderate increases in employment in the
York, Boston, and New York, respectively coming months.
Manufacturing production increased strongly in Febru-
Robert L. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Re-
ary after declining in January, and the rate of manufac-
serve Bank of Richmond
turing capacity utilization in February was a little higher
_______________________
than in the fourth quarter. The production of motor
¹ Attended Tuesday’s session only.
vehicles and parts rose considerably in February, and
there were also widespread increases in factory output
in other sectors. Automakers’ schedules, however, in-
dicated that the pace of motor vehicle assemblies in the
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
coming months would be a bit below that in February.
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
Broader indicators of manufacturing production, such
The Manager of the System Open Market Account
as the diffusion indexes of new orders from the nation-
reported on developments in domestic and foreign fi-
al and regional manufacturing surveys, were at levels
nancial markets as well as the System open market op-
that pointed to moderate increases in factory produc-
erations during the period since the Federal Open Mar-
tion in the near term.
ket Committee (FOMC) met on January 29–30, 2013.
The Manager also reported on developments in foreign Real personal consumption expenditures rose modestly
money markets and implications for the assets that the in January. In February, nominal retail sales, excluding
Federal Reserve holds in its foreign currency portfolio. those at motor vehicle and parts outlets, increased at a
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Open strong rate, while light motor vehicle sales edged up.
Market Desk’s domestic transactions over the inter- Some key factors that tend to influence household
meeting period. There were no intervention operations spending were mixed: Households’ real disposable
in foreign currencies for the System’s account over the incomes declined in January, reflecting in part the in-
intermeeting period. creases in both payroll and income taxes that went into
effect at the beginning of the year and the previous
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
pulling forward of taxable income from 2013 into 2012;
The information reviewed at the March 19–20 meeting
in contrast, household net worth likely rose in recent
suggested that economic activity was expanding at a
months as a result of higher equity values and home
moderate rate in the first quarter of this year after the
prices. Consumer sentiment in the Thomson Reu-
slowdown late last year. Private-sector employment
ters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers
increased at a fairly solid pace, on balance, and the un-
rose somewhat in February, but it declined in early
employment rate, though still elevated, was slightly
March and remained relatively downbeat.
lower in February than in the fourth quarter of last
year. Consumer price inflation, excluding some tempo- Conditions in the housing sector improved further, but
rary fluctuations in energy prices, was subdued, while construction activity was still at a relatively low level
measures of longer-run inflation expectations remained and continued to be restrained by tight credit standards
stable. for mortgages. Both starts and permits of new single-
family homes increased, on net, over January and Feb-
Private nonfarm employment increased at a modest
ruary. Starts of multifamily units declined, on balance,
rate in January but expanded more briskly in February,
but permits rose, consistent with additional gains in
while government employment continued to decrease.

--- Page 3 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 1_9_–_2_0_,_ 2_0_1_3________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
construction in coming months. Sales of both new and the employment cost index were even slower than for
existing homes advanced in January, and home prices the measure of compensation per hour last year. In
increased further. January and February, increases in average hourly earn-
ings for all employees continued to be subdued.
Real business expenditures on equipment and software
appeared to slow somewhat early this year after rising Economic growth weakened in a number of the ad-
at a brisk rate in the fourth quarter. Nominal ship- vanced foreign economies in the fourth quarter of
ments for nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft 2012. In the euro area, real gross domestic product
decreased in January, but nominal orders increased to a (GDP) contracted for a fifth consecutive quarter. Re-
level above that of shipments, pointing to higher ship- cent data for European economies, including retail
ments in the near term. Other forward-looking indica- sales and purchasing managers indexes, suggest that the
tors, such as surveys of business conditions and capital rate of economic contraction may have diminished
spending plans, also suggested that outlays for business since the beginning of the year. In emerging market
equipment would rise in the coming months. Nominal economies (EMEs), an increase in exports contributed
business spending for nonresidential construction de- to a pickup in the pace of economic growth in the
clined in January. Business inventories in most indus- fourth quarter, including for China. More-recent indi-
tries appeared to be generally aligned with sales in re- cators suggest that economic activity in China has
cent months. slowed some. Inflation remained generally contained in
both advanced foreign economies and EMEs.
Real federal government purchases appeared to de-
crease further in January and February, as defense Staff Review of the Financial Situation
spending continued to contract on balance. Real state Generally favorable U.S. economic data releases, along
and local government purchases looked to have de- with communications from Federal Reserve policymak-
clined as nonfederal government payrolls decreased in ers regarding the outlook for the economy and mone-
January and February and nominal construction ex- tary policy, appeared to contribute to improved senti-
penditures fell in January. ment in domestic financial markets over the intermeet-
ing period despite some renewed concerns about eco-
The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in De-
nomic and financial conditions in Europe.
cember but widened in January. Imports rose in Janu-
ary, largely reflecting a rebound in the value of oil im- The expected path for the federal funds rate implied by
ports, and exports decreased, driven by a decline in the market quotes moved down over the intermeeting pe-
value of exports of petroleum products. Exports of riod, likely reflecting policymakers’ communications
capital goods increased; the other major categories of that reinforced market expectations of continued mon-
exports remained about unchanged. etary policy accommodation. Results from the Desk’s
survey of primary dealers conducted prior to the March
Indexes of overall U.S. consumer prices were little
meeting showed that dealers continued to view the
changed in January but the consumer price index
third quarter of 2015 as the most likely time of the first
moved up briskly in February, largely reflecting a sharp
increase in the target federal funds rate. In addition,
rise in gasoline prices. Consumer food prices were flat
the median dealer continued to see the first quarter of
in January and only edged up in February. Consumer
2014 as the most probable time for the Federal Re-
prices excluding food and energy increased moderately
serve’s asset purchases to end, and most dealers antici-
in January and February. Near-term inflation expecta-
pated that the pace of purchases would be adjusted
tions from the Michigan survey were unchanged in
down before ending.
February and early March; longer-term inflation expec-
tations in the survey were also little changed and re- Yields on nominal Treasury securities were modestly
mained within the narrow range that they have occu- lower, on net, over the intermeeting period. In late
pied for some time. February, these yields declined notably following the
inconclusive election outcomes in Italy but mostly re-
Measures of labor compensation indicated that gains in
traced this decline as economic data releases in subse-
nominal wages remained relatively slow, only slightly
quent weeks exceeded expectations. Measures of infla-
above the rate of price inflation. Compensation per
tion compensation derived from nominal and inflation-
hour in the nonfarm business sector rose modestly
protected Treasury securities edged down over the pe-
over 2012, and, with small increases in productivity,
riod.
unit labor costs also advanced only modestly. Gains in

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Conditions in domestic and offshore dollar funding bit. Despite the increase in mortgage rates since the
markets were generally little changed, on balance, dur- start of the year, mortgage refinancing originations de-
ing the intermeeting period. The outstanding amount clined only slightly.
of unsecured commercial paper (CP) issued by financial
Consumer credit sustained its moderate expansion in
institutions with European parents increased slightly on
December and January. Nonrevolving credit continued
net, and CP issued by institutions with U.S. parents
to increase at a solid pace because of growth in student
remained stable.
and auto loans, while revolving credit was roughly flat.
In the March Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Issuance of consumer asset-backed securities remained
Dealer Financing Terms, respondents reported that strong.
leveraged investors seemed to have become somewhat
Driven largely by continued growth in C&I loans, total
more willing to take positions in risky assets since De-
bank credit expanded in January and February at
cember.
roughly its fourth-quarter pace. The February Survey
Market reaction to the results of the Dodd–-Frank Act of Terms of Business Lending indicated some easing in
annual stress tests and of the Comprehensive Capital loan pricing.
Analysis and Review was limited. Overall, a broad in-
The level of M2 was about unchanged, on net, over
dex of U.S. bank equity prices rose, on net, over the
January and February. In contrast, the monetary base
intermeeting period, and credit default swap spreads
expanded briskly from January through mid-March,
for most large domestic banks edged down on balance.
driven mainly by the increase in reserve balances result-
Broad equity price indexes increased over the inter- ing from the Federal Reserve’s purchases of Treasury
meeting period, bolstered by favorable incoming eco- securities and agency MBS.
nomic data. Option-implied volatility for the S&P 500
Financial market concerns regarding the euro area rose
index over the near term rose slightly but remained
over the intermeeting period amid weaker-than-
low, at levels last seen in early 2007. Fourth-quarter
expected economic data releases and political uncer-
earnings per share for S&P 500 firms were estimated to
tainties generated by the inconclusive election results in
have increased modestly from the previous quarter.
Italy. Adding to the concerns was the proposal in Cy-
Yields on investment- and speculative-grade corporate prus to tax insured, along with uninsured, deposits as
bonds rose a bit over the intermeeting period, leaving part of the country’s effort to secure an aid package
risk spreads a little wider. Corporate bond issuance by from the euro area and the International Monetary
nonfinancial firms remained fairly robust in February; Fund. Ten-year sovereign yields in most peripheral
commercial and industrial (C&I) loans and nonfinancial euro-area countries rose relative to German bond
CP also continued to expand. After picking up in Jan- yields, with spreads for Italian sovereign debt increasing
uary, gross public issuance of equity by nonfinancial noticeably; euro-area banking-sector share prices fell
firms remained strong in February, and issuance of col- sharply. With economic data for the euro area, the
lateralized loan obligations reached a post-financial- United Kingdom, and Canada coming in weaker than
crisis high. anticipated, yields on bunds, gilts, and long-term Cana-
dian government securities fell. In addition, market-
Conditions in the commercial real estate (CRE) sector
based measures of expected overnight interest rates
improved somewhat. Commercial mortgage debt in-
also declined in those countries, and the dollar appreci-
creased in the fourth quarter after having decreased in
ated against the euro, sterling, and the Canadian dollar.
each quarter since the beginning of 2009, and commer-
Expectations intensified that the Bank of Japan would
cial mortgage-backed security (CMBS) issuance contin-
pursue aggressive monetary easing after the new gover-
ued to be robust over the intermeeting period. None-
nor of the Bank of Japan was installed; over the inter-
theless, delinquency rates on loans underlying existing
meeting period, the yen depreciated further, 10-year
CMBS remained near historically high levels in Febru-
Japanese government bond yields declined to near rec-
ary, and CRE prices flattened out in the fourth quarter
ord lows, and the Nikkei stock price index rose sub-
after several quarters of increases.
stantially. Movements in the currencies of EMEs
Both conforming home mortgage rates and yields on against the dollar were generally small. Although in-
agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) rose, on net, flows into emerging market mutual funds continued,
during the intermeeting period, and the spread between they slowed notably in recent weeks, and EME equity
the primary mortgage rate and MBS yields narrowed a indexes were, on average, slightly lower. Some EME

--- Page 5 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 1_9_–_2_0_,_ 2_0_1_3________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
central banks cut interest rates, citing concerns about slowly from their current levels, long-run inflation ex-
economic growth. pectations assumed to remain stable, and significant
resource slack persisting over the forecast period, the
The staff also reported on potential risks to financial
staff continued to project that inflation would be sub-
stability, including those associated with the current
dued through 2015.
low interest rate environment. Some observers have
suggested that a lengthy period of low long-term rates The staff viewed the uncertainty around its forecast for
could encourage excessive risk-taking that could have economic activity as similar to the average level over
adverse consequences for financial stability at some the past 20 years. However, the risks were viewed as
point in the future. The staff surveyed a wide range of skewed to the downside, reflecting in part the concerns
asset markets and financial institutions for signs of ex- about the situation in Europe and the possibility of a
cess valuations, leverage, or risk-taking that could pose more severe tightening in U.S. fiscal policy than cur-
systemic risks. Low interest rates likely have supported rently anticipated. The staff saw the uncertainty around
gains in asset prices and encouraged the flow of credit its projection for inflation as about average, and it
to households and businesses, but these changes to viewed the risks to the inflation outlook as roughly bal-
date do not appear to have been accompanied by sig- anced.
nificant financial imbalances. However, trends in a few
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and
specific markets bore watching, and the staff will con-
Economic Outlook
tinue to monitor for signs of developments that could
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, meeting par-
pose risks to financial stability.
ticipants—the 7 members of the Board of Governors
Staff Economic Outlook and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks, all
In the economic forecast prepared by the staff for the of whom participate in the deliberations of the
March FOMC meeting, real GDP growth was revised FOMC—submitted their assessments of real output
down somewhat in the near term, largely reflecting the growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the tar-
federal spending sequestration that went into effect on get federal funds rate for each year from 2013 through
March 1 and the resulting drag from reduced govern- 2015 and over the longer run, under each participant’s
ment purchases. The staff’s medium-term forecast for judgment of appropriate monetary policy. The longer-
real GDP growth was little changed, on balance, as the run projections represent each participant’s assessment
effects of somewhat more fiscal policy restraint and a of the rate to which each variable would be expected to
higher assumed path for the foreign exchange value of converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy
the dollar were essentially offset by a brighter outlook and in the absence of further shocks to the economy.
for domestic energy production and a higher projection These economic projections and policy assessments are
for household wealth, which reflected upward revisions described in the Summary of Economic Projections,
to the projected paths for both equity prices and home which is attached as an addendum to these minutes.
prices. On balance, with fiscal policy expected to be
Meeting participants generally indicated that they
tighter in 2013 than in 2012, the staff expected that
viewed the economic data received during the inter-
increases in real GDP this year would only modestly
meeting period as somewhat more positive than had
exceed the growth rate of potential output. Fiscal poli-
been expected, but that fiscal policy appeared to have
cy restraint on economic growth was assumed to ease
become more restrictive, leaving the outlook for the
over time, and real GDP was projected to accelerate
economy little changed on balance since the January
gradually in 2014 and 2015, supported by increases in
meeting. Participants judged that the economy had
consumer and business sentiment, further improve-
returned to moderate growth following a pause late last
ments in credit availability and financial conditions, and
year, and a few noted that the downside risks may have
accommodative monetary policy. The expansion in
diminished. Conditions in labor markets had shown
economic activity was anticipated to slowly reduce the
signs of improvement, although the unemployment
slack in labor and product markets over the projection
rate remained elevated. Spending by households and
period, and progress in reducing the unemployment
businesses was continuing to expand, perhaps reflect-
rate was expected to be gradual.
ing some increased optimism. Participants noted that
The staff’s forecast for inflation was little changed from the housing market, in particular, had firmed somewhat
the projection prepared for the January FOMC meet- further. Accommodative monetary policy was likely
ing. With crude oil prices anticipated to trend down providing important support to these developments.

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
In contrast, participants thought that fiscal policy was Many participants reported that their business contacts
exerting significant near-term restraint on the economy. were seeing some further improvement in the econom-
Participants generally anticipated that growth would ic outlook. Firms reported increased planning for capi-
proceed at a moderate pace and that the unemployment tal expenditures, supported by low interest rates and
rate would decline gradually toward levels consistent substantial cash holdings. Investment spending on
with the Committee’s mandate. Inflation had been productivity-enhancing technology was strong, as was
running below the Committee’s 2 percent objective for pipeline construction in the energy sector. A few par-
some time, and nearly all of the participants anticipated ticipants indicated that their contacts saw the level of
that it would run at or below 2 percent over the medi- uncertainty about the economic outlook as having de-
um term. clined recently, a development that could lead to in-
creased investment expenditures.
In their discussion of the household sector, most par-
ticipants noted that the data on spending were some- Most participants remarked on the federal spending
what encouraging, particularly with regard to spending sequester and its potential effects on the economy; they
on automobiles, other consumer durables, and housing. judged that recent tax and spending changes were al-
Several participants stated that the moderate accelera- ready restraining aggregate demand or would do so
tion in spending might in part reflect pent-up demand over the course of the year. A couple of participants,
following years of deleveraging and was importantly however, suggested that they had cut their estimates of
supported by the stance of monetary policy, which has the effect of recent federal austerity measures or had
reduced the cost of financing purchases and improved never considered the effects to be substantial.
credit availability to some degree. A couple of partici-
Recent readings on private employment and the unem-
pants noted that the increase in the payroll tax ap-
ployment rate indicated some improvement in labor
peared to have not yet had a material effect on house-
market conditions. Nonetheless, participants generally
hold spending; however, another suggested that the
saw the unemployment rate as still elevated and were
payroll tax increase, along with higher gasoline prices,
not yet confident that the recent progress toward the
may be one reason why spending by lower-income
Committee’s employment objective would be sus-
households appeared to be depressed, as those changes
tained. The need to use a range of indicators to gauge
disproportionately cut into the disposable income of
labor market conditions was noted. One participant
those households. A couple of other participants
highlighted that hiring rates and quit rates remained
thought that overall consumer spending was likely still
somewhat low. Another participant discussed evidence
held back, at least in part, by ongoing concerns about
that the labor market may have become less dynamic
future income and employment prospects. Both fiscal
over time, with the result that recent payroll gains
restraint and the high level of student debt were men-
might be more meaningful than would first appear.
tioned as risks to aggregate household spending over
Inference about the labor force participation rate was
the forecast period.
complicated by its long-run downward trend. One par-
Participants generally saw conditions in the housing ticipant cited research indicating that long-term unem-
market as having improved further over the intermeet- ployment, which is currently especially high, could lead
ing period. Rising house prices were strengthening to persistently lower income and wealth for those af-
household balance sheets by raising wealth and by in- fected, even after they found jobs. More broadly, firms
creasing the ability of some homeowners to refinance reportedly remained cautious about hiring, which some
their mortgages at lower rates. Such a dynamic was participants attributed in part to restrictive fiscal policy
seen as potentially leading to a virtuous cycle that could combined with growing regulatory burden. This cau-
help support household spending and financial market tion appeared to have resulted in jobs remaining vacant
conditions over time. Reports from homebuilders in for substantially longer than would normally be the
many parts of the country were encouraging. One par- case, given the unemployment rate.
ticipant pointed to ongoing changes in a range of fac-
Recent price developments were consistent with sub-
tors—including demographics, credit conditions, busi-
dued inflation pressures and inflation remaining at or
ness models, and consumer preferences—that were
below the Committee’s 2 percent objective over the
likely shifting both supply and demand in the housing
medium run. Participants saw little near-term inflation-
sector and concluded that the outlook for the sector
ary pressure, with a few noting that the appreciation of
was quite uncertain and potentially subject to rapid
the dollar was holding down import costs or that the
changes.

--- Page 7 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 1_9_–_2_0_,_ 2_0_1_3________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
recent increases in gasoline prices did not appear to credit constraints allowed more borrowers to take ad-
have passed through more broadly to prices of other vantage of lower interest rates. One participant em-
goods. Pointing to inflation that had been running be- phasized the role of recent asset purchases in keeping
low their objective for some time, some participants inflation from declining further below the Committee’s
saw downside risks to inflation, especially if economic longer-run goal. A few participants felt that MBS pur-
activity did not pick up as projected. But a few partici- chases provided more support to the economy than
pants noted that the risk remained that inflationary purchases of longer-term Treasury securities because
pressures could rise as the expansion continued, espe- they stimulated the housing sector directly; however, a
cially if monetary policy remained highly accommoda- few preferred to focus any purchases in the Treasury
tive for too long. market to avoid allocating credit to a specific sector of
the economy. It was noted that, in addition to the
Participants discussed their assessments of risks to fi-
standard channels through which monetary policy af-
nancial stability, particularly in light of the Committee’s
fects the economy, asset purchases could help signal
highly accommodative stance of monetary policy.
the Committee’s commitment to accommodative mon-
Many participants noted that in the current low-interest
etary policy, thereby making the forward guidance
rate environment, investors in some financial markets
about the federal funds rate more effective. However,
were taking on additional risk—either credit risk or
a few participants were not convinced of the benefits
interest rate risk—in an effort to boost returns. As a
of asset purchases, stating that the effects on financial
result, vigilance on the part of policymakers and regula-
markets appeared to be short lived or that they saw
tors was warranted, especially in light of episodic
little evidence of a significant macroeconomic effect.
strains in European markets. A couple of participants
One participant suggested that the signaling effect of
noted that U.S. banks had expanded their capital posi-
asset purchases may have been reduced by the adoption
tions and were generally in sound financial condition.
of threshold-based forward guidance. In general, re-
Meeting participants generally agreed that there was an
flecting the limited experience with large-scale asset
ongoing need to evaluate the possible interactions be-
purchases, participants recognized that estimates of the
tween monetary policy decisions and financial stability,
economic effects were necessarily imprecise and cov-
with some noting that adverse shocks to financial sta-
ered a wide range.
bility can affect progress toward the Committee’s dual
mandate. Participants generally agreed that asset purchases also
have potential costs and risks. In particular, partici-
Review of Efficacy and Costs of Asset Purchases
pants pointed to possible risks to the stability of the
The staff provided presentations covering the efficacy
financial system, the functioning of particular financial
of the Federal Reserve’s asset purchases, the effects of
markets, the smooth withdrawal of monetary accom-
the purchases on security market functioning, the ways
modation when it eventually becomes appropriate, and
in which asset purchases might amplify or reduce risks
the Federal Reserve’s net income. Their views on the
to financial stability, and the fiscal implications of pur-
practical importance of these risks varied, as did their
chases. In their discussion of this topic, meeting partic-
prescriptions for mitigating them. Asset purchases
ipants generally judged the macroeconomic benefits of
were seen by some as having a potential to contribute
the current purchase program to outweigh the likely
to imbalances in financial markets and asset prices,
costs and risks, but they agreed that an ongoing as-
which could undermine financial stability over time.
sessment of the benefits and costs was necessary.
Moreover, to the extent that asset purchases push
Pointing to academic and Federal Reserve staff re-
down longer-term interest rates, they potentially expose
search, most participants saw asset purchases as having
financial markets to a rapid rise in those rates in the
a meaningful effect in easing financial conditions and
future, which could impose significant losses on some
so supporting economic growth. Some expressed the
investors and intermediaries. Several participants sug-
view that these effects had likely been stronger during
gested that enhanced supervision could serve to limit,
the Federal Reserve’s initial large-scale asset purchases
at least to some extent, the increased risk-taking associ-
because that program also helped support market func-
ated with a lengthy period of low long-term interest
tioning during the financial crisis. Other participants,
rates, and that effective policy communication or bal-
however, saw little evidence that the efficacy of asset
ance sheet management by the Committee could re-
purchases had declined over time, and a couple of these
duce the probability of excessively rapid increases in
suggested that the effectiveness of purchases might
longer-term rates. It was also noted that the accom-
even have increased more recently, as the easing of

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
modative stance of policy could be supporting financial ing participants thought the risks and costs of addition-
stability by returning the economy to a stable footing al asset purchases remained manageable, but also that
sooner than would otherwise be the case and perhaps continued close attention to these issues was warranted.
by allowing borrowers to secure longer-term financing A few participants noted that curtailing the purchase
and thereby reduce funding risks; by contrast, curtailing program was the most direct way to mitigate the costs
asset purchases could slow the recovery and so extend and risks.
the period of very low interest rates. Nevertheless, a
In light of their discussion of the benefits and costs of
number of participants remained concerned about the
asset purchases, participants discussed their views on
potential for financial stability risks to build. One con-
the appropriate course for the current asset purchase
sequence of asset purchases has been the increase in
program. A few participants noted that they already
the Federal Reserve’s net income and its remittances to
viewed the costs as likely outweighing the benefits and
the Treasury, but those values were projected to de-
so would like to bring the program to a close relatively
cline, perhaps even to zero for a time, as the Commit-
soon. A few others saw the risks as increasing fairly
tee eventually withdraws policy accommodation. Some
quickly with the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance
participants were concerned that a substantial decline in
sheet and judged that the pace of purchases would like-
remittances might lead to an adverse public reaction or
ly need to be reduced before long. Many participants,
potentially undermine Federal Reserve credibility or
including some of those who were focused on the in-
effectiveness. The possibility of such outcomes was
creasing risks, expressed the view that continued solid
seen as necessitating clear communications about the
improvement in the outlook for the labor market could
outlook for Federal Reserve net income. Several par-
prompt the Committee to slow the pace of purchases
ticipants stated that such risks should not inhibit the
beginning at some point over the next several meetings,
Committee from pursuing its mandated objectives for
while a few participants suggested that economic con-
inflation and employment. In any case, it was indicated
ditions would likely justify continuing the program at
that the fiscal benefits of a stronger economy would be
its current pace at least until late in the year. A range of
much greater than any short-term fluctuations in remit-
views was expressed regarding the economic and labor
tances, and moreover, a couple of participants noted
market conditions that would call for an adjustment in
that cumulative remittances to the Treasury would like-
the pace of purchases. Many participants emphasized
ly be higher than would have been the case without any
that any decision to reduce the pace of purchases
asset purchases. Some participants also were con-
should reflect both an improvement in their overall
cerned that additional asset purchases could complicate
outlook for labor market conditions, as implied by a
the eventual firming of policy—for example, by impair-
wide range of available indicators, and their confidence
ing the Committee’s control over the federal funds rate.
in the sustainability of that improvement. A couple of
A few participants raised the possibility of an undesira-
these participants noted that if progress toward the
ble rise in inflation. However, others expressed confi-
Committee’s economic goals were not maintained, the
dence in the Committee’s exit tools and its resolve to
pace of purchases might appropriately be increased. A
keep inflation near its longer-run goal. Another exit-
number of participants suggested that the Committee
related concern was a possible adverse effect on market
could change the mix of its policy tools if necessary to
functioning from MBS sales during the normalization
increase or maintain overall accommodation, including
of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. Although the
potentially adjusting its forward guidance or its balance
Committee’s asset purchases have had little apparent
sheet policies.
effect on securities market functioning to date, some
participants felt that future asset sales could prove Committee Policy Action
more challenging. In this regard, several participants Committee members saw the information received
noted that a decision by the Committee to hold its over the intermeeting period as suggesting that moder-
MBS to maturity instead of selling them would essen- ate economic growth had resumed following a pause
tially eliminate this risk. A decision not to sell MBS, or late last year. Labor market conditions had shown
to sell MBS only very slowly, would also mitigate some signs of improvement, but the unemployment rate re-
of the financial stability risks that could be associated mained elevated. Household spending and business
with such sales as well as damp the decline in remit- fixed investment had advanced, and the housing sector
tances to the Treasury at that time. Such a decision was had strengthened further, but fiscal policy had become
also seen by some as a potential source of additional somewhat more restrictive. The Committee expected
near-term policy accommodation. Overall, most meet- that, with appropriate monetary policy accommodation,

--- Page 9 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 1_9_–_2_0_,_ 2_0_1_3________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
economic growth would proceed at a moderate pace tent of progress toward the Committee’s economic
and result in a gradual decline in the unemployment objectives.
rate toward levels that the Committee judges consistent
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
with its dual mandate. Members generally continued to
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
anticipate that, with longer-term inflation expectations
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
stable and slack in resource utilization remaining, infla-
cute transactions in the System Account in accordance
tion over the medium term would likely run at or below
with the following domestic policy directive:
the Committee’s 2 percent objective.
“Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
Federal Open Market Committee seeks
ahead, members saw the economic outlook as little
monetary and financial conditions that will
changed since the previous meeting, and, consequently,
foster maximum employment and price sta-
all but one member judged that a highly accommoda-
bility. In particular, the Committee seeks
tive stance of monetary policy was warranted in order
conditions in reserve markets consistent
to foster a stronger economic recovery in a context of
with federal funds trading in a range from
price stability. The Committee agreed that it would be
0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the
appropriate to continue purchases of MBS at a pace of
Desk to undertake open market operations
$40 billion per month and purchases of longer-term
as necessary to maintain such conditions.
Treasury securities at a pace of $45 billion per month,
The Desk is directed to continue purchasing
as well as to maintain the Committee’s reinvestment
longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of
policies. The Committee also retained its forward
about $45 billion per month and to contin-
guidance about the federal funds rate, including the
ue purchasing agency mortgage-backed se-
thresholds on the unemployment and inflation rates.
curities at a pace of about $40 billion per
One member dissented from the Committee’s policy
month. The Committee also directs the
decision, expressing concern that the continued high
Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon
level of monetary accommodation increased the risks
swap transactions as necessary to facilitate
of future economic and financial imbalances and, over
settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency
time, could cause an increase in inflation expectations.
mortgage-backed securities transactions.
Members stressed that any changes to the purchase The Committee directs the Desk to main-
program should be conditional on continuing assess- tain its policy of rolling over maturing
ments both of labor market and inflation developments Treasury securities into new issues and its
and of the efficacy and costs of asset purchases. In policy of reinvesting principal payments on
light of the current review of benefits and costs, one all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed
member judged that the pace of purchases should ide- securities in agency mortgage-backed securi-
ally be slowed immediately. A few members felt that ties. The System Open Market Account
the risks and costs of purchases, along with the im- Manager and the Secretary will keep the
proved outlook since last fall, would likely make a re- Committee informed of ongoing develop-
duction in the pace of purchases appropriate around ments regarding the System’s balance sheet
midyear, with purchases ending later this year. Several that could affect the attainment over time
others thought that if the outlook for labor market of the Committee’s objectives of maximum
conditions improved as anticipated, it would probably employment and price stability.”
be appropriate to slow purchases later in the year and
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
to stop them by year-end. Two members indicated that
low to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
purchases might well continue at the current pace at
least through the end of the year. It was also noted “Information received since the Federal
that were the outlook to deteriorate, the pace of pur- Open Market Committee met in January
chases could be increased. In light of this discussion, suggests a return to moderate economic
the Committee included language in the statement to growth following a pause late last year. La-
be released following the meeting in part to make ex- bor market conditions have shown signs of
plicit that the size, pace, and composition of its asset improvement in recent months but the un-
purchases were conditional not only on the likely effi- employment rate remains elevated. House-
cacy and costs of those purchases, but also on the ex- hold spending and business fixed invest-

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
ment advanced, and the housing sector has size, pace, and composition of its asset pur-
strengthened further, but fiscal policy has chases, the Committee will continue to take
become somewhat more restrictive. Infla- appropriate account of the likely efficacy
tion has been running somewhat below the and costs of such purchases as well as the
Committee’s longer-run objective, apart extent of progress toward its economic ob-
from temporary variations that largely re- jectives.
flect fluctuations in energy prices. Longer-
To support continued progress toward
term inflation expectations have remained
maximum employment and price stability,
stable.
the Committee expects that a highly ac-
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the commodative stance of monetary policy will
Committee seeks to foster maximum em- remain appropriate for a considerable time
ployment and price stability. The Commit- after the asset purchase program ends and
tee expects that, with appropriate policy ac- the economic recovery strengthens. In par-
commodation, economic growth will pro- ticular, the Committee decided to keep the
ceed at a moderate pace and the unem- target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to
ployment rate will gradually decline toward ¼ percent and currently anticipates that this
levels the Committee judges consistent with exceptionally low range for the federal
its dual mandate. The Committee continues funds rate will be appropriate at least as
to see downside risks to the economic out- long as the unemployment rate remains
look. The Committee also anticipates that above 6½ percent, inflation between one
inflation over the medium term likely will and two years ahead is projected to be no
run at or below its 2 percent objective. more than a half percentage point above the
Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and
To support a stronger economic recovery
longer-term inflation expectations continue
and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
to be well anchored. In determining how
is at the rate most consistent with its dual
long to maintain a highly accommodative
mandate, the Committee decided to contin-
stance of monetary policy, the Committee
ue purchasing additional agency mortgage-
will also consider other information, includ-
backed securities at a pace of $40 billion per
ing additional measures of labor market
month and longer-term Treasury securities
conditions, indicators of inflation pressures
at a pace of $45 billion per month. The
and inflation expectations, and readings on
Committee is maintaining its existing policy
financial developments. When the Com-
of reinvesting principal payments from its
mittee decides to begin to remove policy
holdings of agency debt and agency
accommodation, it will take a balanced ap-
mortgage-backed securities in agency
proach consistent with its longer-run goals
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling
of maximum employment and inflation of
over maturing Treasury securities at auction.
2 percent.”
Taken together, these actions should main-
tain downward pressure on longer-term in- Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C.
terest rates, support mortgage markets, and Dudley, James Bullard, Elizabeth Duke, Charles L. Ev-
help to make broader financial conditions ans, Jerome H. Powell, Sarah Bloom Raskin, Eric
more accommodative. Rosengren, Jeremy C. Stein, Daniel K. Tarullo, and
Janet L. Yellen.
The Committee will closely monitor incom-
ing information on economic and financial Voting against this action: Esther L. George.
developments in coming months. The
Ms. George dissented because she continued to view
Committee will continue its purchases of
monetary policy as too accommodative and therefore
Treasury and agency mortgage-backed secu-
as posing risks to the achievement of the Committee’s
rities, and employ its other policy tools as
economic objectives in the long run. In particular, the
appropriate, until the outlook for the labor
current stance of policy could lead to financial imbal-
market has improved substantially in a con-
ances, a mispricing of risk, and, over time, higher long-
text of price stability. In determining the
term inflation expectations. In her view, the Commit-

--- Page 11 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 1_9_–_2_0_,_ 2_0_1_3_______________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
tee’s asset purchases were providing relatively small Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
benefits, and, given the risks that they posed as well as FOMC meeting held on January 29–30, 2013.
the improvement in the outlook for the labor market,
she thought they should be wound down.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, April 30–May _____________________________
1, 2013. The meeting adjourned at 11:30 a.m. on William B. English
March 20, 2013. Secretary
Notation Vote
By notation vote completed on February 19, 2013, the

--- Page 12 ---

Page 1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the March 19–20, 2013, Federal Participants anticipated that the growth rate of real
Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, meeting gross domestic product (GDP) would increase some-
participants—the 7 members of the Board of Gover- what over the forecast period to a pace that generally
nors and the 12 presidents of the Federal Reserve exceeded their estimates of the longer-run sustainable
Banks, all of whom participate in the deliberations of rate of growth. Participants expected the unemploy-
the FOMC—submitted their assessments of real out- ment rate to decline gradually through 2015. Nearly all
put growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the participants projected that inflation, as measured by the
target federal funds rate for each year from 2013 annual change in the price index for personal consump-
through 2015 and over the longer run. Each partici- tion expenditures (PCE), would remain somewhat be-
pant’s assessment was based on information available low the longer-run goal in 2013 and then rise toward
at the time of the meeting plus his or her judgment of 2 percent over the forecast period.
appropriate monetary policy and assumptions about the
As shown in figure 2, most participants judged that
factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The
highly accommodative monetary policy was likely to be
longer-run projections represent each participant’s
warranted over the next few years to support stable
judgment of the value to which each variable would be
prices and continued progress toward maximum em-
expected to converge, over time, under appropriate
ployment. In particular, 14 participants thought that it
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks
would be appropriate for the first increase in the target
to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is
federal funds rate to occur during 2015 or later. Most
defined as the future path of policy that each partici-
participants also judged that it would be appropriate to
pant deems most likely to foster outcomes for econom-
continue purchasing agency mortgage-backed securities
ic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her indi-
(MBS) and longer-term Treasury securities into the sec-
vidual interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objectives
ond half of 2013.
of maximum employment and stable prices.
Many participants continued to judge the uncertainty
Overall, the assessments submitted in March indicated
associated with the outlook for real activity and the
that FOMC participants projected that, under appro-
unemployment rate to be unusually high compared
priate monetary policy, the pace of economic recovery
with the norm of the past 20 years. In contrast to De-
would gradually pick up over the 2013–15 period and
cember, however, more participants viewed the risks to
inflation would remain subdued (table 1 and figure 1).
those outlooks as broadly balanced than saw the risks
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board membersand Federal Reserve Bank presidents, March 2013
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2013 2014 2015 Longer run 2013 2014 2015 Longer run
Change in real GDP . . . . . 2.3 to 2.8 2.9 to 3.4 2.9 to 3.7 2.3 to 2.5 2.0 to 3.0 2.6 to 3.8 2.5 to 3.8 2.0 to 3.0
December projection . . 2.3 to 3.0 3.0 to 3.5 3.0 to 3.7 2.3 to 2.5 2.0 to 3.2 2.8 to 4.0 2.5 to 4.2 2.2 to 3.0
Unemployment rate . . . . . 7.3 to 7.5 6.7 to 7.0 6.0 to 6.5 5.2 to 6.0 6.9 to 7.6 6.1 to 7.1 5.7 to 6.5 5.0 to 6.0
December projection . . 7.4 to 7.7 6.8 to 7.3 6.0 to 6.6 5.2 to 6.0 6.9 to 7.8 6.1 to 7.4 5.7 to 6.8 5.0 to 6.0
PCE inflation . . . . . . . . . . . 1.3 to 1.7 1.5 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 2.0 1.3 to 2.0 1.4 to 2.1 1.6 to 2.6 2.0
December projection . . 1.3 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 2.0 1.3 to 2.0 1.4 to 2.2 1.5 to 2.2 2.0
Core PCE inflation3 . . . . . 1.5 to 1.6 1.7 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.1 1.5 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.1 1.7 to 2.6
December projection . . 1.6 to 1.9 1.6 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.2
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the pre-
vious year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index
for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the aver-
age civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate
monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under ap-
propriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The December projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the
Federal Open Market Committee on December 11–12, 2012.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

--- Page 13 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure1. Centraltendenciesandrangesofeconomicprojections,2013–15andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
5
Central tendency of projections
4
Range of projections
3
2
1
+
Actual 0
-
1
2
3
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesofthevariablesare
annual.

--- Page 14 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t i o n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f M a r c h 1 9 – 2 0 , 2 0 1 3 Page 3
Figure2. OverviewofFOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy
Number of participants
Appropriate timing of policy firming 13
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
4
3
2
1 1
1
2013 2014 2015 2016
Appropriate pace of policy firming Percent
Target federal funds rate at year end
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2013 2014 2015 Longer run
Note: Intheupperpanel,theheightofeachbardenotesthenumberofFOMCparticipantswhojudgethat,under
appropriatemonetarypolicy,thefirstincreaseinthetargetfederalfundsratefromitscurrentrangeof0to1/4percent
will occur in the specified calendar year. In December 2012, the numbers of FOMC participants who judged that the
first increase in the target federal funds rate would occur in 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2016 were, respectively, 2, 3, 13,
and 1. In the lower panel, each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/4 percentage point) of an
individual participant’s judgment of the appropriate level of the target federal funds rate at the end of the specified
calendaryearoroverthelongerrun.

--- Page 15 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
as skewed toward adverse outcomes. A majority of tral tendency of participants’ estimates of the longer-
participants indicated that the uncertainty surrounding run normal rate of unemployment that would prevail
their projections for PCE inflation was broadly similar under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence
to historical norms, and nearly all considered the risks of further shocks to the economy was 5.2 to 6.0 per-
to inflation to be either broadly balanced or weighted cent, the same as in December. Most participants pro-
to the downside. jected that the unemployment rate would converge to
their estimates of its longer-run normal rate in five or
The Outlook for Economic Activity
six years, while some judged that less time would be
Participants projected that, conditional on their indi-
needed.
vidual assumptions about appropriate monetary policy,
the economy would grow at a somewhat faster pace in As shown in figures 3.A and 3.B, participants’ views
2013 than it had in 2012. They also generally judged regarding the likely outcomes for real GDP growth and
that growth would strengthen further in 2014 and 2015, the unemployment rate over the next three years and
in most cases to a rate above what participants saw as over the longer run remained diverse, reflecting their
the longer-run rate of output growth. Most partici- individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy
pants noted that the high degree of monetary policy and its economic effects, the likely rate of improvement
accommodation assumed in their projections would in the housing sector and domestic spending more gen-
help promote the economic recovery over the forecast erally, the domestic implications of foreign economic
period and expected that continued improvement in developments, the extent of structural dislocations to
the housing sector would add more broadly to private the labor market and the economy’s productive poten-
demand; however, they also judged that increased fiscal tial, and a number of other factors. The dispersion of
restraint in the United States would hold back the pace participants’ projections of real GDP growth was little
of economic expansion, especially in 2013, and pointed changed relative to December, with a small reduction
to the situation in Europe as an ongoing downside risk. in the upper end of the distribution in all three years of
the forecast period and a slight overall downward shift
The central tendency of participants’ projections for
in 2014. The distributions of the unemployment rate
the change in real GDP was 2.3 to 2.8 percent for
projections in each year narrowed a few tenths, reflect-
2013, 2.9 to 3.4 percent for 2014, and 2.9 to 3.7 percent
ing decreases in the high ends of the ranges. The dis-
for 2015; these projections were little changed, to
persion of estimates for the longer-run rate of output
slightly below, the ones in December. When partici-
growth stayed fairly narrow, with all but four within the
pants compared their own March forecast with the one
central tendency of 2.3 to 2.5 percent; two participants,
they made in December, many mentioned that
however, dropped their estimates to below 2.2 percent.
stronger-than-anticipated incoming data on private
The range of participants’ estimates of the longer-run
economic activity had nearly offset the effects of
rate of unemployment, at 5.0 to 6.0 percent, was un-
greater-than-expected fiscal restraint likely to be put in
changed relative to December.
place this year. The central tendency for the longer-run
rate of increase of real GDP was 2.3 to 2.5 percent, The Outlook for Inflation
unchanged from December. Participants’ broad outlook for inflation under appro-
priate monetary policy suggested that both headline and
Participants anticipated a gradual decline in the unem-
core inflation would remain subdued over the 2013–15
ployment rate over the forecast period; even so, they
period, with nearly all participants judging that inflation
generally thought that the unemployment rate at the
would be equal to or below the FOMC’s longer-run
end of 2015 would remain well above their individual
objective of 2 percent in each year. Specifically, the
estimates of its longer-run normal level. The central
central tendency of participants’ projections for overall
tendencies of participants’ forecasts for the unemploy-
inflation in 2013, as measured by the growth in the
ment rate were 7.3 to 7.5 percent at the end of 2013
PCE price index, narrowed to 1.3 to 1.7 percent, while
and 6.7 to 7.0 percent at the end of 2014. These pro-
the central tendencies for 2014 and 2015 were un-
jections are slightly lower than in December, with a few
changed at 1.5 to 2.0 percent and 1.7 to 2.0 percent,
participants attributing their revisions to the more fa-
respectively. The central tendency of the forecasts for
vorable data from the labor market or small changes in
core inflation in 2013 also narrowed, to 1.5 to 1.6 per-
their estimated rate of potential output growth. How-
cent, but, unlike overall inflation, edged up slightly in
ever, the central tendency of the forecasts for the end
2014 and 2015; nevertheless, the central tendencies
of 2015, at 6.0 to 6.5 percent, changed little. The cen-
remained near or below 2 percent in both years. In

--- Page 16 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t i o n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f M a r c h 1 9 – 2 0 , 2 0 1 3 Page 5
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2013–15andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2013 20
March projections 18
December projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3. 0 3. 2 3. 4 3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2
2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3. 0 3. 2 3. 4 3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2
2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3. 0 3. 2 3. 4 3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2
2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3. 0 3. 2 3. 4 3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2
2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 17 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2013–15andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2013 20
March projections 18
December projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2 6.4 6.6 6.8 7.0 7.2 7.4 7.6 7.8
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2 6.4 6.6 6.8 7.0 7.2 7.4 7.6 7.8
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2 6.4 6.6 6.8 7.0 7.2 7.4 7.6 7.8
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2 6.4 6.6 6.8 7.0 7.2 7.4 7.6 7.8
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 18 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t i o n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f M a r c h 1 9 – 2 0 , 2 0 1 3 Page 7
discussing factors likely to keep inflation near the of the federal funds rate until 2015. Among the five
Committee’s inflation objective of 2 percent, several participants who saw the federal funds rate leaving the
participants cited the role of stable inflation expecta- effective lower bound earlier, their projections for the
tions and existing resource slack that was expected to federal funds rate at the end of 2014 range from ½ to
diminish only gradually. 2¾ percent. Views on the appropriate level of the fed-
eral funds rate at the end of 2015 varied, with 15 partic-
Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the diver-
ipants seeing the appropriate level of the federal funds
sity of participants’ views about the outlook for infla-
rate as 1¼ percent or lower and the others seeing the
tion. The ranges of participants’ projections for overall
appropriate level as 2 percent or higher. On balance,
inflation in 2013 and 2014 were almost unchanged
participants’ projections for the appropriate federal
compared with the corresponding distributions for De-
funds rate at the end of 2015 shifted down a bit from
cember. The ranges for core inflation were also little
those in their December forecasts.
changed, but, in 2013, many of the projections shifted
toward the lower end of the range. The distributions Nearly all participants saw the appropriate target for
for core and overall inflation in 2015 remained concen- the federal funds rate at the end of 2015 as still well
trated near the Committee’s longer-run objective, and below their assessment of its expected longer-run val-
all participants continued to project that overall infla- ue. Estimates of the longer-run target federal funds
tion would converge to the 2 percent goal over the rate ranged from 3¼ to 4½ percent, reflecting the
longer run. Committee’s inflation objective of 2 percent and partic-
ipants’ individual judgments about the longer-run level
Appropriate Monetary Policy
of the real federal funds rate.
As indicated in figure 2, most participants judged that
exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate would Participants also described their views regarding the
remain appropriate for a couple more years. In particu- appropriate path of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.
lar, 13 participants thought that the first increase in the All but a few participants thought that, given the cur-
target federal funds rate would not be warranted until rent economic outlook, it would be appropriate for the
sometime in 2015, and one judged that policy firming Committee to continue purchasing MBS and longer-
would likely not be appropriate until 2016 (upper pan- term Treasury securities at about the current pace at
el). Five participants judged that an earlier increase in least through midyear. A number of these participants
the federal funds rate, in 2013 or 2014, would be most anticipated that the pace would be tapered down
consistent with the Committee’s statutory mandate. around midyear. A few others thought that it would be
appropriate for the Committee to purchase securities at
All of the participants who judged that raising the fed-
the current pace through the third quarter of 2013 be-
eral funds rate target would first be appropriate in 2015
fore beginning to adjust the pace and a few saw the
also projected that the unemployment rate would first
current rate of purchases continuing at least through
decline below 6½ percent during that year and that
the end of 2013, with two participants specifying that
inflation would remain near or below 2 percent. In
some purchases would likely extend into 2014. Several
addition, those participants, as well as the participant
participants emphasized that the asset purchase pro-
who saw liftoff in 2016 as appropriate, also projected
gram was effective in supporting the economic expan-
that a sizable gap between the unemployment rate and
sion, that the benefits continued to exceed the costs,
the longer-run normal level of the unemployment rate
and that additional purchases would be necessary to
would persist until 2015 or later. The majority of the
achieve a substantial improvement in the outlook for
five participants who judged that policy firming should
the labor market. In contrast, a couple of participants
begin in 2013 or 2014 indicated that the Committee
indicated that the Committee could best foster its dual
would need to act relatively soon in order to keep infla-
objectives and limit the potential costs of the program
tion near the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 per-
by beginning to taper its purchases before midyear or
cent and to prevent a rise in inflation expectations.
by ending purchases altogether.
Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’
Key factors informing participants’ views of the eco-
judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target
nomic outlook and the appropriate setting for mone-
federal funds rate at the end of each calendar year from
tary policy included their judgments regarding labor
2013 to 2015 and over the longer run. As previously
market conditions that would be consistent with maxi-
noted, most participants judged that economic condi-
mum employment, the extent to which employment
tions would warrant maintaining the current low level

--- Page 19 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2013–15andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2013 20
March projections 18
December projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t i o n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f M a r c h 1 9 – 2 0 , 2 0 1 3 Page 9
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2013–15
Number of participants
2013
20
March projections
December projections 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2014
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2015
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

Page 10 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthetargetfederalfundsrate,2013–15andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2013
March projections
20
December projections
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2014
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2015
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Note: The target federal funds rate is measured as the level of the target rate at the end of the calendar year or
inthelongerrun.

--- Page 22 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o je c t i o n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f M a r c h 1 9 – 2 0 , 2 0 1 3 Page 11
currently deviated from maximum employment, the Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
extent to which projected inflation over the medium Percentage points
term deviated from the Committee’s longer-term objec- Variable 2013 2014 2015
tive of 2 percent, and participants’ projections of the Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . . ±1.3 ±1.7 ±1.8
likely time horizon necessary to return employment and Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . . . ±0.6 ±1.2 ±1.7
inflation to mandate-consistent levels. Participants
Total consumer prices2 . . . . . . . ±0.9 ±1.0 ±1.1
generally discussed their forecasts for the time of the
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root
first increase in the federal funds rate in the context of
mean squared error of projections for 1993 through 2012 that were
the thresholds adopted by the Committee in December released in the spring by various private and government forecasters. As
2012. A couple of participants noted that their assess- described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions,
there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real
ments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by
took into account the likelihood that the neutral level the average size of projection errors made in the past. Further infor-
mation is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the
of the federal funds rate was currently somewhat below
Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting
its historical norm. It was also noted that, because the Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washing-
appropriate stance of monetary policy is conditional on ton: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).
1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
the path of real activity and inflation over time, assess-
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
ments of the appropriate future path of the federal that has been most widely used in government and private economic
funds rate and the balance sheet could change if eco- forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.
nomic conditions were to evolve in an unexpected
manner. ly balanced, with the remainder generally indicating that
they saw the risks to their forecasts for real GDP
Uncertainty and Risks
growth as weighted to the downside and for unem-
A majority of the participants continued to judge that
ployment as weighted to the upside. Some participants
the levels of uncertainty about their projections for real
who changed their assessment to “broadly balanced”
GDP growth and unemployment remained higher than
indicated that, while U.S. fiscal policy had become
was the norm during the previous 20 years; however,
more restrictive this year, the future path of that policy
the number of participants with this view was noticea-
had become less uncertain than it was in December.
bly smaller than in December (figure 4).1 The main
factor cited as contributing to the elevated uncertainty Participants reported little change in their assessments
about economic outcomes was the challenge associated of the level of uncertainty and the balance of risks
with forecasting the path of the U.S. economic recov- around their forecasts for overall PCE inflation and
ery following a financial crisis and recession that dif- core inflation. Thirteen participants judged the levels
fered markedly from recent historical experience. Sev- of uncertainty associated with their forecasts for those
eral participants also noted the difficulties involved in inflation measures to be broadly similar to, or lower
predicting fiscal policy in the United States and the po- than, historical norms; the same number assessed the
tential for European developments to threaten U.S. risks to those projections to be broadly balanced. Sev-
financial stability, though a few participants noted a eral participants highlighted the likely role played by the
decline in the likely severity of those risks as a reason Committee’s adoption of a 2 percent inflation goal or
for changing their assessments of uncertainty from its commitment to maintaining accommodative mone-
“higher” to “broadly similar” to the norm. tary policy as contributing to the recent stability of
longer-term inflation expectations. Four participants
A majority of participants, somewhat more than in De-
saw the risks to their inflation forecast as tilted to the
cember, reported that they saw the risks to their fore-
downside, reflecting, for example, risks of disinflation
casts of real GDP growth and unemployment as broad-
that could arise from adverse shocks to the economy
that policy would have limited scope to offset in the
current environment. Conversely, a couple of the par-
1 Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for ticipants saw the risks to inflation as weighted to the
the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total
upside in light of the current highly accommodative
consumer price inflation over the period from 1993 through
stance of monetary policy and their concerns about the
2012. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncer-
Committee’s ability to shift to a less accommodative
tainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertain-
policy stance when it becomes appropriate to do so.
ty in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used
to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’
projections.

--- Page 23 ---

Page 12 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure4. Uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth 20 Risks to GDP growth 20
March projections 18 March projections 18
December projections 16 December projections 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate 20 Risks to the unemployment rate 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation 20 Risks to PCE inflation 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation 20 Risks to core PCE inflation 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”Defini-
tionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 24 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o je c t i o n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f M a r c h 1 9 – 2 0 , 2 0 1 3 Page 13
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by cent in the second year, and 1.2 to 4.8 percent
the members of the Board of Governors and in the third year. The corresponding 70 percent
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks confidence intervals for overall inflation would
inform discussions of monetary policy among be 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the current year, 1.0 to
policymakers and can aid public understand- 3.0 percent in the second year, and 0.9 to
ing of the basis for policy actions. Consider- 3.1 percent in the third year.
able uncertainty attends these projections, Because current conditions may differ
however. The economic and statistical models from those that prevailed, on average, over his-
and relationships used to help produce eco- tory, participants provide judgments as to
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de- whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
scriptions of the real world, and the future jections of each variable is greater than, smaller
path of the economy can be affected by myr- than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
iad unforeseen developments and events. forecast uncertainty in the past, as shown in
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
participants consider not only what appears to to whether the risks to their projections are
be the most likely economic outcome as em- weighted to the upside, are weighted to the
bodied in their projections, but also the range downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of participants judge whether each variable is
their occurring, and the potential costs to the more likely to be above or below their projec-
economy should they occur. tions of the most likely outcome. These judg-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical ments about the uncertainty and the risks at-
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including tending each participant’s projections are dis-
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports tinct from the diversity of participants’ views
and those prepared by the Federal Reserve about the most likely outcomes. Forecast un-
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the certainty is concerned with the risks associated
Federal Open Market Committee. The pro- with a particular projection rather than with
jection error ranges shown in the table il- divergences across a number of different pro-
lustrate the considerable uncertainty associat- jections.
ed with economic forecasts. For example, As with real activity and inflation, the out-
suppose a participant projects that real gross look for the future path of the federal funds
domestic product (GDP) and total consumer rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This
prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, re- uncertainty arises primarily because each partic-
spectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the ipant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of
uncertainty attending those projections is simi- monetary policy depends importantly on the
lar to that experienced in the past and the risks evolution of real activity and inflation over
around the projections are broadly balanced, time. If economic conditions evolve in an un-
the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a expected manner, then assessments of the ap-
probability of about 70 percent that actual propriate setting of the federal funds rate
GDP would expand within a range of 1.7 to would change from that point forward.
4.3 percent in the current year, 1.3 to 4.7 per-

# Tables

## Page_12_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |      |      |            |      |      |      |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|------------|------|------|------|
| 2013                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | 2014 | 2015 | Longer run | 2013 | 2014 | 2015 |
| 2.3 to 2.8 2.9 to 3.4 2.9 to 3.7 2.3 to 2.5
2.3 to 3.0 3.0 to 3.5 3.0 to 3.7 2.3 to 2.5
7.3 to 7.5 6.7 to 7.0 6.0 to 6.5 5.2 to 6.0
7.4 to 7.7 6.8 to 7.3 6.0 to 6.6 5.2 to 6.0
1.3 to 1.7 1.5 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 2.0
1.3 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 2.0
1.5 to 1.6 1.7 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.1
1.6 to 1.9 1.6 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 |      |      |            |      |      |      |