# 20131218_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:37:33*
*Pages: 25, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
December 17–18, 2013
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was James A. Clouse and William Nelson, Deputy Direc-
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the tors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gov-
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues- ernors
day, December 17, 2013, at 1:00 p.m. and continued on
Wednesday, December 18, 2013, at 8:30 a.m. Jon W. Faust, Special Adviser to the Board, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
PRESENT:
Ben Bernanke, Chairman Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Board Members, Board of Governors
James Bullard
Charles L. Evans Trevor A. Reeve, Senior Associate Director, Division
Esther L. George of International Finance, Board of Governors
Jerome H. Powell
Eric Rosengren Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers,
Jeremy C. Stein Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gover-
Daniel K. Tarullo nors
Janet L. Yellen
Eric M. Engen, Thomas Laubach, David E. Lebow,
Christine Cumming, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana and Michael G. Palumbo, Associate Directors,
Kocherlakota, Sandra Pianalto, and Charles I. Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Plosser, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Governors; Gretchen C. Weinbach, Associate Di-
Market Committee rector, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and John C.
Williams, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks Marnie Gillis DeBoer, Deputy Associate Director,
of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respec- Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gover-
tively nors; Diana Hancock, Deputy Associate Director,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
William B. English, Secretary and Economist Governors
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Stacey Tevlin, Assistant Director, Division of Research
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary and Statistics, Board of Governors
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel
Steven B. Kamin, Economist Eric Engstrom, Section Chief, Division of Research
David W. Wilcox, Economist and Statistics, Board of Governors
Thomas A. Connors, Troy Davig, Michael P. Leahy, David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Mone-
Stephen A. Meyer, and William Wascher, Associ- tary Affairs, Board of Governors
ate Economists
Peter M. Garavuso, Records Management Analyst,
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gover-
nors
Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking Su-
pervision and Regulation, Board of Governors John F. Moore, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco
Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability
Policy and Research, Board of Governors David Altig, Jeff Fuhrer, Loretta J. Mester, and
Mark S. Sniderman, Executive Vice Presidents,

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, Phila- of the program beyond the end of January. However,
delphia, and Cleveland, respectively some participants questioned the extent to which the
proposed limited increase in the caps would provide
Evan F. Koenig, Lorie K. Logan, and Samuel additional insights about the operational aspects of the
Schulhofer-Wohl, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal ON RRP program or the potential market effects of
Reserve Banks of Dallas, New York, and Minne- ON RRP operations. A few participants suggested that
apolis, respectively it would be useful to evaluate the potential role of an
ON RRP facility in the context of the Committee’s
David Andolfatto, James P. Bergin, Jonas D. M. Fish- plans for monetary policy implementation over the
er, Sylvain Leduc, and Paolo A. Pesenti, Vice Pres- medium and longer term.
idents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, New
Following the discussion, the Committee unanimously
York, Chicago, San Francisco, and New York, re-
approved the following resolution:
spectively
“The Federal Open Market Committee au-
Robert L. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve thorizes an increase in the maximum allot-
Bank of Richmond ment cap for the series of fixed-rate, over-
night reverse repurchase operations ap-
proved on September 17, 2013, to $3 billion
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed- per counterparty per day from its previous
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet level of $1 billion per counterparty per day.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account All other aspects of the resolution remain
reported on developments in domestic and foreign fi- unchanged.”
nancial markets as well as System open market opera-
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
tions during the period since the Federal Open Market
domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.
Committee (FOMC) met on October 29–30, 2013.
There were no intervention operations in foreign cur-
The staff also presented an update on the ongoing test-
rencies for the System’s account over the intermeeting
ing of overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON
period.
RRP) operations that the Committee approved at its
September meeting and that is scheduled to end on The staff presented a short briefing summarizing a sur-
January 29, 2014. All operations to date had proceeded vey that was conducted over the intermeeting period
smoothly. Participation in ON RRP operations varied regarding participants’ views of the marginal costs and
somewhat from day to day, in part reflecting changes in marginal efficacy of asset purchases. Most participants
the spread between market rates on repurchase agree- judged the marginal costs of asset purchases as unlikely
ment transactions and the rate offered in the Federal to be sufficient, relative to their marginal benefits, to
Reserve’s ON RRP operations. The staff reported that justify ending the purchases now or relatively soon; a
they saw potential benefits to extending the exercise few participants identified some possible costs as being
and in January would likely recommend a continuation more substantial, indicating that the costs could justify
along with possible adjustments to program parameters ending purchases now or relatively soon even if the
that could provide additional insights into the demand Committee’s macroeconomic goals for the purchase
for a potential facility and its efficacy in putting a floor program had not yet been achieved. Participants were
on money market rates. most concerned about the marginal cost of additional
asset purchases arising from risks to financial stability,
Following the Manager’s report, the Committee con-
pointing out that a highly accommodative stance of
sidered a proposal to increase the caps on individual
monetary policy could provide an incentive for exces-
allocations in the ON RRP test operations from
sive risk-taking in the financial sector. It was noted
$1 billion to $3 billion per counterparty. The proposed
that the risks to financial stability could be somewhat
increase in caps was intended to test the Desk’s ability
larger in the case of asset purchases than in the case of
to manage somewhat larger operational flows and to
interest rate policy because purchases work in part by
provide additional information about the potential use-
affecting term premiums and policymakers have less
fulness of ON RRP operations to affect market interest
experience with term premium effects than with more
rates when doing so becomes appropriate. Participants
conventional interest rate policy. Participants also ex-
generally supported the proposal, with one participant
pressed some concern that additional asset purchases
emphasizing the usefulness of extending the end date

--- Page 3 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r _1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_13_______________________P_a_g_e_ _3
increase the likelihood that the Federal Reserve might proving conditions in the labor market. The rate of job
at some point suffer capital losses. But it was pointed openings edged up in recent months, the share of small
out that the Federal Reserve’s asset purchases would businesses reporting that they had hard-to-fill positions
almost certainly provide significant net income to the increased, and the four-week moving average of initial
Treasury over the life of the program, especially when claims for unemployment insurance trended down, on
the effects of the program on the broader economy net, over the intermeeting period, although the rate of
were taken into account, and that potential reputational gross private-sector hiring was still somewhat low.
risks to the Federal Reserve arising from any future Measures of firms’ hiring plans remained higher than a
capital losses could be mitigated by communicating that year earlier, and household expectations of the labor
point to the public. Further, participants noted that market situation improved in early December.
ongoing asset purchases could increase the difficulty of
Manufacturing production accelerated briskly in Octo-
managing exit from the current highly accommodative
ber and November after increasing at a subdued pace
policy stance when the time came. Many participants,
in the third quarter, and the gains were broad based
however, expressed confidence in the tools at the Fed-
across industries. Automakers’ schedules indicated that
eral Reserve’s disposal for managing its balance sheet
the pace of light motor vehicle assemblies would rise in
and for normalizing the stance of policy at the appro-
December, and broader indicators of manufacturing
priate time. Regarding the marginal efficacy of the pur-
production, such as the readings on new orders from
chase program, most participants viewed the program
the national and regional manufacturing surveys, were
as continuing to support accommodative financial con-
consistent with a further expansion in factory output in
ditions, with a number of them pointing to the im-
the coming months.
portance of purchases in serving to enhance the credi-
bility of the Committee’s forward guidance about the Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) in-
target federal funds rate. A majority of participants creased modestly in the third quarter but rose at a faster
judged that the marginal efficacy of purchases was like- pace in September and October. The components of
ly declining as purchases continue, although some not- the nominal retail sales data used by the Bureau of
ed the difficulty inherent in making such an assessment. Economic Analysis to construct its estimate of PCE
A couple of participants thought that the marginal effi- increased at a strong pace in November, and light mo-
cacy of the program was not declining, as evidenced by tor vehicle sales moved up significantly. Moreover,
the substantial effects in financial markets in recent recent information for key factors that support house-
months of news about the likely path of purchases. hold spending was consistent with further solid gains in
PCE in the coming months. Households’ net worth
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
likely expanded as equity values and home prices in-
The information reviewed for the December 17–18
creased further in recent months; real disposable in-
meeting indicated that economic activity was expanding
come rose, on net, in September and October; and
at a moderate pace. Total payroll employment in-
consumer sentiment in the Thomson Reu-
creased further, and the unemployment rate declined
ters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers
but remained elevated. Consumer price inflation con-
improved significantly in early December.
tinued to run below the Committee’s objective,
although measures of longer-run inflation expectations The pace of activity in the housing sector appeared to
remained stable. continue to slow somewhat, likely reflecting the higher
level of mortgage rates since the spring. Starts for both
Total nonfarm payroll employment rose in October
new single-family homes and multifamily units in-
and November at a faster monthly pace than in the
creased, on balance, from August to November, but
previous two quarters. The unemployment rate de-
permits—which are typically a better indicator of the
clined, on net, from 7.2 percent in September to
underlying pace of construction—rose more gradually
7.0 percent in November. The labor force participa-
than starts over the same period. Sales of existing
tion rate also decreased, on balance, and the
homes and pending home sales decreased further in
employment-to-population ratio in November was the
October, although new home sales rose in October
same as in September. The share of workers employed
after falling markedly in the third quarter.
part time for economic reasons declined slightly while
the rate of long-duration unemployment was little Growth in real private expenditures for business
changed, but both measures were still high. Other in- equipment and intellectual property products was sub-
dicators were generally consistent with gradually im- dued in the third quarter. In October, nominal ship-

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
ments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft Measures of labor compensation indicated that increas-
edged down. However, nominal new orders for these es in nominal wages continued to be modest. Compen-
capital goods remained above the level of shipments, sation per hour in the nonfarm business sector rose
pointing to increases in shipments in subsequent moderately over the year ending in the third quarter,
months, and other forward-looking indicators, such as and unit labor costs moved up at a similar pace as gains
surveys of business conditions, were generally con- in productivity were small. The employment cost index
sistent with moderate gains in business equipment expanded a little more slowly than the compensation
spending in the near term. Real business spending for per hour measure over the same yearlong period. The
nonresidential structures rose substantially in the third increase in nominal average hourly earnings for all em-
quarter, but nominal expenditures for new business ployees over the 12 months ending in November was
buildings declined slightly in October. Real nonfarm also modest.
inventory investment increased noticeably in the third
Foreign economic activity strengthened in the third
quarter, but recent book-value data for
quarter, as the euro area continued to recover from its
inventory-to-sales ratios, along with readings on inven-
recent recession, economic growth picked up in China
tories from national and regional manufacturing sur-
after slowing in the first half of the year, and the Mexi-
veys, did not point to significant inventory imbalances
can economy rebounded from a second-quarter con-
in most industries.
traction. Inflation slowed recently in many advanced
Real federal government purchases declined somewhat foreign economies, partly as a result of a deceleration in
in the third quarter but appeared likely to decrease prices for energy and other commodities. Monetary
more substantially in the fourth quarter, reflecting the policy remained very accommodative in most advanced
effect of the temporary partial government shutdown economies, but central banks in some emerging market
in October and further cuts in defense spending in Oc- economies recently tightened policy further to contain
tober and November. Real state and local government inflation and support the foreign exchange value of
purchases rose markedly in the third quarter. Moreo- their currencies.
ver, the payrolls of these governments continued to
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
expand, on net, in October and November, and nomi-
Financial market developments over the intermeeting
nal state and local construction expenditures increased
period appeared to be driven largely by incoming data
in October.
on employment and economic activity that exceeded
The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in Octo- investor expectations as well as by Federal Reserve
ber as exports rose more than imports. The gains in communications.
exports were fairly widespread across categories and
Investors appeared to read the economic data releases
were led by sales of consumer goods, industrial sup-
over the intermeeting period as better than had been
plies, and agricultural products. The higher value of
expected and therefore as raising the odds that the
imports reflected increases in services, consumer
FOMC might decide to reduce the pace of asset pur-
goods, and petroleum products that more than offset
chases at its December meeting. Survey evidence sug-
lower purchases of computers, semiconductors, and
gested that market participants now saw roughly similar
automotive products.
probabilities of the first reduction in the pace of asset
Total U.S. consumer price inflation, as measured by the purchases occurring at the December, January, or
PCE price index, was less than 1 percent over the March meeting. Market expectations regarding the
12 months ending in October, in part because consum- timing of liftoff of the federal funds rate seemed to be
er energy prices declined over the same 12-month peri- little changed over the period. In part, a variety of
od. In addition, core PCE price inflation—which ex- Federal Reserve communications were seen as
cludes consumer energy and food prices—was only a strengthening the Committee’s forward guidance for
little above 1 percent, partly reflecting subdued in- the federal funds rate and contributing to the stability
creases in medical services prices and recent declines in of expectations for the near-term path of the federal
the prices of many nonfuel imported goods. In No- funds rate in the face of an improved economic out-
vember, the consumer price index (CPI) was flat, and look.
core CPI prices rose slightly faster than in the preced-
On net, judging by financial market quotes on interest
ing few months. Both near-term and longer-term infla-
rate futures, the expected federal funds rate path
tion expectations from the Michigan survey were little
through the end of 2015 moved only slightly since the
changed, on net, in November and early December.

--- Page 5 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r _1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_13_______________________P_a_g_e_ _5
October FOMC meeting. The expected federal funds less. House prices rose significantly in October, but
rate path at longer horizons rose somewhat, and the some indicators suggested that the pace of house price
Treasury yield curve steepened, with the 2-year Treas- gains continued to decelerate relative to earlier in the
ury yield about unchanged but the 5- and 10-year yields year.
higher by 21 and 34 basis points, respectively. The
Responses to the December SCOOS generally showed
measure of 5-year inflation compensation based on
little change in dealer-intermediated financing since
Treasury inflation-protected securities dipped 5 basis
September. Credit terms for most classes of counter-
points, while the 5-year forward measure increased
parties were little changed. One-third of respondents
7 basis points. The 30-year current-coupon yield on
reported a decline in the use of financial leverage by
agency mortgage-backed securities increased a bit more
trading real estate investment trusts, whereas the use of
than the 10-year Treasury yield.
financial leverage by other classes of counterparties was
Stock prices were about unchanged, on net, over the basically unchanged. In response to special questions
intermeeting period, even though some broad equity in the survey, dealers indicated that the current use of
price indexes temporarily touched all-time nominal repurchase agreements or other forms of short-term
highs. Corporate risk spreads narrowed somewhat. funding for longer-duration assets was roughly in line
with or somewhat below the levels seen early in 2013.
Business finance flows were robust over the intermeet-
ing period. Gross equity issuance by the nonfinancial Bank credit rose slightly in October and November, as
corporate sector in October and November reached growth in commercial and industrial loans, CRE loans,
levels not seen in a decade. Gross bond issuance by and consumer loans was partially offset by declines in
nonfinancial corporations picked up again after a dip the outstanding balances of closed-end residential
related to the fiscal standoff in October. Similarly, in- mortgages on banks’ books. Stock prices for large and
stitutional issuance of leveraged loans rose in October regional domestic banking firms outperformed the
and November, and collateralized loan obligation issu- broad equity market over the intermeeting period amid
ance remained strong. better-than-expected economic data and the settlement
of mortgage-related litigation by some large banking
Financing conditions in commercial real estate (CRE)
organizations. Spreads on credit default swaps for the
markets were consistent with increased confidence.
largest bank holding companies also moved lower, on
Year-to-date issuance of commercial mortgage-backed
net.
securities (CMBS) remained strong, but far below levels
seen before the financial crisis. Responses to the De- M2 contracted in November, likely reflecting in part
cember 2013 Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on portfolio reallocations by investors that had temporarily
Dealer Financing Terms (SCOOS) suggested that de- placed funds in bank deposits as a safe haven during
mand for funding for CMBS picked up since Septem- the recent federal debt limit impasse. Meanwhile, the
ber. CRE loans on banks’ books expanded in October monetary base continued to expand rapidly, primarily
and November at an increasing pace. reflecting the increase in reserve balances resulting
from the Federal Reserve’s asset purchases.
Automobile loans continued to expand in October, and
available data suggested that this trend was sustained in The foreign exchange value of the dollar appreciated
November. Automobile asset-backed securities (ABS) following the October FOMC meeting and the Octo-
issuance accelerated in November, and issuance of pa- ber employment report and ended the intermeeting
per backed by subprime automobile loans stayed period higher on balance. A shift in market expecta-
strong. In contrast, credit card balances moved side- tions toward easier monetary policy abroad may have
ways, and ABS issuance in that sector stayed flat. also boosted the exchange value of the dollar, most
notably against the Japanese yen, and equity prices in
In the residential mortgage market, several large lenders
Japan rose substantially further during the period. By
were reported to have eased their underwriting stand-
contrast, equity prices declined in many emerging mar-
ards slightly, but data suggested that mortgage lenders
ket economies; in some cases, those declines were large
generally continued to be reluctant to lend to borrow-
and accompanied by sizable decreases in currency val-
ers with less-than-pristine credit scores. Mortgage rates
ues and sovereign bond prices. European equity prices
rose over the intermeeting period to levels about
were also lower over the period. Long-term bench-
100 basis points above their early-May lows. On bal-
mark sovereign yields in the United Kingdom and Can-
ance, refinancing applications were down substantially
ada increased, in line with, but somewhat less than, the
since May while purchase applications declined much

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
rise in yields on comparable U.S. Treasury securities. the unemployment rate was expected to decline gradu-
Yields on German sovereign bonds, which reacted to a ally to the staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate.
policy rate cut by the European Central Bank and the
The staff’s forecast for inflation was quite similar to the
release of data showing lower-than-expected euro-area
projection prepared for the previous FOMC meeting.
inflation, were only slightly higher on net.
The near-term forecast for inflation was revised down
The staff’s periodic report on potential risks to finan- slightly to reflect some recent softer-than-expected da-
cial stability concluded that the vulnerability of the fi- ta. The staff continued to forecast that inflation would
nancial system to adverse shocks remained at moderate be modest, on net, through early next year but higher
levels overall. Relatively strong capital profiles of large than its low level in the first half of this year. The
domestic banking firms, low levels and moderate staff’s projection for inflation over the medium term
growth of aggregate credit in the nonfinancial sectors, was essentially unchanged. With longer-run inflation
and some reduction in reliance on short-term wholesale expectations assumed to remain stable, changes in
funding across the financial sector were seen as factors commodity and import prices expected to be measured,
supporting financial stability in the current environ- and slack in labor and product markets persisting over
ment. Valuations in most asset markets seemed broad- most of the projection period, inflation was projected
ly in line with historical norms. However, the staff re- to be subdued through 2016.
port noted that the complexity and interconnectedness
The staff viewed the uncertainty around the projection
of large financial institutions, along with some apparent
for economic activity as similar to its average over the
increases in investor appetite for higher-yielding assets
past 20 years. Nonetheless, the risks to the forecast for
and associated pressures on underwriting standards
real GDP growth were viewed as tilted to the down-
remained potential sources of risk to the financial sys-
side, reflecting concerns that the extent of supply-side
tem.
damage to the economy since the recession could
Staff Economic Outlook prove greater than assumed; that the tightening in
In the economic projection prepared by the staff for mortgage rates since last spring could exert greater re-
the December FOMC meeting, the forecast for growth straint on the housing recovery than had been project-
in real gross domestic product (GDP) in the second ed; that economic and financial stresses in emerging
half of this year was revised up a little from the one market economies and the euro area could intensify;
prepared for the previous meeting, as the recent infor- and that, with the target federal funds rate already near
mation on private domestic final demand—particularly its lower bound, the U.S. economy was not well posi-
consumer spending—was somewhat better, on balance, tioned to weather future adverse shocks. However, the
than the staff had anticipated. The staff’s medium- staff viewed the risks around the projection for the un-
term forecast for real GDP growth was also revised up employment rate as roughly balanced, with the risk of a
slightly, reflecting a small reduction in fiscal restraint higher unemployment rate resulting from adverse de-
from the recent federal budget agreement, which the velopments roughly countered by the possibility that
staff assumed would be enacted; a lower anticipated the unemployment rate could continue to fall more
trajectory for longer-term interest rates; and higher than expected, as it had in recent years. The staff did
paths for equity values and home prices. Those fac- not see the uncertainty around its outlook for inflation
tors, in total, more than offset a higher path for the as unusually high, and the risks to that outlook were
foreign exchange value of the dollar. The staff contin- viewed as broadly balanced.
ued to project that real GDP would expand more
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
quickly over the next few years than it has this year and
Economic Outlook
would rise significantly faster than the growth rate of
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, the meeting
potential output. This acceleration in economic activity
participants—5 members of the Board of Governors
was expected to be supported by an easing in the ef-
and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks, all
fects of fiscal policy restraint on economic growth, in-
of whom participated in the deliberations—submitted
creases in consumer and business sentiment, continued
their assessments of real output growth, the unem-
improvements in credit availability and financial condi-
ployment rate, inflation, and the target federal funds
tions, a further easing of the economic stresses in Eu-
rate for each year from 2013 through 2016 and over the
rope, and still-accommodative monetary policy. The
longer run, under each participant’s judgment of ap-
expansion in economic activity was anticipated to slow-
propriate monetary policy. The longer-run projections
ly reduce resource slack over the projection period, and
represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to

--- Page 7 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r _1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_13_______________________P_a_g_e_ _7
which each variable would be expected to converge, progress that households have made in reducing debt
over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in and strengthening their balance sheets. These favora-
the absence of further shocks to the economy. These ble trends were generally anticipated to continue and to
economic projections and policy assessments are de- be accompanied by stronger real disposable income as
scribed in the Summary of Economic Projections labor market conditions improve and inflation remains
(SEP), which is attached as an addendum to these low.
minutes.
Activity in the housing sector slowed in recent months.
In their discussion of the economic situation and the Some participants noted that the increase in mortgage
outlook, meeting participants viewed the information interest rates since the spring was having a greater ef-
received over the intermeeting period as suggesting that fect on that sector than they had anticipated earlier.
the economy was expanding at a moderate pace. They Despite the recent softening, participants discussed a
generally indicated that the broad contours of their out- number of factors that should support a continued re-
look for real activity, the labor market, and inflation covery in housing going forward. These included ex-
had not changed materially since their October meet- pectations that mortgage interest rates would remain
ing, but most expressed greater confidence in the out- relatively favorable, that rising home values would
look and saw the risks associated with their forecasts of boost household wealth and further reduce the number
real GDP growth and the unemployment rate as more of borrowers with underwater mortgages, that consum-
nearly balanced than earlier in the year. Almost all par- er incomes and confidence would continue to rise as
ticipants continued to project that the rate of growth of employment expanded, and that a pickup in household
economic activity would strengthen in coming years, formation would support the demand for housing.
and all anticipated that the unemployment rate would
Business investment appeared to be advancing at a
gradually decline toward levels consistent with their
moderate rate. A number of the fundamental determi-
current assessments of its longer-run normal value.
nants of business investment were positive: Business
The projected improvement in economic activity was
balance sheets remained in good shape, cash flow was
expected to be supported by highly accommodative
ample, and input costs were subdued. Business con-
monetary policy, diminished fiscal policy restraint, and
tacts in a number of Districts were reportedly some-
a pickup in global economic growth, as well as a further
what more confident about the outlook than they had
easing of credit conditions and continued improve-
been earlier in the fall, but a couple of participants re-
ments in household balance sheets. Inflation remained
ported that their contacts continued to focus on in-
below the Committee’s longer-run objective over the
vestments intended to reduce costs and were still cau-
intermeeting period. Nevertheless, participants still
tious regarding investment to expand capacity, or that
anticipated that with longer-run inflation expectations
concerns about health care costs were holding back
stable and economic activity picking up, inflation would
hiring. In the manufacturing sector, production ap-
move back toward its objective over the medium run.
peared to be increasing at a solid rate according to both
But they noted that inflation persistently below the
national and most of the regional surveys of activity,
Committee’s objective would pose risks to economic
and the available indexes of future activity continued to
performance and so saw a need to monitor inflation
suggest optimism among firms. Renewed export de-
developments carefully.
mand and a buildup in auto inventories, which may be
Consumer spending appeared to be strengthening, with reversed in 2014, were cited as contributing to the re-
solid gains in retail sales in recent months and a re- cent gains in production. Participants heard positive
bound in motor vehicle sales in November. On bal- reports from their contacts in the technology, rail,
ance, retail contacts reportedly were fairly optimistic freight, and airline industries, and activity in the energy
about holiday sales. Participants cited a number of fac- sector remained strong. In agriculture, record yields
tors that likely contributed to the recent pickup in were reported for corn and soybeans, but farm income
spending, including the waning effects of the payroll was being reduced by lower crop prices. Measures of
tax increase that had trimmed disposable income earlier farmland values were still rising, but anecdotal reports
in the year, the drop in energy costs, and the recent suggested softening in some areas.
improvement in consumer sentiment. More broadly,
Fiscal policy continued to restrain economic growth.
spending was being supported by gains in household
However, participants generally judged that the extent
wealth associated with rising house prices and equity
of the restraint may have begun to diminish as the ef-
values, the still-low level of interest rates, and the
fects of the payroll tax increases earlier in the year seem

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
to have waned, and the drag on real activity from re- mean, or sticky-price inflation measures as indicative of
strictive fiscal policies was expected to decline further fairly steady underlying price trends; most measures of
going forward. Moreover, a number of participants wage gains were also steady. Nonetheless, many partic-
observed that the prospect that the Congress would ipants expressed concern about the deceleration in
shortly reach an accord on the budget seemed to be consumer prices over the past year, and a couple point-
reducing uncertainty and lowering the risks that might ed out that a number of other advanced economies
be associated with a disruptive political impasse. were also experiencing very low inflation. Among the
costs of very low or declining inflation that were cited
Committee participants generally viewed the increases
were its effects in raising real interest rates and debt
in nonfarm payroll employment of more than 200,000
burdens. A few participants raised the possibility that
per month in October and November and the decline
recent declines in inflation might suggest that the eco-
in the unemployment rate to 7 percent as encouraging
nomic recovery was not as strong as some thought.
signs of ongoing improvement in labor market condi-
tions. Several cited other indicators of progress in the Domestic financial markets were influenced important-
labor market, such as the decline in new claims for un- ly over the intermeeting period by Federal Reserve
employment insurance, the uptrend in quits, or the rise communications and by economic data that were gen-
in the number of small businesses reporting job open- erally better than market participants expected. These
ings that were hard to fill. Participants exchanged factors apparently led market participants to raise the
views on the extent to which the decrease in labor odds they assigned to a reduction in the pace of asset
force participation over recent years represented cycli- purchases at the December meeting, and to leave
cal weakness in the labor market that was not adequate- roughly unchanged their expectations for the timing of
ly captured by the unemployment rate. Some partici- the first increase in the target federal funds rate. A
pants cited research that found that demographic and number of participants noted that current market ex-
other structural factors, particularly rising retirements pectations were reasonably well aligned with the Com-
by older workers, accounted for much of the recent mittee’s recent policy communications.
decline in participation. However, several others con-
Participants also reviewed indicators of financial vul-
tinued to see important elements of cyclical weakness
nerabilities that could pose risks to financial stability
in the low labor force participation rate and cited other
and the broader economy. These indicators generally
indicators of considerable slack in the labor market,
suggested that such risks were moderate, in part be-
including the still-high levels of long-duration unem-
cause of the reduction in leverage and maturity trans-
ployment and of workers employed part time for eco-
formation that has occurred in the financial sector since
nomic reasons and the still-depressed ratio of employ-
the onset of the financial crisis. In their discussion of
ment to population for workers ages 25 to 54. In addi-
potential risks, several participants commented on the
tion, although a couple of participants had heard re-
rise in forward price-to-earnings ratios for some small-
ports of labor shortages, particularly for workers with
cap stocks, the increased level of equity repurchases, or
specialized skills, most measures of wages had not ac-
the rise in margin credit. One pointed to the increase
celerated. A few participants noted the risk that the
in issuance of leveraged loans this year and the appar-
persistent weakness in labor force participation and low
ent decline in the average quality of such loans. A cou-
rates of productivity growth might indicate lasting
ple of participants offered views on the role of financial
structural economic damage from the financial crisis
stability in monetary policy decisionmaking more
and ensuing recession.
broadly. One proposed that the Committee analyze
Inflation continued to run noticeably below the Com- more explicitly the potential consequences of specific
mittee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent, but partici- risks to the financial system for its dual-mandate objec-
pants anticipated that it would move back toward tives and take account of the possible effects of mone-
2 percent over time as the economic recovery strength- tary policy on such risks in its assessment of appropri-
ened and longer-run inflation expectations remained ate policy. Another suggested that the importance of
steady. Several participants suggested that some of the financial stability considerations in the Committee’s
factors that had held down inflation recently, such as deliberations would likely increase over time as
the slowing in price increases for medical care and progress is made toward the Committee’s objectives,
banking services, were likely to prove transitory. Some and that such considerations should be incorporated
participants suggested that inflation, while low, was into forward guidance for the federal funds rate and
unlikely to slow further, pointing to core, trimmed asset purchases.

--- Page 9 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r _1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_13_______________________P_a_g_e_ _9
In their discussion of the appropriate path for mone- Participants also considered the potential for clarifying
tary policy, participants considered whether the cumu- or strengthening the Committee’s forward guidance for
lative improvement in labor market conditions since the federal funds rate. In general, participants who
the asset purchase program began in September 2012 favored amending the forward guidance saw a need to
and the associated improvement in the outlook for the more fully communicate how, if the unemployment
labor market warranted a reduction in the pace of asset rate threshold was reached first, the Committee would
purchases. The most recent data showed that increases likely set monetary policy after that threshold was
in nonfarm payroll employment had averaged around crossed. A number of participants pointed out that the
190,000 per month for the past 15 months, and the federal funds rate paths underlying the economic fore-
unemployment rate had fallen more quickly over that casts that they prepared for this meeting, as well as ex-
period than most participants had expected. Moreover, pectations for the funds rate path priced into financial
participants generally anticipated that the improvement markets, were consistent with the view that the Com-
in labor market conditions would continue, and most mittee would not raise the federal funds rate until well
had become more confident in that outlook. Against after the time that the threshold was crossed. A few
this backdrop, most participants saw a reduction in the participants discussed the potential advantages and dis-
pace of purchases as appropriate at this meeting and advantages of using medians of the projections of the
consistent with the Committee’s previous policy com- federal funds rate from the SEP as a means of com-
munications. Many commented that progress to date municating the likely path of short-term interest rates.
had been meaningful, and some expressed the view that Some worried that, if the Committee began to reduce
the criterion of substantial improvement in the outlook asset purchases, market expectations might shift, and
for the labor market was likely to be met in the coming they wanted to reinforce the forward guidance to miti-
year if the economy evolved as expected. However, gate the risks of an undesired tightening of financial
several participants stressed that the unemployment conditions that could have adverse effects on the econ-
rate remained elevated, that a range of other indicators omy. In light of their concern that inflation might con-
had shown less progress toward levels consistent with a tinue to run well below the Committee’s longer-run
full recovery in the labor market, and that the projected objective, several participants saw the need to clearly
pickup in economic growth was not assured. Some convey that inflation remains an important considera-
participants also questioned whether slowing the pace tion in adjusting the target funds rate. Participants de-
of purchases at a time when inflation was running well bated the advantages and disadvantages of lowering the
below the Committee’s longer-run objective was ap- unemployment rate threshold provided in the forward
propriate. For some, the considerable slack remaining guidance. In the view of the few participants who ad-
in the labor market and shortfall of inflation from the vocated such a change, a lower threshold would be a
Committee’s longer-run objective warranted continuing clear signal of the Committee’s intentions and was an
asset purchases at the current pace for a time in order appropriate adjustment in light of recent labor market
to wait for additional information confirming sustained and inflation trends. In contrast, a few others ex-
progress toward the Committee’s objectives or to pro- pressed concern that any change in the threshold might
mote faster progress toward those objectives. Among be confusing and could undermine the credibility of the
those inclined to begin to reduce the pace of asset pur- Committee’s forward guidance. Most were inclined to
chases at this meeting, many favored a modest initial retain the current thresholds for the unemployment
reduction accompanied by guidance indicating that de- and inflation rates and to instead provide qualitative
cisions regarding future reductions would depend on guidance regarding the Committee’s likely behavior
economic and financial developments as well as the after a threshold was crossed.
efficacy and costs of purchases. Some other partici-
Committee Policy Action
pants preferred a larger reduction in purchases at this
Committee members viewed the information received
meeting and future reductions that would bring the
over the intermeeting period as indicating that the
program to a close relatively quickly. A few proposed
economy was expanding at a moderate pace. Labor
that the Committee lay out, either at this meeting or
market conditions had improved in recent months,
subsequently, a more deterministic path for winding
with monthly gains in payroll employment of more
down the program or that it announce a fixed amount
than 200,000 in October and November. The unem-
of additional purchases and an expected completion
ployment rate had declined but remained elevated.
date, thereby reducing uncertainty about the trajectory
Household spending and business fixed investment
of the purchase program.
advanced, while the recovery in the housing market

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
slowed somewhat in recent months. Fiscal policy was month, and add to its holdings of longer-term Treasury
restraining economic growth, although the extent of securities at a pace of $40 billion per month rather than
the restraint may have begun to diminish. The Com- $45 billion per month. While deciding to modestly
mittee expected that, with appropriate policy accom- reduce its pace of purchases, the Committee empha-
modation, economic growth would strengthen and the sized that its holdings of longer-term securities were
unemployment rate would gradually decline toward sizable and would still be increasing, which would
levels consistent with its dual mandate. Moreover, promote a stronger economic recovery by maintaining
members judged that the risks to the outlook for the downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, sup-
economy and the labor market had become more near- porting mortgage markets, and helping to make broad-
ly balanced, reflecting in part an easing of fiscal policy er financial conditions more accommodative. The
concerns and an improvement in the prospects for Committee also reiterated that it will continue its asset
global economic growth. Inflation was running below purchases, and employ its other policy tools as appro-
the Committee’s longer-run objective, and this was priate, until the outlook for the labor market has im-
seen as posing possible risks to economic performance. proved substantially in a context of price stability. In
Members anticipated that inflation would, over time, the view of one member, a reduction in the pace of
return to the Committee’s 2 percent objective, support- purchases was premature and, before taking such a
ed by stable inflation expectations and stronger eco- step, the Committee should wait for more convincing
nomic activity. However, in light of their concerns evidence that economic growth was rising faster than
about the persistence of low inflation, many members its potential and that inflation would return to the
saw a need for the Committee to monitor inflation de- Committee’s 2 percent objective.
velopments carefully for evidence that inflation was
In their discussion of forward guidance about the target
moving back toward its longer-run objective.
federal funds rate, a few members suggested that lower-
In their discussion of monetary policy in the period ing the unemployment threshold to 6 percent could
ahead, most members agreed that the cumulative im- effectively convey the Committee’s intention to keep
provement in labor market conditions and the likeli- the target federal funds rate low for an extended peri-
hood that the improvement would be sustained indi- od. However, most members wanted to make no
cated that the Committee could appropriately begin to change to the threshold and instead preferred to pro-
slow the pace of its asset purchases at this meeting. vide qualitative guidance to clarify that a range of labor
However, members also weighed a number of consid- market indicators would be used when assessing the
erations regarding such an action, including their degree appropriate stance of policy once the threshold had
of confidence in prospects for sustained above- been crossed. A number of members thought that the
potential economic growth, continued improvement in forward guidance should emphasize the importance of
labor market conditions, and a return of inflation to its inflation as a factor in their decisions. Accordingly,
mandate-consistent level over time. Some also ex- almost all members agreed to add language indicating
pressed concern about the potential for an unintended the Committee’s anticipation, based on its current as-
tightening of financial conditions if a reduction in the sessment of additional measures of labor market condi-
pace of asset purchases was misinterpreted as signaling tions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation
that the Committee was likely to withdraw policy ac- expectations, and readings on financial developments,
commodation more quickly than had been anticipated. that it would be appropriate to maintain the current
As a consequence, many members judged that the target range for the federal funds rate well past the time
Committee should proceed cautiously in taking its first that the unemployment rate declines below 6½ percent,
action to reduce the pace of asset purchases and should especially if projected inflation continues to run below
indicate that further reductions would be undertaken in the Committee’s longer-run objective. It was noted
measured steps. Members also stressed the need to that this language might appear calendar-based rather
underscore that the pace of asset purchases was not on than conditional on economic and financial develop-
a preset course and would remain contingent on the ments, and one member objected to having forward
Committee’s outlook for the labor market and inflation guidance that might be seen as relatively inflexible in
as well as its assessment of the efficacy and costs of response to changes in members’ views about the ap-
purchases. Consistent with this approach, the Commit- propriate path of the target federal funds rate. Howev-
tee agreed that, beginning in January, it would add to its er, those concerns generally were seen as outweighed
holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace by the benefit of avoiding tying the Committee’s deci-
of $35 billion per month rather than $40 billion per sion too closely to the unemployment rate alone, while

--- Page 11 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r _1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_13______________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
still being clear about the Committee’s intention to fixed investment advanced, while the recov-
provide the monetary accommodation needed to sup- ery in the housing sector slowed somewhat
port a return to maximum employment and stable pric- in recent months. Fiscal policy is restraining
es. economic growth, although the extent of re-
straint may be diminishing. Inflation has
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
been running below the Committee’s longer-
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
run objective, but longer-term inflation ex-
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
pectations have remained stable.
cute transactions in the System Account in accordance
with the following domestic policy directive: Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
Committee seeks to foster maximum em-
“Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
ployment and price stability. The Committee
Federal Open Market Committee seeks
expects that, with appropriate policy ac-
monetary and financial conditions that will
commodation, economic growth will pick up
foster maximum employment and price sta-
from its recent pace and the unemployment
bility. In particular, the Committee seeks
rate will gradually decline toward levels the
conditions in reserve markets consistent with
Committee judges consistent with its dual
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to
mandate. The Committee sees the risks to
¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk
the outlook for the economy and the labor
to undertake open market operations as nec-
market as having become more nearly bal-
essary to maintain such conditions. Begin-
anced. The Committee recognizes that infla-
ning in January, the Desk is directed to pur-
tion persistently below its 2 percent objective
chase longer-term Treasury securities at a
could pose risks to economic performance,
pace of about $40 billion per month and to
and it is monitoring inflation developments
purchase agency mortgage-backed securities
carefully for evidence that inflation will move
at a pace of about $35 billion per month.
back toward its objective over the medium
The Committee also directs the Desk to en-
term.
gage in dollar roll and coupon swap transac-
tions as necessary to facilitate settlement of Taking into account the extent of federal fis-
the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage- cal retrenchment since the inception of its
backed securities transactions. The Commit- current asset purchase program, the Com-
tee directs the Desk to maintain its policy of mittee sees the improvement in economic ac-
rolling over maturing Treasury securities into tivity and labor market conditions over that
new issues and its policy of reinvesting prin- period as consistent with growing underlying
cipal payments on all agency debt and agency strength in the broader economy. In light of
mortgage-backed securities in agency mort- the cumulative progress toward maximum
gage-backed securities. The System Open employment and the improvement in the
Market Account Manager and the Secretary outlook for labor market conditions, the
will keep the Committee informed of ongo- Committee decided to modestly reduce the
ing developments regarding the System’s bal- pace of its asset purchases. Beginning in
ance sheet that could affect the attainment January, the Committee will add to its hold-
over time of the Committee’s objectives of ings of agency mortgage-backed securities at
maximum employment and price stability.” a pace of $35 billion per month rather than
$40 billion per month, and will add to its
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
holdings of longer-term Treasury securities at
low to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
a pace of $40 billion per month rather than
“Information received since the Federal $45 billion per month. The Committee is
Open Market Committee met in October in- maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting
dicates that economic activity is expanding at principal payments from its holdings of
a moderate pace. Labor market conditions agency debt and agency mortgage-backed se-
have shown further improvement; the un- curities in agency mortgage-backed securities
employment rate has declined but remains and of rolling over maturing Treasury securi-
elevated. Household spending and business ties at auction. The Committee’s sizable and

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
still-increasing holdings of longer-term secu- tary policy, the Committee will also consider
rities should maintain downward pressure on other information, including additional
longer-term interest rates, support mortgage measures of labor market conditions, indica-
markets, and help to make broader financial tors of inflation pressures and inflation ex-
conditions more accommodative, which in pectations, and readings on financial devel-
turn should promote a stronger economic opments. The Committee now anticipates,
recovery and help to ensure that inflation, based on its assessment of these factors, that
over time, is at the rate most consistent with it likely will be appropriate to maintain the
the Committee’s dual mandate. current target range for the federal funds rate
well past the time that the unemployment
The Committee will closely monitor incom-
rate declines below 6½ percent, especially if
ing information on economic and financial
projected inflation continues to run below
developments in coming months and will
the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal.
continue its purchases of Treasury and agen-
When the Committee decides to begin to
cy mortgage-backed securities, and employ
remove policy accommodation, it will take a
its other policy tools as appropriate, until the
balanced approach consistent with its longer-
outlook for the labor market has improved
run goals of maximum employment and in-
substantially in a context of price stability. If
flation of 2 percent.”
incoming information broadly supports the
Committee’s expectation of ongoing im- Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C. Dud-
provement in labor market conditions and ley, James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George,
inflation moving back toward its longer-run Jerome H. Powell, Jeremy C. Stein, Daniel K. Tarullo,
objective, the Committee will likely reduce and Janet L. Yellen.
the pace of asset purchases in further meas-
Voting against this action: Eric Rosengren.
ured steps at future meetings. However, as-
set purchases are not on a preset course, and Mr. Rosengren dissented because he viewed the deci-
the Committee’s decisions about their pace sion to slow the pace of asset purchases at this meeting
will remain contingent on the Committee’s as premature. In his view, with the unemployment rate
outlook for the labor market and inflation as still elevated and the inflation rate well below the
well as its assessment of the likely efficacy Committee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent, changes
and costs of such purchases. in the asset purchase program should be postponed
until incoming data more clearly indicate that economic
To support continued progress toward max-
growth is likely to be sustained above its potential rate.
imum employment and price stability, the
He saw the costs of delaying action at this meeting as
Committee today reaffirmed its view that a
likely to be small relative to the gains from promoting a
highly accommodative stance of monetary
faster return of both elements of the Committee’s dual
policy will remain appropriate for a consider-
mandate to their longer-run objectives.
able time after the asset purchase program
ends and the economic recovery strengthens. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
The Committee also reaffirmed its expecta- would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, January 28–29,
tion that the current exceptionally low target 2014. The meeting adjourned at 11:00 a.m. on Decem-
range for the federal funds rate of 0 to ber 18, 2013.
¼ percent will be appropriate at least as long
Notation Vote
as the unemployment rate remains above
By notation vote completed on November 19, 2013,
6½ percent, inflation between one and two
the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of
years ahead is projected to be no more than a
the FOMC meeting held on October 29–30, 2013.
half percentage point above the Committee’s
2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term _____________________________
inflation expectations continue to be well an-
William B. English
chored. In determining how long to main-
Secretary
tain a highly accommodative stance of mone-

--- Page 13 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the December 17–18, 2013, Feder- tion, as measured by the annual change in the price
al Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, meeting index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE),
participants—5 members of the Board of Governors would rise to a level at or slightly below the Commit-
and the 12 presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all tee’s 2 percent objective in 2016.
of whom participated in the deliberations—submitted
Most participants expected that highly accommodative
their assessments of real output growth, the unem-
monetary policy would remain warranted over the next
ployment rate, inflation, and the target federal funds
few years to foster progress toward the Federal Re-
rate for each year from 2013 through 2016 and over the
serve’s longer-run objectives. As shown in figure 2, a
longer run. Each participant’s assessment was based
large majority of participants projected not only that it
on information available at the time of the meeting plus
would be appropriate to wait until 2015 or later before
his or her judgment of appropriate monetary policy and
beginning to increase the federal funds rate, but also
assumptions about the factors likely to affect economic
that it would then be appropriate to raise the target
outcomes. The longer-run projections represent each
federal funds rate relatively gradually. Most partici-
participant’s judgment of the value to which each vari-
pants viewed their economic projections as broadly
able would be expected to converge, over time, under
consistent with a slowing in the pace of the Commit-
appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of fur-
tee’s purchases of longer-term securities in early 2014
ther shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary
and the completion of the program in the second half
policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each
of the year.
participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for
economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or Most participants saw the uncertainty associated with
her individual interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s their outlook for economic growth, the unemployment
objectives of maximum employment and stable prices. rate, and inflation as similar to that of the past 20 years.
In addition, most participants considered the risks to
Overall, FOMC participants expected, under appropri-
the outlook for real gross domestic product (GDP), the
ate monetary policy, that economic growth would pick
unemployment rate, and inflation to be broadly bal-
up, on average, over the next three years, with the un-
anced, although a few saw the risks to their inflation
employment rate declining gradually (table 1 and figure
forecasts as tilted to the downside.
1). Almost all of the participants projected that infla-
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, December 2013
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2013 2014 2015 2016 Longer run 2013 2014 2015 2016 Longer run
Change in real GDP . . 2.2 to 2.3 2.8 to 3.2 3.0 to 3.4 2.5 to 3.2 2.2 to 2.4 2.2 to 2.4 2.2 to 3.3 2.2 to 3.6 2.1 to 3.5 1.8 to 2.5
September projection . 2.0 to 2.3 2.9 to 3.1 3.0 to 3.5 2.5 to 3.3 2.2 to 2.5 1.8 to 2.4 2.2 to 3.3 2.2 to 3.7 2.2 to 3.5 2.1 to 2.5
Unemployment rate . . 7.0 to 7.1 6.3 to 6.6 5.8 to 6.1 5.3 to 5.8 5.2 to 5.8 7.0 to 7.1 6.2 to 6.7 5.5 to 6.2 5.0 to 6.0 5.2 to 6.0
September projection . 7.1 to 7.3 6.4 to 6.8 5.9 to 6.2 5.4 to 5.9 5.2 to 5.8 6.9 to 7.3 6.2 to 6.9 5.3 to 6.3 5.2 to 6.0 5.2 to 6.0
PCE inflation . . . . . . . 0.9 to 1.0 1.4 to 1.6 1.5 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 2.0 0.9 to 1.2 1.3 to 1.8 1.4 to 2.3 1.6 to 2.2 2.0
September projection . 1.1 to 1.2 1.3 to 1.8 1.6 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 2.0 1.0 to 1.3 1.2 to 2.0 1.4 to 2.3 1.5 to 2.3 2.0
Core PCE inflation3 . . 1.1 to 1.2 1.4 to 1.6 1.6 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 1.1 to 1.2 1.3 to 1.8 1.5 to 2.3 1.6 to 2.2
September projection . 1.2 to 1.3 1.5 to 1.7 1.7 to 2.0 1.9 to 2.0 1.2 to 1.4 1.4 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.3 1.7 to 2.3
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for per-
sonal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civil-
ian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary
policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate mone-
tary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The September projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee on September 17–18, 2013.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

--- Page 14 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure1. Centraltendenciesandrangesofeconomicprojections,2013–16andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
5
Central tendency of projections
4
Range of projections
3
2
1
+
Actual 0
-
1
2
3
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesofthevariablesare
annual.

--- Page 15 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _17_–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_3____________P_a_g_e_ _3
Figure2. OverviewofFOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy
Number of participants
Appropriate timing of policy firming 12
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
3
2
2
1
2014 2015 2016
Appropriate pace of policy firming Percent
Target federal funds rate at year end
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2013 2014 2015 2016 Longer run
Note: Intheupperpanel,theheightofeachbardenotesthenumberofFOMCparticipantswhojudgethat,under
appropriatemonetarypolicy,thefirstincreaseinthetargetfederalfundsratefromitscurrentrangeof0to1/4percent
willoccurinthespecifiedcalendaryear. InSeptember2013,thenumbersofFOMCparticipantswhojudgedthatthe
first increase in the target federal funds rate would occur in 2014, 2015, and 2016 were, respectively, 3, 12, and 2. In
the lower panel, each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/4 percentage point) of an individual
participant’sjudgmentoftheappropriatelevelofthetargetfederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryear
oroverthelongerrun.

--- Page 16 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
The Outlook for Economic Activity will diminish and demand for consumer and producer
Participants generally projected that, conditional on durables will recover, the anticipated path for foreign
their individual assumptions about appropriate mone- economic activity, the trajectory for growth in house-
tary policy, real GDP growth would accelerate in 2014 hold net worth, and the appropriate path of monetary
from its rate in 2013 and would pick up further in policy. Relative to September, the dispersions of par-
2015. Subsequently, in 2016, real GDP growth would ticipants’ projections for GDP growth in 2014 and be-
begin to converge back to a pace that participants saw yond were about unchanged, while dispersions of the
as the longer-run rate of output growth. Participants projections for the unemployment rate narrowed some
pointed to a number of factors contributing to the through 2015.
pickup in growth in the near term, including diminish-
The Outlook for Inflation
ing restraint from fiscal policy, pent-up demand for
Participants’ views on the broad outlook for inflation
consumer and producer durables, rising household net
under the assumption of appropriate monetary policy
worth, stronger growth abroad, and accommodative
were marked down a bit in 2013 and 2014 from those
monetary policy. A number of participants noted that
in their September projections, but the central tenden-
growth in residential investment had slowed some re-
cies for 2015 and beyond were similar. All participants
cently as a result of higher mortgage rates, but they ex-
anticipated that, on average, both headline and core
pected growth to strengthen beginning in 2014. Several
inflation would rise gradually over the next few years,
participants also noted a slowdown in the growth of
and a large majority of participants expected headline
business investment but saw growth picking up over
inflation to be at or slightly below the Committee’s
the forecast horizon, reflecting an expected acceleration
2 percent objective in 2016. Specifically, the central
in sales.
tendencies for PCE inflation were 0.9 to 1.0 percent in
The central tendencies of participants’ projections for 2013, 1.4 to 1.6 percent in 2014, 1.5 to 2.0 percent in
real GDP growth were 2.2 to 2.3 percent in 2013, 2015, and 1.7 to 2.0 percent in 2016. The central
2.8 to 3.2 percent in 2014, 3.0 to 3.4 percent in 2015, tendencies of the forecasts for core inflation were
and 2.5 to 3.2 percent in 2016. The central tendency slightly lower over the projection period than in Sep-
for the longer-run rate of growth of real GDP was tember and broadly similar to those for the headline
2.2 to 2.4 percent. These projections were little measure. A number of participants viewed the combi-
changed from September. nation of stable inflation expectations and diminishing
resource slack as likely to contribute to a gradual rise of
Participants anticipated a gradual decline in the unem-
inflation back toward the Committee’s longer-run ob-
ployment rate over the projection period. The central
jective.
tendencies of participants’ forecasts for the unemploy-
ment rate in the fourth quarter of each year were 7.0 to Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the diver-
7.1 percent in 2013, 6.3 to 6.6 percent in 2014, 5.8 to sity of participants’ views about the outlook for infla-
6.1 percent in 2015, and 5.3 to 5.8 percent in 2016. tion. Relative to September, the ranges of participants’
Nearly all participants made a modest downward revi- projections for overall inflation narrowed some in 2013
sion to their projected path for the unemployment rate, and 2014 but remained relatively unchanged thereafter.
reflecting its recent larger-than-expected decline; how- In 2016, the forecasts for PCE inflation were concen-
ever, the central tendency of participants’ estimates of trated near the Committee’s longer-run objective,
the longer-run normal rate of unemployment that though one participant expected inflation to be ¼ per-
would prevail under appropriate monetary policy and in centage point above the Committee’s objective and
the absence of further shocks to the economy was un- another three expected it to be almost ½ percentage
changed at 5.2 to 5.8 percent. A majority of partici- point below. Similar to the projections for headline
pants projected that the unemployment rate would be inflation, the projections for core inflation also were
near or slightly above their individual estimates of its concentrated near 2 percent in 2016.
longer-run level at the end of 2016.
Appropriate Monetary Policy
Figures 3.A and 3.B show that participants’ views re- As indicated in figure 2, most participants judged that
garding the likely outcomes for real GDP growth and exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate would
the unemployment rate remained dispersed. The diver- remain appropriate for the next few years. In particu-
sity evidently reflected their individual assessments of lar, 12 participants thought that the first increase in the
the likely rate at which the restraint from fiscal policy target federal funds rate would not be warranted until

--- Page 17 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _17_–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_3____________P_a_g_e_ _5
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2013–16andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2013 20
December projections 18
16
September projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2016 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 18 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2013–16andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2013 20
December projections 18
16
September projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2016 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 19 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _17_–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_3____________P_a_g_e_ _7
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2013–16andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2013 20
December projections 18
16
September projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0. 9 1. 1 1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0. 9 1. 1 1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0. 9 1. 1 1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2016 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0. 9 1. 1 1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0. 9 1. 1 1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2013–16
Number of participants
2013 20
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2016 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _17_–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_3____________P_a_g_e_ _9
sometime in 2015, and 3 judged that policy firming Participants also described their views regarding the
would likely not be appropriate until 2016. Only 2 par- appropriate path of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.
ticipants judged that an increase in the federal funds Conditional on their respective economic outlooks,
rate in 2014 would be appropriate. most participants judged that it would likely be appro-
priate to begin to reduce the pace of the Committee’s
All participants projected that the unemployment rate
purchases of longer-term securities in the first quarter
would be below the Committee’s 6½ percent threshold
of 2014 and to conclude purchases in the second half
at the end of the year in which they viewed the initial
of the year. A number of participants thought it would
increase in the federal funds rate to be appropriate, and
be appropriate to end the asset purchase program earli-
all but one judged that inflation would be at or below
er; in contrast, one participant thought a more accom-
the Committee’s longer-run objective. Almost all par-
modative path for asset purchases would be appropri-
ticipants projected that the unemployment rate would
ate.
remain above their view of its longer-run normal level
at the end of the year in which they saw the federal Participants’ views of the appropriate path for mone-
funds rate increasing from the effective lower bound. tary policy were informed by their judgments on the
state of the economy, including the values of the un-
Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’
employment rate and other labor market indicators that
judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target
would be consistent with maximum employment, the
federal funds rate at the end of each calendar year from
extent to which the economy was currently falling short
2013 to 2016 and over the longer run. As noted above,
of maximum employment, the prospects for inflation
most participants judged that economic conditions
to reach the Committee’s longer-term objective of
would warrant maintaining the current low level of the
2 percent, and the balance of risks around the outlook.
federal funds rate until 2015. The two participants who
A few participants also mentioned using various mone-
saw the federal funds rate leaving the effective lower
tary policy rules to guide their thinking on the appro-
bound earlier submitted projections for the federal
priate path for the federal funds rate.
funds rate at the end of 2014 of ¾ percent and
1¼ percent. These two participants’ views of the ap- Uncertainty and Risks
propriate level of the federal funds rate at the end of Nearly all participants judged that the levels of uncer-
2015 were 2¾ percent and 3¼ percent, while the re- tainty about their projections for real GDP growth and
mainder of participants saw the appropriate level of the unemployment were broadly similar to the norm during
funds rate at that time to be 2 percent or lower. On the previous 20 years, although three participants con-
balance, while the dispersion of projections for the val- tinued to see them as higher (figure 4).1 More partici-
ue of the federal funds rate in each year changed little pants than in September judged the risks to real GDP
since September, the median value of the rate at the growth and the unemployment rate to be broadly bal-
end of 2015 and 2016 decreased ¼ percentage point. anced. A range of factors was cited as contributing to
this change in view, including an improved outlook for
As in September, all of the participants who saw the
global financial and economic conditions, a moderation
first tightening in either 2015 or 2016 judged that the
in geopolitical risks, an upgraded assessment of the
appropriate level of the federal funds rate at the end of
prospects for consumption growth, and reduced odds
2016 would still be below their individual assessments
of a fiscal impasse.
of its expected longer-run value. In contrast, the two
participants who saw the first tightening in 2014 be-
lieved that the appropriate level of the federal funds
rate at the end of 2016 would be at their assessment of
its longer-run level, which they judged to be either at or
just above 4 percent. Among all participants, estimates
1 Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for
of the longer-run target federal funds rate ranged from
the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total
3½ to about 4¼ percent, reflecting the Committee’s
consumer price inflation over the period from 1993 through
inflation objective of 2 percent and participants’ indi-
2012. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncer-
vidual judgments about the appropriate longer-run level
tainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertain-
of the real federal funds rate in the absence of further
ty in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used
shocks to the economy. to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’
projections.

--- Page 22 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthetargetfederalfundsrate,2013–16andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2013
20
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
2014
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
2015
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Note: The target federal funds rate is measured as the level of the target rate at the end of the calendar year or
inthelongerrun.

--- Page 23 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _17_–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_3___________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Figure4. Uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth 20 Risks to GDP growth 20
December projections 18 December projections 18
September projections 16 September projections 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate 20 Risks to the unemployment rate 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation 20 Risks to PCE inflation 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation 20 Risks to core PCE inflation 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”Defini-
tionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 24 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges Participants reported little change in their assessments
Percentage points of the level of uncertainty and the balance of risks
Variable 2013 2014 2015 2016 around their forecasts for overall PCE inflation and
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . ±0.5 ±1.4 ±1.8 ±1.8 core inflation. Most participants judged the levels of
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . ±0.1 ±0.7 ±1.4 ±1.8 uncertainty associated with their forecasts for the two
inflation measures to be broadly similar to historical
Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.3 ±0.9 ±1.0 ±1.0
norms and the risks to those projections as broadly
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the
balanced. Four participants saw the risks to their infla-
root mean squared error of projections for 1993 through 2012 that
were released in the winter by various private and government fore- tion forecasts as tilted to the downside, reflecting, for
casters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under example, the possibility that the current low levels of
certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that
actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices inflation could prove more persistent than anticipated.
will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors Conversely, one participant cited upside risks to infla-
made in the past. Further information may be found in David
tion stemming from uncertainty about the timing and
Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of
the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance efficacy of the Committee’s withdrawal of accommoda-
and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of tion.
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).
1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price meas-
ure that has been most widely used in government and private eco-
nomic forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the
previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.

--- Page 25 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _17_–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_3___________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by cent in the second year, and 1.2 to 4.8 percent
the members of the Board of Governors and in the third and fourth years. The correspond-
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks ing 70 percent confidence intervals for overall
inform discussions of monetary policy among inflation would be 1.7 to 2.3 percent in the cur-
policymakers and can aid public understand- rent year, 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the second year,
ing of the basis for policy actions. Consider- and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the third and fourth
able uncertainty attends these projections, years.
however. The economic and statistical models Because current conditions may differ
and relationships used to help produce eco- from those that prevailed, on average, over his-
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de- tory, participants provide judgments as to
scriptions of the real world, and the future whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
path of the economy can be affected by jections of each variable is greater than, smaller
myriad unforeseen developments and events. than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, forecast uncertainty in the past, as shown in
participants consider not only what appears to table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
be the most likely economic outcome as em- to whether the risks to their projections are
bodied in their projections, but also the range weighted to the upside, are weighted to the
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
their occurring, and the potential costs to the participants judge whether each variable is
economy should they occur. more likely to be above or below their projec-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical tions of the most likely outcome. These judg-
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including ments about the uncertainty and the risks at-
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports tending each participant’s projections are dis-
and those prepared by the Federal Reserve tinct from the diversity of participants’ views
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the about the most likely outcomes. Forecast un-
Federal Open Market Committee. The pro- certainty is concerned with the risks associated
jection error ranges shown in the table il- with a particular projection rather than with
lustrate the considerable uncertainty associat- divergences across a number of different pro-
ed with economic forecasts. For example, jections.
suppose a participant projects that real gross As with real activity and inflation, the out-
domestic product (GDP) and total consumer look for the future path of the federal funds
prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, re- rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This
spectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty arises primarily because each partic-
uncertainty attending those projections is simi- ipant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of
lar to that experienced in the past and the risks monetary policy depends importantly on the
around the projections are broadly balanced, evolution of real activity and inflation over
the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a time. If economic conditions evolve in an un-
probability of about 70 percent that actual expected manner, then assessments of the ap-
GDP would expand within a range of 2.5 to propriate setting of the federal funds rate
3.5 percent in the current year, 1.6 to 4.4 per- would change from that point forward.

# Tables

## Page_13_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |      |      |      |            |      |      |      |      |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|------|------------|------|------|------|------|
| 2013                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | 2014 | 2015 | 2016 | Longer run | 2013 | 2014 | 2015 | 2016 |
| 2.2 to 2.3 2.8 to 3.2 3.0 to 3.4 2.5 to 3.2 2.2 to 2.4
2.0 to 2.3 2.9 to 3.1 3.0 to 3.5 2.5 to 3.3 2.2 to 2.5
7.0 to 7.1 6.3 to 6.6 5.8 to 6.1 5.3 to 5.8 5.2 to 5.8
7.1 to 7.3 6.4 to 6.8 5.9 to 6.2 5.4 to 5.9 5.2 to 5.8
0.9 to 1.0 1.4 to 1.6 1.5 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 2.0
1.1 to 1.2 1.3 to 1.8 1.6 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 2.0
1.1 to 1.2 1.4 to 1.6 1.6 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0
1.2 to 1.3 1.5 to 1.7 1.7 to 2.0 1.9 to 2.0 |      |      |      |            |      |      |      |      |