# 20130918_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:37:33*
*Pages: 25, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
September 17–18, 2013
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was James A. Clouse and William Nelson, Deputy Direc-
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the tors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gov-
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues- ernors
day, September 17, 2013, at 1:00 p.m. and continued on
Wednesday, September 18, 2013, at 8:30 a.m. Jon W. Faust, Special Adviser to the Board, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
PRESENT:
Ben Bernanke, Chairman Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Board Members, Board of Governors
James Bullard
Charles L. Evans Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers,
Esther L. George Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Jerome H. Powell
Eric Rosengren Eric M. Engen, Michael T. Kiley, Thomas Laubach,
Jeremy C. Stein David E. Lebow, and Michael G. Palumbo, Asso-
Daniel K. Tarullo ciate Directors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Janet L. Yellen Board of Governors; Fabio M. Natalucci, Associate
Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Christine Cumming, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana Governors
Kocherlakota, Sandra Pianalto, and Charles I.
Plosser, Alternate Members of the Federal Open Joshua Gallin, Deputy Associate Director, Division of
Market Committee Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and John C. Jeremy B. Rudd, Adviser, Division of Research and
Williams, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks Statistics, Board of Governors
of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respec-
tively Christopher J. Gust and Elizabeth Klee, Section Chiefs,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary Gordon Werkema, First Vice President, Federal Re-
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary serve Bank of Chicago
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel David Altig, Loretta J. Mester, and Harvey Rosen-
Steven B. Kamin, Economist blum,1 Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
David W. Wilcox, Economist Banks of Atlanta, Philadelphia, and Dallas, respec-
tively
Thomas A. Connors, Troy Davig, Michael P. Leahy,
Stephen A. Meyer, Geoffrey Tootell, Christopher J. Joyce Hansen, Evan F. Koenig, Spencer Krane, Lorie
Waller, and William Wascher, Associate Econo- K. Logan, Mark E. Schweitzer, John A. Weinberg,
mists and Kei-Mu Yi, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of New York, Dallas, Chicago, New
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account York, Cleveland, Richmond, and Minneapolis, re-
spectively
Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking Su-
pervision and Regulation, Board of Governors _______________________
1 Attended introductory remarks at Tuesday’s session only.
Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Pol-
icy and Research, Board of Governors

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Chris Burke and Jonathan P. McCarthy, Vice Presi- erations reflected an ongoing effort to improve the
dents, Federal Reserve Bank of New York technical execution of policy and did not signal any
change in the Committee’s views about policy going
Eric T. Swanson, Senior Research Advisor, Federal forward. Following the discussion, the Committee
Reserve Bank of San Francisco unanimously approved the following resolution:
“The Federal Open Market Committee
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
(FOMC) authorizes the Federal Reserve
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
Bank of New York to conduct a series of
The Manager of the System Open Market Account
fixed-rate, overnight reverse repurchase op-
reported on developments in domestic and foreign fi-
erations involving U.S. Government securi-
nancial markets as well as the System open market op-
ties, and securities that are direct obligations
erations during the period since the Federal Open Mar-
of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and in-
ket Committee (FOMC) met on July 30–31, 2013. The
terest by, any agency of the United States, for
review included a report that the System’s purchases of
the purpose of assessing operational readi-
longer-term assets did not appear to have had an ad-
ness. The reverse repurchase operations au-
verse effect on the functioning of the markets for
thorized by this resolution shall be (i) offered
Treasury securities or agency mortgage-backed securi-
at a fixed rate that may vary from zero to five
ties (MBS), and that the Open Market Desk’s opera-
basis points, (ii) offered at up to a capped al-
tions in both sectors had proceeded smoothly. By
lotment per counterparty of $1 billion per
unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
day and (iii) for an overnight term, or such
domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.
longer term as is warranted to accommodate
There were no intervention operations in foreign cur-
weekend, holiday, and similar trading con-
rencies for the System’s account over the intermeeting
ventions. The System Open Market Account
period.
Manager will inform the FOMC in advance
In support of the Committee’s longer-run planning for of the terms of the planned operations.
improvements in the implementation of monetary poli- These operations may be announced when
cy, the staff presented an update on the potential for authorized by the Chairman, may begin when
establishing a fixed-rate, full-allotment overnight re- authorized by the Chairman on or after Sep-
verse repurchase agreement (RRP) facility. The presen- tember 23, 2013, and shall be authorized
tation summarized initial discussions with financial through the FOMC meeting that ends on
market firms about how such a facility might affect January 29, 2014.”
money market interest rates and intermediation flows,
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
what the relationship might be between the facility rate
The information reviewed for the September 17–18
and other money market rates, and how the different
meeting suggested that economic activity continued to
types of firms might view the facility. Overall, the in-
increase at a moderate rate. Private-sector employment
quiries suggested that the facility could be an effective
rose further in July and August, but the unemployment
additional tool for managing money market interest
rate was still elevated. Total consumer price inflation
rates and helping to support a floor on those rates.
picked up in recent months but continued to be mod-
Meeting participants discussed the potential role for an
est, and measures of longer-run inflation expectations
overnight RRP facility, the possible effects on the func-
remained stable.
tioning of the federal funds market or the structure of
money markets, and the usefulness of expanding the Private nonfarm employment continued to expand in
Desk’s test operations in RRPs. Meeting participants July and August, but at a somewhat slower pace than in
generally supported a proposal to authorize the Desk to the first half of the year, while total government em-
conduct a limited exercise in order to provide some ployment edged down on balance. The unemployment
insight into the potential usage of an overnight RRP rate declined further to 7.3 percent in August. The
facility as well as additional experience with operational labor force participation rate also decreased, leaving the
aspects of such a facility. One participant, however, employment-to-population ratio essentially unchanged
preferred that further analysis be undertaken before in recent months. Other indicators of labor market
proceeding with the exercise. A number of meeting activity also were mixed. Measures of firms’ hiring
participants emphasized that their interest in these op- plans moved up, initial claims for unemployment insur-

--- Page 3 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_1_3______________________P_a_g_e_ _3
ance declined, and the share of workers employed part increased in July but were still at a low level. Recent
time for economic reasons decreased a little. However, book-value data for inventory-sales ratios, along with
household expectations of the labor market situation readings on inventories from national and regional
deteriorated somewhat, rates of job openings and gross manufacturing surveys, did not point to significant in-
private-sector hiring were little changed, on net, and the ventory imbalances.
rate of long-duration unemployment rose slightly.
Reductions in real federal government purchases ap-
Manufacturing production increased in August after a peared to persist: Defense spending continued to de-
decline in July, and the rate of manufacturing capacity crease in July and August, while federal employment
utilization was unchanged, on balance, over those two edged down further. Real state and local government
months. Automakers’ schedules indicated that the pace purchases looked to be about flat—the payrolls of
of motor vehicle assemblies would remain roughly flat these governments expanded slightly, on balance, in
in the coming months, but broader indicators of manu- July and August, and state and local construction ex-
facturing production, such as the readings on new or- penditures seemed to be leveling off.
ders from the national and regional manufacturing sur-
The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed substan-
veys, pointed to moderate increases in factory output in
tially in June before widening in July to a level near its
the near term.
second-quarter average. Exports expanded in June,
Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) were with particular strength in industrial supplies and capi-
flat in July. In August, nominal retail sales, excluding tal goods, before stepping down somewhat in July.
those at motor vehicle and parts outlets, edged up, Imports fell in June but then largely recovered in July,
while sales of light motor vehicles rose notably. Recent driven by swings in imports of oil and consumer goods.
information on key factors that influence consumer
Total U.S. inflation, as measured by the PCE price in-
spending were mixed: Households’ net worth likely
dex through July and by the consumer price index
expanded further as home prices posted additional
through August, was about 1½ percent over the pre-
gains through July, but real disposable incomes in-
ceding 12-month period for each series. Consumer
creased only a little in July and consumer sentiment in
food prices only edged up in July and August, while
the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys
energy prices were little changed, on net, over those
of Consumers moved lower in August and early Sep-
two months, and retail gasoline prices moved down in
tember.
the first half of September. Core consumer price infla-
Improvements in housing-sector activity appeared to tion, which excludes food and energy, was modest in
slow, possibly reflecting the rise in mortgage rates since July and August. Both near-term and longer-term infla-
the spring. Starts and permits of new single-family tion expectations from the Michigan survey were little
homes moved down in July, but the level of permit changed in August and early September.
issuance was still somewhat above that for starts and
Measures of labor compensation indicated that increas-
pointed to moderate increases in construction in sub-
es in nominal wages were still subdued. Both compen-
sequent months. In the multifamily sector, both starts
sation per hour and unit labor costs in the nonfarm
and permits rose in July but construction remained
business sector rose modestly over the year ending in
around the same level as early in the year. Sales of ex-
the second quarter, as there were only slight gains in
isting homes increased, but new home sales declined.
productivity. In July and August, increases in average
Growth in real private expenditures for business hourly earnings for all employees were fairly slow on
equipment and intellectual property products appeared balance.
to be subdued going into the third quarter. Nominal
Average foreign economic growth remained muted in
shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding air-
the first half of the year, although there were some no-
craft declined again in July. However, nominal new
table divergences across countries. Growth in real
orders for these capital goods continued to be above
gross domestic product (GDP) picked up in the second
the level of shipments, pointing to increases in ship-
quarter in the United Kingdom and remained strong in
ments in subsequent months, and other forward-
Japan, recent data suggested that the euro-area econo-
looking indicators, such as surveys of business condi-
my was coming out of recession, and economic indica-
tions, were consistent with moderate gains in spending
tors were positive for China and several other emerging
for business equipment in the near term. Nominal
market economies (EMEs) in Asia. However, real
business expenditures for nonresidential construction

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
GDP fell in the second quarter in Mexico and deceler- Stock prices for financial-sector firms underperformed
ated notably in India. Foreign inflation was generally the broad equity market somewhat over the intermeet-
subdued. Monetary policy remained highly accommo- ing period. However, spreads on credit default swaps
dative in the advanced economies, but some EME cen- (CDS) for the largest bank holding companies re-
tral banks moved toward tighter monetary policy in the mained stable at levels near the bottom of their range
face of capital outflows and depreciation pressures. An over the past few years.
exception was the Bank of Mexico, which cut its policy
Credit flows to nonfinancial businesses remained solid
rate in response to economic weakness.
in the face of higher longer-term interest rates. Relative
Staff Review of the Financial Situation to the typical summer lull, gross issuance of corporate
Longer-term interest rates rose over the intermeeting bonds and leveraged loans was robust in August; com-
period, while equity prices were fairly volatile but ended mercial and industrial (C&I) loans on banks’ books
the period modestly higher. The move in interest rates continued to expand moderately, on average, in July
appeared to be importantly influenced by shifting ex- and August. Commercial real estate (CRE) loans at
pectations about monetary policy. banks accelerated over the summer, and issuance of
commercial mortgage-backed securities remained
The path of the federal funds rate implied by financial
strong despite slightly wider spreads on those securities.
market quotes steepened notably during the period, in
part reflecting some increase in uncertainty about the Recent information about household credit was mixed.
outlook for monetary policy as indicated by option- Mortgage rates increased further over the intermeeting
implied measures of uncertainty about the future path period, and credit standards for mortgage loans re-
of the policy rate. In contrast to market-based quotes, mained tight. Nonetheless, applications for new mort-
the results from the Desk’s September survey of pri- gages declined only modestly, apparently supported by
mary dealers showed little change in the projected path improvements in labor market conditions and some
of the policy rate relative to that in the July survey. pent-up demand. Higher mortgage rates weighed more
However, the survey also suggested that primary deal- heavily on applications to refinance existing mortgages,
ers marked up somewhat the odds that the FOMC which decreased significantly. The pace of home price
would begin to cut the pace of asset purchases at its appreciation moderated a bit in July, although it was
September meeting, a result generally in line with other still strong. In nonmortgage credit, automobile loans
surveys of market participants. and student loans both continued to expand rapidly,
while balances on revolving consumer credit stayed
Five- and 10-year Treasury yields increased about
about flat. Issuance of consumer asset-backed securi-
25 basis points over the intermeeting period. Yields on
ties remained robust in July and August.
corporate bonds, agency MBS, and Treasury inflation-
protected securities rose about in line with those on In the municipal bond market, despite the ongoing
nominal Treasury securities. bankruptcy proceedings for Detroit and greater scruti-
ny of Puerto Rico’s fiscal problems, broader market
Conditions in short-term dollar funding markets were
sentiment was reportedly supported by the lessening in
generally stable during the period since the July FOMC
budget pressures for many other state and local gov-
meeting. Responses to the September Senior Credit
ernments. Gross issuance of long-term municipal
Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms
bonds was solid in August, and yield ratios on general-
suggested little change over the preceding three months
obligation municipal bonds over comparable Treasury
in the credit terms applicable to most classes of coun-
securities were about unchanged, on balance, over the
terparties covered by the survey. A moderate net frac-
intermeeting period.
tion of respondents reported a decline in the use of
financial leverage by hedge funds, and a more substan- Bank credit declined in July and August amid the gen-
tial net fraction reported a decrease in financial leverage eral rise in longer-term interest rates. While banks’
used by real estate investment trusts. In response to holdings of assets with longer duration, such as resi-
special questions in the survey, dealers indicated that, dential mortgages, decreased, growth in C&I, CRE, and
during the period of heightened volatility beginning in automobile loans—which are more likely to have float-
May and extending into early July, liquidity and func- ing interest rates or relatively short maturities, and
tioning had deteriorated in a number of fixed-income therefore less duration risk—tended to hold up in re-
markets. cent months.

--- Page 5 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_1_3______________________P_a_g_e_ _5
M2 increased significantly in July and August, as the meeting. The staff’s forecast for real GDP over the
selloff in fixed-income markets that began in May, medium term also was revised down somewhat, reflect-
along with the associated outflows from bond funds, ing higher projected paths for both longer-term interest
likely continued to support reallocations into liquid M2 rates and the foreign exchange value of the dollar,
assets. The monetary base continued to expand rapid- along with slightly lower projected paths for equity and
ly, primarily reflecting the rise in reserve balances re- home prices. The staff still anticipated that the pace of
sulting from the Federal Reserve’s asset purchases. expansion in real GDP this year would only moderately
exceed the growth rate of potential output but contin-
Against a backdrop of higher interest rates in the ad-
ued to forecast that real GDP would accelerate in 2014
vanced economies and slowing economic growth in the
and 2015, supported by an eventual easing in the ef-
EMEs, several EME currencies came under downward
fects of fiscal policy restraint on economic growth, in-
pressure in August; yields and CDS premiums on EME
creases in consumer and business sentiment, further
sovereign debt increased, particularly for those econo-
improvements in credit availability and financial condi-
mies experiencing sharp currency depreciations; and
tions, and accommodative monetary policy. In 2016,
investors continued to decrease their holdings in EME
real GDP growth was projected to begin to edge down
mutual funds. In response, some EME authorities
toward the growth rate of potential output. Over the
took actions to support their currencies, including
projection period, the expansion in economic activity
tightening monetary policy, modifying capital controls,
was anticipated to slowly reduce the slack in labor and
and purchasing their currencies in foreign exchange
product markets, and the unemployment rate was ex-
markets. On net over the period, the dollar ended little
pected to decline gradually.
changed on a trade-weighted basis against a broad set
of currencies, but it appreciated notably against the The staff’s forecast for inflation was little changed from
currencies of India, Indonesia, and Turkey. Equity the projection prepared for the previous FOMC meet-
prices in Germany increased substantially and sovereign ing. In the near term, the staff continued to project
yields in the United Kingdom and Germany continued that inflation would be modest in the second half of
to rise as data on economic activity in Europe generally this year but higher than the readings posted in the first
improved over the period, while yield spreads of Span- half. Over the medium term, with longer-run inflation
ish and Italian sovereign securities relative to German expectations assumed to remain stable, changes in
government debt declined a bit further. commodity and import prices expected to be modest,
and resource slack persisting over most of the projec-
The staff reported on potential risks to financial stabil-
tion period, inflation was forecast to be subdued
ity, including those highlighted by the rise in yields and
through 2016.
volatility on longer-term fixed-income securities since
the spring. The increase in yields appeared to reduce The staff viewed the uncertainty around the forecast
investors’ appetite for taking duration risk, but if a sig- for economic activity as similar to its normal level over
nificant volume of bond investors moved to sell at a the past 20 years. However, the risks were viewed as
future time, issues surrounding dealer capacity and will- skewed to the downside, reflecting concerns about the
ingness to make markets in volatile conditions could economic effects of the recent tightening in U.S. finan-
again amplify price movements. On balance, the vul- cial market conditions, the resolution of federal fiscal
nerability of the financial system appeared moderate, as policy issues in the coming months, the economic and
loss-absorbing capital had increased and the reliance on financial stresses in the EMEs, and the ability of the
short-term funding and the exposure of financial insti- U.S. economy to weather potential future adverse
tutions to nonfinancial credit risk had decreased. shocks. The staff did not see the uncertainty around its
Nonetheless, a number of potential shocks could prove outlook for inflation as unusually high, and the risks
challenging to markets and institutions, including a fail- were viewed as balanced.
ure to raise the U.S. federal debt limit, financial instabil-
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
ity in EMEs, and geopolitical events in the Middle East.
Economic Outlook
Staff Economic Outlook In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, meeting par-
In the economic forecast prepared by the staff for the ticipants—5 members of the Board of Governors and
September FOMC meeting, the projection for real the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks, all of
GDP growth in the second half of this year was revised whom participated in the deliberations—submitted
down a little from the one prepared for the previous their assessments of real output growth, the unem-

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
ployment rate, inflation, and the target federal funds confidence, concerns about job security and availability,
rate for each year from 2013 through 2016 and over the and the lingering effects of this year’s payroll tax in-
longer run, under each participant’s judgment of ap- crease. While the housing sector continued to
propriate monetary policy. The longer-run projections strengthen, supported by improving fundamentals and
represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to gains in house prices, the increases in mortgage rates
which each variable would be expected to converge, since the spring were seen as a potential risk. The ex-
over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in tent to which the higher mortgage rates had materially
the absence of further shocks to the economy. These affected that sector remained unclear, with the excep-
economic projections and policy assessments are de- tion of the sharp decline in refinancing activity. But it
scribed in the Summary of Economic Projections was noted that recent softness in housing starts and
(SEP), which is attached as an addendum to these home sales might well reflect some restraint from those
minutes. higher rates.
In their discussion of the economic situation and out- Business contacts in selected parts of the country were
look, meeting participants regarded the information reported to be cautiously optimistic, consistent with
received during the intermeeting period as indicating encouraging responses to a number of business sur-
that economic activity had continued to expand at a veys. Nonetheless, uncertainties regarding the outlook
moderate pace, albeit somewhat more slowly than earli- for the economy and fiscal and regulatory policies were
er anticipated, and they generally indicated that the reportedly continuing to weigh on business deci-
broad contours of the outlook further out had not sionmaking, with firms focused on improving their
changed materially since their July meeting. Partici- balance sheets and enhancing productivity and still
pants continued to project the rate of growth of eco- quite cautious about expanding their workforces. Re-
nomic activity to strengthen over coming years, sup- ports on manufacturing activity pointed to some re-
ported by highly accommodative monetary policy and bound, with production related to autos the most nota-
the gradual abatement of the headwinds that have been ble area of strength, and activity in the energy sector
slowing the pace of economic recovery, such as continued to expand at a steady pace. In the agricul-
household-sector deleveraging, tight credit conditions tural sector, farmland values increased further, even
for some households and businesses, and fiscal re- though farm income was reported to be declining.
straint. Accordingly, the unemployment rate was pro- Some business contacts indicated that wage and price
jected to continue to decline over time toward levels pressures were subdued; however, in one District, con-
judged to be consistent with the Committee’s dual tacts pointed to rising wage pressures and labor short-
mandate. While downside risks to the outlook for the ages.
economy and the labor market were generally viewed as
Participants discussed the extent to which the ongoing
having diminished, on balance, since last fall, a number
tightening in fiscal policy was likely to further restrain
of significant risks remained, including those related to
economic activity in the second half of this year, with
the potential economic effects of the sizable increases
one participant noting that the effects of the federal
in interest rates since the spring, ongoing fiscal drag,
sequestration appeared to be less pronounced than
and the possible fallout from near-term fiscal debates.
previously anticipated. However, a number of others
Inflation continued to run below the Committee’s
pointed to heightened uncertainty about the course of
longer-run objective, apart from fluctuations that large-
federal fiscal policy over coming months, including the
ly reflected changes in energy prices, and participants
potential for a government shutdown or strains related
generally saw it as moving back gradually to 2 percent
to the debt ceiling debate, which posed downside risks
in the medium term.
to the economic outlook.
In the household sector, consumer spending continued
In discussing labor market developments, a number of
to advance, but incoming data on retail sales were
participants indicated that gains in payrolls in the July
somewhat weaker than expected. Auto sales, however,
and August employment reports were disappointing,
remained strong, supported in part by steady interest
but one participant also noted that seasonal adjustment
rates on auto loans, which, unlike mortgage rates, did
tended to be challenging during the summer months.
not rise substantially in recent months. Despite the
Taking a range of data into account, participants gener-
continued improvement in household balance sheets, a
ally agreed that labor market conditions had improved
number of factors were mentioned as possible re-
meaningfully since the start of the asset purchase pro-
straints on spending, including declines in consumer

--- Page 7 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_1_3______________________P_a_g_e_ _7
gram in September 2012. Participants discussed how few others observed that the increase in longer-term
to reconcile the notable decline in the unemployment yields in recent months had not seemed to leave a
rate over the past year with the only moderate pace of meaningful imprint on other asset prices, suggesting
expansion in real GDP. One possible explanation was that the effects on the economy were likely to be rela-
that, to the extent the decline in the unemployment rate tively muted. While recognizing the potentially signifi-
was primarily driven by a fall in the labor force partici- cant impact of higher mortgage rates on the housing
pation rate and low productivity growth, such a decline market, these same participants pointed to higher equi-
might overstate the degree of improvement in broader ty prices, the further gradual loosening of terms in bank
labor market conditions. Indeed, the continued low lending, and the continued availability of credit at inex-
readings on the employment-to-population ratio were pensive terms in corporate debt markets as signs that
supportive of this explanation, suggesting that overall financial conditions more generally had not tightened
labor market conditions had not improved as much as materially. In any case, however, the assessment of the
the unemployment rate would indicate. An alternative adverse effects of the increase in longer-term rates on
explanation for the significant improvement in the la- financial conditions and ultimately on economic activity
bor market performance despite the moderate growth would depend importantly upon the extent to which
in real GDP over the past year was that growth had rates stabilized at current levels or instead continued to
been understated somewhat; notably, some research rise.
suggested that real gross domestic income, which ex-
Participants also touched on the implications for finan-
panded at a somewhat faster pace than real GDP, may
cial stability resulting from the increase in interest rates,
provide better information about overall economic ac-
focusing on the effects on securities held by banking
tivity. Despite recent declines in the unemployment
and other nonbank institutions, the unwinding of lever-
rate, one participant noted the risk that the longer the
aged trades, and the liquidity and functioning of a
duration of elevated unemployment, the more likely it
number of fixed-income markets. One participant not-
was that the labor market and economy would experi-
ed that, notwithstanding the recent rise in interest rates,
ence some lasting structural damage. While judging the
net interest margins remained under pressure at com-
extent of structural damage continued to be quite diffi-
munity and regional banks, and as a result many of
cult, one piece of evidence consistent with this view
these banks continued to add to risk exposures. An-
was the apparent decline in the job-finding rate of the
other participant raised the possibility that financial
long-term unemployed.
stability risks might arise from recent adverse develop-
Despite the reversal of some transitory factors that had ments in municipal bond markets. It was also noted
contributed to the earlier softness in inflation, recent that financial conditions in a number of EMEs had
readings continued to be below the Committee’s tightened as a result of some depreciation of their cur-
longer-run objective of 2 percent. However, partici- rencies, an increase in yields and borrowing costs, and
pants generally expected inflation to pick up over the some capital outflows as measured by withdrawals
coming year as the pace of economic growth accelerat- from bond funds. More broadly, a couple of partici-
ed and slack in resource utilization diminished further, pants noted the complexities related to the interaction
although to a rate still below the Committee’s longer- between the stance of monetary policy and the vulner-
run objective. abilities in the financial system.
Participants discussed financial market developments, In their discussion of the path for monetary policy,
including their views on the extent to which the rise in participants debated the advantages and disadvantages
longer-term interest rates since May reflected growing of reducing the pace of the Committee’s asset purchas-
confidence about the economic outlook or a percep- es at this meeting, focusing importantly on whether the
tion by financial markets that monetary policy would be conditions presented to the public in June for reducing
less accommodative going forward than had been pre- the pace of asset purchases had yet been met. In gen-
viously anticipated. Several participants judged that eral, those who preferred to maintain for now the pace
overall financial conditions had tightened notably over of purchases viewed incoming data as having been on
the past few months, as seen most importantly in the the disappointing side and, despite clear improvements
rise in mortgage rates. While acknowledging that it was in labor market conditions since the purchase pro-
too early to assess the effects of such an increase, they gram’s inception in September 2012, were not yet ade-
expressed concerns that tighter financial conditions quately confident of continued progress. Many of
might weigh on the recovery in the housing sector. A these participants had revised down their forecasts for

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
economic activity or pointed to near-term risks and Those participants generally were satisfied that inves-
uncertainties. For example, questions were raised tors had come to understand the data-dependent nature
about the effects on the housing sector and on the of the Committee’s thinking about asset purchases,
broader economy of the tightening in financial condi- and, because they judged that the conditions laid out in
tions in recent months, as well as about the considera- June had been met, they believed that the credibility of
ble risks surrounding fiscal policy. Moreover, the an- the Committee would best be served by announcing a
nouncement of a reduction in asset purchases at this downward adjustment in asset purchases at this meet-
meeting might trigger an additional, unwarranted tight- ing. With the markets apparently viewing a cut in pur-
ening of financial conditions, perhaps because markets chases as the most likely outcome, it was noted that the
would read such an announcement as signaling the postponement of such an announcement to later in the
Committee’s willingness, notwithstanding mixed recent year or beyond could have significant implications for
data, to take an initial step toward exit from its highly the effectiveness of Committee communications. In
accommodative policy. As a result of such concerns, a particular, concerns were expressed that a delay could
number of participants thought that risk-management potentially undermine the credibility or predictability of
considerations called for a cautious approach and that, monetary policy by, for example, increasing uncertainty
in light of the ambiguous cast of recent readings on the about the Committee’s reaction function and about its
economy, it would be prudent to await further evidence commitment to the forward guidance for the federal
of progress before reducing the pace of asset purchas- funds rate, with the result of an increase in volatility in
es. Consistent with the framework discussed by the financial markets. Moreover, maintaining the pace of
Chairman during the June press conference, asset pur- purchases could be perceived as a sign that the FOMC
chases were contingent on the Committee’s ongoing had turned more pessimistic about the economic out-
assessment of the economic outlook and were not on a look. Finally, it was noted that if the Committee did
preset course; this approach implied a need to adapt not pare back its purchases in these circumstances, it
and to adjust asset purchases in response to changes in might be difficult to explain a cut in coming months,
economic conditions in order to preserve the Commit- absent clearly stronger data on the economy and a swift
tee’s credibility. With many outside observers expect- resolution of federal fiscal uncertainties. Most of the
ing a decision to reduce purchases at this meeting, participants leaning toward a downward adjustment in
some participants emphasized a need to clearly com- the pace of asset purchases also indicated that they fa-
municate the rationale behind any decision not to do vored a relatively small reduction to signal the Commit-
so, in order to avoid conveying a message of pessimism tee’s intention to proceed cautiously.
regarding the economic outlook or to reinforce the
With regard to adjustments in the pace of asset pur-
distinction between decisions concerning the pace of
chases, whether at this or a future meeting, a few par-
purchases and those concerning the federal funds rate.
ticipants expressed a preference for not cutting MBS
One participant suggested that postponing the reduc-
purchases but reducing purchases only of Treasury se-
tion in the pace of asset purchases would also allow
curities initially, with the intent of continuing to sup-
time for the Committee to further discuss and to im-
port the recovery in the housing sector. However, the
plement a clarification or strengthening of its forward
appeal of including both types of securities in any re-
guidance for the federal funds rate, which could temper
duction was also mentioned. In addition, in an effort
the risk that a future downward adjustment in asset
to reduce uncertainty about how the Committee might
purchases would cause an undesirable tightening of
adjust its purchases in response to economic develop-
financial conditions.
ments and to alleviate some of the related communica-
The participants who spoke in favor of moderating the tions issues, one participant suggested an approach that
pace of securities purchases at this meeting also cited would mechanically link the reduction in asset purchas-
the incoming data, but viewed those data as broadly es to numerical values for the unemployment rate, with
consistent with the Committee’s outlook for the labor the goal of ending the program when the unemploy-
market at the time of the June FOMC meeting when ment rate reached a stated level.
the contingent expectation that the pace of asset pur-
Participants also discussed the potential for clarifying
chases would be reduced later in the year was first pre-
or strengthening the Committee’s forward guidance for
sented to the public. Moreover, they highlighted what
the federal funds rate. To the extent that financial
they saw as meaningful cumulative progress in labor
markets have at times interpreted the Committee’s
market conditions since the purchase program began.
communications regarding the asset purchase program

--- Page 9 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_1_3______________________P_a_g_e_ _9
as also signaling information about the federal funds further improvement in recent months, but the unem-
rate target, participants thought it might be important ployment rate remained elevated. Household spending
to reiterate the distinction between the two, and a clari- and business fixed investment advanced, and the hous-
fication or strengthening of the forward guidance might ing sector was strengthening, but mortgage rates had
help to reinforce this message. In part toward this end, risen further and fiscal policy was restraining growth.
participants mentioned several possible steps that The Committee expected that, with appropriate policy
might be considered, including stating that the Com- accommodation, economic growth would pick up from
mittee would not raise its target for the federal funds its recent pace, resulting in a gradual decline in the un-
rate if the inflation rate was expected to run below a employment rate toward levels consistent with the
given level or providing additional information on the Committee’s dual mandate. Members generally contin-
Committee’s intentions regarding the federal funds rate ued to see the downside risks to the outlook for the
after the 6½ percent unemployment threshold was economy and the labor market as having diminished,
reached. One participant stressed that the Committee on net, since last fall, but indicated that the tightening
could use the full range of its tools, including forward of financial conditions observed in recent months, if
guidance, to further improve the alignment of the sustained, could slow the pace of improvement in the
medium-term outlook for employment and inflation economy and labor market. Apart from fluctuations
with its longer-term goals. In light of the importance due to changes in energy prices, inflation was running
of credibility for the effectiveness of the forward guid- below the Committee’s longer-run objective, but
ance for the federal funds rate, participants noted the longer-term inflation expectations were stable, and the
possible implications of uncertainties related to the Committee anticipated that inflation would move back
Federal Reserve leadership transition in considering the toward its objective over the medium term. Members
appropriate timing of any enhancements to the guid- recognized, however, that inflation persistently below
ance. the Committee’s 2 percent objective could pose risks to
economic performance.
In discussing the projections for the target federal
funds rate at the end of 2016 as reported in the SEP, In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
some participants highlighted the importance of com- ahead, members reviewed the degree of improvement
municating to the public the reasons why the policy in economic activity and labor market conditions since
rates that were projected by most, but not all, partici- the asset purchase program began a year ago and
pants appeared to remain at low levels even as the un- judged that, taking into account the extent of federal
employment rate and inflation by then were expected fiscal retrenchment, the improvement was consistent
to be close to their longer-run values. In particular, if with growing underlying strength in the broader econ-
economic headwinds died away only slowly, as a num- omy. However, all members but one judged that it
ber of participants expected, the achievement of the would be appropriate for the Committee to await more
Committee’s employment and price stability objectives evidence that progress would be sustained before ad-
would likely require keeping the federal funds rate be- justing the pace of asset purchases. In the view of one
low its longer-run equilibrium value for some time even member, the progress to date in labor markets and in
as economic conditions improved. In light of the po- broader economic conditions amply supported a reduc-
tential difficulties in succinctly conveying this infor- tion in purchases. During the exchange of views on
mation in the Committee’s policy statement, the whether to trim the flow of asset purchases at this
Chairman’s postmeeting press conference and the meeting, a number of members emphasized the contin-
minutes were mentioned as more appropriate vehicles gent and data-dependent nature of the Committee’s
for providing this information. A couple of partici- purchase program. In light of the mixed data recently,
pants also remarked that they viewed their projections including inflation readings that remained below the
of a low federal funds rate in 2016 as reflecting a com- Committee’s longer-run objective, and the concerns
mitment to support the economy by maintaining a over near-term fiscal uncertainties, some members in-
more accommodative policy for longer. dicated that they preferred to await more evidence that
their expectation of continuing improvement would be
Committee Policy Action
realized. But with financial markets appearing to ex-
Committee members saw the information received
pect a reduction in purchases at this meeting, concerns
over the intermeeting period as suggesting that eco-
were raised about the effectiveness of FOMC commu-
nomic activity was expanding at a moderate pace.
nications if the Committee did not take that step. For
Some indicators of labor market conditions showed

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
several members, the various considerations made the monetary and financial conditions that will
decision to maintain an unchanged pace of asset pur- foster maximum employment and price sta-
chases at this meeting a relatively close call. At the bility. In particular, the Committee seeks
conclusion of the discussion, the Committee decided to conditions in reserve markets consistent with
continue adding policy accommodation by purchasing federal funds trading in a range from 0 to
additional MBS at a pace of $40 billion per month and ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk
longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of $45 billion to undertake open market operations as nec-
per month and to maintain its existing reinvestment essary to maintain such conditions. The
policies. In addition, the Committee reaffirmed its in- Desk is directed to continue purchasing
tention to keep the target federal funds rate at 0 to longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of
¼ percent and retained its forward guidance that it an- about $45 billion per month and to continue
ticipates that this exceptionally low range for the feder- purchasing agency mortgage-backed securi-
al funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the ties at a pace of about $40 billion per month.
unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent, infla- The Committee also directs the Desk to en-
tion between one and two years ahead is projected to gage in dollar roll and coupon swap transac-
be no more than a half percentage point above the tions as necessary to facilitate settlement of
Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer- the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-
term inflation expectations continue to be well an- backed securities transactions. The Commit-
chored. tee directs the Desk to maintain its policy of
rolling over maturing Treasury securities into
Members also discussed the wording of the policy
new issues and its policy of reinvesting
statement to be issued following the meeting. In addi-
principal payments on all agency debt and
tion to updating its description of the state of the
agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
economy, the Committee decided to underline its con-
mortgage-backed securities. The System
cern about the tightening of financial conditions ob-
Open Market Account Manager and the Sec-
served in recent months. It also acknowledged the im-
retary will keep the Committee informed of
provement in economic activity and labor market con-
ongoing developments regarding the Sys-
ditions since its asset purchase program began, while
tem’s balance sheet that could affect the at-
emphasizing that it was prepared to be patient and
tainment over time of the Committee’s ob-
await more evidence that progress would be sustained
jectives of maximum employment and price
before adjusting downward the pace of purchases. The
stability.”
Committee also adopted language to the effect that, in
judging when to moderate the pace of asset purchases The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
at its coming meetings, it would assess whether incom- low to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
ing information continued to support its expectation of
“Information received since the Federal
ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and
Open Market Committee met in July sug-
of inflation moving back toward its longer-run objec-
gests that economic activity has been ex-
tive. Finally, the Committee reiterated the contingent
panding at a moderate pace. Some indicators
nature of the outlook for asset purchases, indicating
of labor market conditions have shown fur-
that asset purchases were not on a preset course and
ther improvement in recent months, but the
that the Committee’s decisions about their pace would
unemployment rate remains elevated.
continue to depend on its economic outlook as well as
Household spending and business fixed in-
its assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of such
vestment advanced, and the housing sector
purchases.
has been strengthening, but mortgage rates
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee have risen further and fiscal policy is re-
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank straining economic growth. Apart from fluc-
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe- tuations due to changes in energy prices, in-
cute transactions in the System Account in accordance flation has been running below the Commit-
with the following domestic policy directive: tee’s longer-run objective, but longer-term
inflation expectations have remained stable.
“Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
Federal Open Market Committee seeks

--- Page 11 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_1_3_____________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the developments in coming months and will
Committee seeks to foster maximum em- continue its purchases of Treasury and agen-
ployment and price stability. The Committee cy mortgage-backed securities, and employ
expects that, with appropriate policy ac- its other policy tools as appropriate, until the
commodation, economic growth will pick up outlook for the labor market has improved
from its recent pace and the unemployment substantially in a context of price stability. In
rate will gradually decline toward levels the judging when to moderate the pace of asset
Committee judges consistent with its dual purchases, the Committee will, at its coming
mandate. The Committee sees the downside meetings, assess whether incoming infor-
risks to the outlook for the economy and the mation continues to support the Commit-
labor market as having diminished, on net, tee’s expectation of ongoing improvement in
since last fall, but the tightening of financial labor market conditions and inflation moving
conditions observed in recent months, if sus- back toward its longer-run objective. Asset
tained, could slow the pace of improvement purchases are not on a preset course, and the
in the economy and labor market. The Committee’s decisions about their pace will
Committee recognizes that inflation persis- remain contingent on the Committee’s eco-
tently below its 2 percent objective could nomic outlook as well as its assessment of
pose risks to economic performance, but it the likely efficacy and costs of such purchas-
anticipates that inflation will move back to- es.
ward its objective over the medium term.
To support continued progress toward max-
Taking into account the extent of federal fis- imum employment and price stability, the
cal retrenchment, the Committee sees the Committee today reaffirmed its view that a
improvement in economic activity and labor highly accommodative stance of monetary
market conditions since it began its asset policy will remain appropriate for a consider-
purchase program a year ago as consistent able time after the asset purchase program
with growing underlying strength in the ends and the economic recovery strengthens.
broader economy. However, the Committee In particular, the Committee decided to keep
decided to await more evidence that progress the target range for the federal funds rate at
will be sustained before adjusting the pace of 0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that
its purchases. Accordingly, the Committee this exceptionally low range for the federal
decided to continue purchasing additional funds rate will be appropriate at least as long
agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace as the unemployment rate remains above
of $40 billion per month and longer-term 6½ percent, inflation between one and two
Treasury securities at a pace of $45 billion years ahead is projected to be no more than a
per month. The Committee is maintaining half percentage point above the Committee’s
its existing policy of reinvesting principal 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term
payments from its holdings of agency debt inflation expectations continue to be well an-
and agency mortgage-backed securities in chored. In determining how long to main-
agency mortgage-backed securities and of tain a highly accommodative stance of mone-
rolling over maturing Treasury securities at tary policy, the Committee will also consider
auction. Taken together, these actions other information, including additional
should maintain downward pressure on measures of labor market conditions, indica-
longer-term interest rates, support mortgage tors of inflation pressures and inflation ex-
markets, and help to make broader financial pectations, and readings on financial devel-
conditions more accommodative, which in opments. When the Committee decides to
turn should promote a stronger economic begin to remove policy accommodation, it
recovery and help to ensure that inflation, will take a balanced approach consistent with
over time, is at the rate most consistent with its longer-run goals of maximum employ-
the Committee’s dual mandate. ment and inflation of 2 percent.”
The Committee will closely monitor incom- Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C.
ing information on economic and financial Dudley, James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Jerome H.

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Powell, Eric Rosengren, Jeremy C. Stein, Daniel K. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
Tarullo, and Janet L. Yellen. would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, October 29–
30, 2013. The meeting adjourned at 11:15 a.m. on Sep-
Voting against this action: Esther L. George.
tember 18, 2013.
Ms. George dissented because she saw recent infor-
Notation Vote
mation on the economy as sufficiently positive to war-
rant a reduction in the pace of the Committee’s asset By notation vote completed on August 20, 2013, the
purchases at this meeting. In her view, waiting for Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
more evidence of progress discounted the cumulative FOMC meeting held on July 30–31, 2013.
improvement in the economy as well as the potential
costs of ongoing purchases. Accordingly, not only
would a reduction be appropriate in light of the ongo-
ing improvement in labor market conditions, but it also
_____________________________
would support the credibility and predictability of
William B. English
monetary policy because it would be seen as following
Secretary
through on the Committee’s earlier communications
about the outlook for the asset purchase program.

--- Page 13 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the September 17–18, 2013, Fed- index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE),
eral Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, meet- would rise to a level at or somewhat below the Com-
ing participants—5 members of the Board of Gover- mittee’s 2 percent objective in 2016.
nors and the 12 presidents of the Federal Reserve
Most participants judged that highly accommodative
Banks, all of whom participated in the deliberations—
monetary policy was likely to remain warranted over
submitted their assessments of real output growth, the
the next few years to support continued progress to-
unemployment rate, inflation, and the target federal
ward maximum employment and a return to 2 percent
funds rate for each year from 2013 through 2016 and
inflation. As shown in figure 2, a large majority of par-
over the longer run. Each participant’s assessment was
ticipants judged not only that it would be appropriate
based on information available at the time of the meet-
to wait until 2015 or later before beginning to increase
ing plus his or her judgment of appropriate monetary
the federal funds rate, but also that it would then be
policy and assumptions about the factors likely to affect
appropriate to raise the federal funds rate target rela-
economic outcomes. The longer-run projections rep-
tively gradually. Most participants viewed their eco-
resent each participant’s judgment of the value to
nomic projections as broadly consistent with a slowing
which each variable would be expected to converge,
in the pace of the Committee’s purchases of longer-
over time, under appropriate monetary policy and in
term securities this year and the completion of the pro-
the absence of further shocks to the economy. “Ap-
gram in mid-2014.
propriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path
of policy that each participant deems most likely to Most participants saw the uncertainty associated with
foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation their outlook for economic growth, the unemployment
that best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of rate, and inflation as similar to that of the past 20 years.
the Federal Reserve’s objectives of maximum employ- In addition, most participants considered the risks to
ment and stable prices. the outlook for the unemployment rate and inflation as
broadly balanced. A slim majority of the participants
Overall, FOMC participants expected, under appropri-
also judged that the risks to the outlook for real gross
ate monetary policy, a pickup in economic growth, with
domestic product (GDP) growth were broadly bal-
the unemployment rate declining gradually (table 1 and
anced, while nearly as many indicated that the risks
figure 1). Almost all of the participants projected that
were weighted to the downside.
inflation, as measured by the annual change in the price
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, September 2013
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2013 2014 2015 2016 Longer run 2013 2014 2015 2016 Longer run
Change in real GDP . . 2.0 to 2.3 2.9 to 3.1 3.0 to 3.5 2.5 to 3.3 2.2 to 2.5 1.8 to 2.4 2.2 to 3.3 2.2 to 3.7 2.2 to 3.5 2.1 to 2.5
June projection . . . . . . 2.3 to 2.6 3.0 to 3.5 2.9 to 3.6 n.a. 2.3 to 2.5 2.0 to 2.6 2.2 to 3.6 2.3 to 3.8 n.a. 2.0 to 3.0
Unemployment rate . . 7.1 to 7.3 6.4 to 6.8 5.9 to 6.2 5.4 to 5.9 5.2 to 5.8 6.9 to 7.3 6.2 to 6.9 5.3 to 6.3 5.2 to 6.0 5.2 to 6.0
June projection . . . . . . 7.2 to 7.3 6.5 to 6.8 5.8 to 6.2 n.a. 5.2 to 6.0 6.9 to 7.5 6.2 to 6.9 5.7 to 6.4 n.a. 5.0 to 6.0
PCE inflation . . . . . . . 1.1 to 1.2 1.3 to 1.8 1.6 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 2.0 1.0 to 1.3 1.2 to 2.0 1.4 to 2.3 1.5 to 2.3 2.0
June projection . . . . . . 0.8 to 1.2 1.4 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 n.a. 2.0 0.8 to 1.5 1.4 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.3 n.a. 2.0
Core PCE inflation3 . . 1.2 to 1.3 1.5 to 1.7 1.7 to 2.0 1.9 to 2.0 1.2 to 1.4 1.4 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.3 1.7 to 2.3
June projection . . . . . . 1.2 to 1.3 1.5 to 1.8 1.7 to 2.0 n.a. 1.1 to 1.5 1.5 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.3 n.a.
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the pre-
vious year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for
personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average
civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary
policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The June projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee on June 18–19, 2013.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

--- Page 14 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure1. Centraltendenciesandrangesofeconomicprojections,2013–16andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
5
Central tendency of projections
4
Range of projections
3
2
1
+
Actual 0
-
1
2
3
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesofthevariablesare
annual.

--- Page 15 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_7–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_3____________P_a_g_e_ _3
Figure2. OverviewofFOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy
Number of participants
Appropriate timing of policy firming 12
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
3
2
2
1
2014 2015 2016
Appropriate pace of policy firming Percent
Target federal funds rate at year end
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2013 2014 2015 2016 Longer run
Note: Intheupperpanel,theheightofeachbardenotesthenumberofFOMCparticipantswhojudgethat,under
appropriatemonetarypolicy,thefirstincreaseinthetargetfederalfundsratefromitscurrentrangeof0to1/4percent
will occur in the specified calendar year. In June 2013, the numbers of FOMC participants who judged that the first
increase in the target federal funds rate would occur in 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2016 were, respectively, 1, 3, 14, and 1.
Inthelowerpanel,eachshadedcircleindicatesthevalue(roundedtothenearest1/4percentagepoint)ofanindividual
participant’sjudgmentoftheappropriatelevelofthetargetfederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryear
oroverthelongerrun.

--- Page 16 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
The Outlook for Economic Activity of other factors. Relative to June, the dispersions of
Participants generally projected that, conditional on participants’ projections for GDP growth in 2014 and
their individual assumptions about appropriate mone- 2015 narrowed to some extent, while the dispersions of
tary policy, real GDP growth would be similar in 2013 projections for the unemployment rate in those years
to its rate in 2012 and would increase in the 2014–16 generally widened a bit.
period to a pace above what participants saw as the
The Outlook for Inflation
longer-run rate of output growth. Many participants
Participants’ views on the broad outlook for inflation
pointed to diminishing restraint from fiscal policy,
under the assumption of appropriate monetary policy
pent-up demand for consumer and producer durables,
were little changed from June. Although most partici-
or rising household net worth as contributing to the
pants revised up slightly their projection for PCE infla-
pickup in growth. In addition, a number of partici-
tion in 2013, a number of participants revised down a
pants noted continued improvement in the housing
bit their forecasts for 2014. All participants anticipated
sector, supported by rising employment and income
that both headline and core inflation would rise gradu-
and by improved credit availability.
ally over the next few years, and almost all participants
The central tendencies of participants’ projections for expected inflation to be at or somewhat below the
real GDP growth were 2.0 to 2.3 percent in 2013, Committee’s 2 percent objective in 2016. Specifically,
2.9 to 3.1 percent in 2014, 3.0 to 3.5 percent in 2015, the central tendencies for PCE inflation were 1.1 to
and 2.5 to 3.3 percent in 2016. In general, participants’ 1.2 percent in 2013, 1.3 to 1.8 percent in 2014, 1.6 to
projections for growth in 2013, 2014, and, to a lesser 2.0 percent in 2015, and 1.7 to 2.0 percent in 2016.
extent, 2015 were below those collected in June. Most The central tendencies of the forecasts for core infla-
participants attributed the downward revisions to their tion were little changed from June and broadly similar
projections in 2013 and 2014 in part to weaker-than- to those for the headline measure over the projection
expected incoming data, while some participants point- period. A number of participants viewed the combina-
ed to tighter financial conditions. The central tendency tion of stable inflation expectations and diminishing
for the longer-run rate of growth of real GDP was resource slack as important factors leading to a gradual
2.2 to 2.5 percent, little changed from June. pickup in inflation toward the Committee’s longer-run
objective.
Participants anticipated a gradual decline in the unem-
ployment rate over the projection period. The central Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the diver-
tendencies of participants’ forecasts for the unemploy- sity of participants’ views about the outlook for infla-
ment rate in the fourth quarter of each year were 7.1 to tion. The ranges of participants’ projections for overall
7.3 percent in 2013, 6.4 to 6.8 percent in 2014, 5.9 to inflation in 2014 and 2015 widened slightly from June
6.2 percent in 2015, and 5.4 to 5.9 percent in 2016. and were 1.2 to 2.0 percent in 2014 and 1.4 to 2.3 per-
These projections were little changed from June. The cent in 2015. In 2016, the forecasts for PCE inflation
central tendency of participants’ estimates of the were concentrated near the Committee’s longer-run
longer-run normal rate of unemployment that would objective, though one participant expected inflation to
prevail under appropriate monetary policy and in the be noticeably above the Committee’s objective and
absence of further shocks to the economy was 5.2 to another expected it to be ½ percentage point below.
5.8 percent. A majority of participants projected that Similar to the projections for headline inflation, the
the unemployment rate would be near or slightly above projections for core inflation became more concentrat-
their individual estimates of its longer-run level at the ed near the 2 percent objective in 2016 than in earlier
end of 2016. years; however, the dispersion of the projections for
core inflation in each year was lower than for headline
Figures 3.A and 3.B show that participants’ views re-
inflation.
garding the likely outcomes for real GDP growth and
the unemployment rate in 2014 and 2015 remained Appropriate Monetary Policy
dispersed. This diversity reflected their individual as- As indicated in figure 2, most participants judged that
sessments of the likely rate of improvement in the exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate would
housing sector and in household balance sheets, the remain appropriate for the next few years. In particu-
domestic implications of foreign economic develop- lar, 12 participants thought that the first increase in the
ments, the prospective path for U.S. fiscal policy, the target federal funds rate would not be warranted until
likely evolution of financial conditions, and a number sometime in 2015, and two judged that policy firming

--- Page 17 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_7–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_3____________P_a_g_e_ _5
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2013–16andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2013 20
September projections 18
16
June projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2016 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 2.0 2.2 2. 4 2.6 2. 8 3. 0 3. 2 3. 4 3. 6 3. 8
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 18 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2013–16andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2013 20
September projections 18
16
June projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5. 8 6. 0 6.2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2 7. 4
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5. 8 6. 0 6.2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2 7. 4
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5. 8 6. 0 6.2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2 7. 4
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2016 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6.4 6.6 6. 8 7. 0 7.2 7.4
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5. 8 6. 0 6.2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2 7. 4
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 19 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_7–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_3____________P_a_g_e_ _7
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2013–16andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2013 20
September projections 18
16
June projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2016 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2013–16
Number of participants
2013 20
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2016 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_7–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_3____________P_a_g_e_ _9
would likely not be appropriate until 2016. Three par- most participants judged that it would likely be appro-
ticipants judged that an increase in the federal funds priate to begin to reduce the pace of the Committee’s
rate in 2014 would be appropriate. purchases of longer-term securities this year and to
conclude purchases in the middle of 2014. A couple of
All participants projected that the unemployment rate
participants thought it appropriate for the first reduc-
would be below the Committee’s 6½ percent threshold
tion in the pace of asset purchases to occur later, and
at the end of the year in which they viewed the initial
another specified that purchases likely would continue
increase in the federal funds rate to be appropriate, and
past midyear 2014; in contrast, a couple of participants
all but one judged that inflation would be at or below
thought that the program should be ended considerably
the Committee’s longer-run objective. Almost all par-
sooner than the middle of next year.
ticipants projected that the unemployment rate would
still be above their view of its longer-run level at the Participants’ views of the appropriate path for mone-
end of the year in which they saw the federal funds rate tary policy were informed by their judgments on the
increasing from the effective lower bound. state of the economy, including the values of the un-
employment rate and other labor market indicators that
Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’
would be consistent with maximum employment, the
judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target
extent to which the economy was currently falling short
federal funds rate at the end of each calendar year from
of maximum employment, the prospects for inflation
2013 to 2016 and over the longer run. As noted above,
to reach the Committee’s longer-term objective of
most participants judged that economic conditions
2 percent, and the balance of risks around the outlook.
would warrant maintaining the current low level of the
Some participants also mentioned the usefulness of
federal funds rate until 2015. Among the three partici-
examining the implications of alternative policy strate-
pants who saw the federal funds rate leaving the effec-
gies for returning employment and inflation to
tive lower bound earlier, projections for the federal
mandate-consistent levels over the medium term.
funds rate at the end of 2014 ranged from 1 to 1¼ per-
cent. These three participants viewed the appropriate Uncertainty and Risks
level of the federal funds rate as 3 percent or higher at Most participants judged that the levels of uncertainty
the end of 2015, while the remainder of participants about their projections for real GDP growth and un-
saw the appropriate level of the funds rate as 1½ per- employment were broadly similar to the norm during
cent or lower. On balance, the dispersion of partici- the previous 20 years, although four participants con-
pants’ projections for the appropriate federal funds rate tinued to see them as higher (figure 4).1 The number
at the end of 2015 widened a bit from June, while the of participants who viewed the risks around their GDP
median value of the rate was unchanged. projections as weighted to the downside was nearly
equal to the number who viewed them as broadly bal-
All of the participants who saw the first tightening in
anced. Most participants saw the risks around their
either 2015 or 2016 judged that the appropriate level of
unemployment projections as broadly balanced. The
the federal funds rate at the end of 2016 would still be
main factors cited as contributing to the uncertainty
below their individual assessment of its expected
and balance of risks around economic outcomes were
longer-run value. In contrast, the three participants
the limits on the ability of monetary policy at the zero
who saw the first tightening in 2014 believed that the
lower bound to respond to adverse shocks, as well as
appropriate level of the federal funds rate at the end of
challenges associated with forecasting the path of fiscal
2016 would be at their assessment of its longer-run
policy and developments abroad. In addition, some
level, which they viewed as either at or just above
4 percent. Among all participants, estimates of the
longer-run target federal funds rate ranged from 3¼ to
about 4¼ percent, reflecting the Committee’s inflation
1 Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for
objective of 2 percent and participants’ individual
the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total
judgments about the appropriate longer-run level of the
consumer price inflation over the period from 1993 through
real federal funds rate in the absence of further shocks
2012. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncer-
to the economy.
tainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertain-
Participants also described their views regarding the ty in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used
to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’
appropriate path of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.
projections.
Conditional on their respective economic outlooks,

--- Page 22 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthetargetfederalfundsrate,2013–16andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2013
20
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2014
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2015
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Note: The target federal funds rate is measured as the level of the target rate at the end of the calendar year or
inthelongerrun.

--- Page 23 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_7–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_3___________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Figure4. Uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth 20 Risks to GDP growth 20
September projections 18 September projections 18
June projections 16 June projections 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate 20 Risks to the unemployment rate 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation 20 Risks to PCE inflation 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation 20 Risks to core PCE inflation 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”Defini-
tionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 24 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
volatility in financial markets, while others pointed to
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
risks associated with structural changes affecting
Percentage points
Variable 2013 2014 2015 2016 productivity growth and labor markets.
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . ±0.9 ±1.5 ±1.8 ±1.9 Participants reported little change in their assessments
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . ±0.3 ±1.0 ±1.6 ±1.9 of the level of uncertainty and the balance of risks
around their forecasts for overall PCE inflation and
Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.8 ±1.0 ±1.1 ±1.1
core inflation. Eleven participants judged the levels of
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the
root mean squared error of projections for 1993 through 2012 that uncertainty associated with their forecasts for those
were released in the fall by various private and government forecast- inflation measures to be broadly similar to historical
ers. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain
norms; the same number saw the risks to those projec-
assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual out-
comes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in tions as broadly balanced. Five participants saw the
ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the risks to their inflation forecasts as tilted to the down-
past. Further information may be found in David Reifschneider and
side, reflecting, for example, the possibility that the
Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Out-
look from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics current low levels of inflation could persist and become
Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the embedded in inflation expectations. Conversely, a
Federal Reserve System, November).
1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. couple of participants cited upside risks to inflation
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price meas- stemming from the current highly accommodative
ure that has been most widely used in government and private eco-
stance of monetary policy or concerns about the
nomic forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the
previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Committee’s ability to shift to a less accommodative
policy stance when it becomes appropriate to do so.
participants pointed to the tightening in financial condi-
tions in recent months and the possibility of heightened

--- Page 25 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_7–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_3___________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by cent in the second year, 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the
the members of the Board of Governors and third year, and 1.1 to 4.9 percent in the fourth
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks year. The corresponding 70 percent confidence
inform discussions of monetary policy among intervals for overall inflation would be 1.2 to
policymakers and can aid public understand- 2.8 percent in the current year, 1.0 to 3.0 per-
ing of the basis for policy actions. Consider- cent in the second year, and 0.9 to 3.1 percent
able uncertainty attends these projections, in the third and fourth years.
however. The economic and statistical models Because current conditions may differ
and relationships used to help produce eco- from those that prevailed, on average, over his-
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de- tory, participants provide judgments as to
scriptions of the real world, and the future whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
path of the economy can be affected by myr- jections of each variable is greater than, smaller
iad unforeseen developments and events. than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, forecast uncertainty in the past, as shown in
participants consider not only what appears to table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
be the most likely economic outcome as em- to whether the risks to their projections are
bodied in their projections, but also the range weighted to the upside, are weighted to the
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
their occurring, and the potential costs to the participants judge whether each variable is
economy should they occur. more likely to be above or below their projec-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical tions of the most likely outcome. These judg-
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including ments about the uncertainty and the risks at-
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports tending each participant’s projections are dis-
and those prepared by the Federal Reserve tinct from the diversity of participants’ views
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the about the most likely outcomes. Forecast un-
Federal Open Market Committee. The pro- certainty is concerned with the risks associated
jection error ranges shown in the table il- with a particular projection rather than with
lustrate the considerable uncertainty associat- divergences across a number of different pro-
ed with economic forecasts. For example, jections.
suppose a participant projects that real gross As with real activity and inflation, the out-
domestic product (GDP) and total consumer look for the future path of the federal funds
prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, re- rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This
spectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty arises primarily because each partic-
uncertainty attending those projections is simi- ipant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of
lar to that experienced in the past and the risks monetary policy depends importantly on the
around the projections are broadly balanced, evolution of real activity and inflation over
the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a time. If economic conditions evolve in an un-
probability of about 70 percent that actual expected manner, then assessments of the ap-
GDP would expand within a range of 2.1 to propriate setting of the federal funds rate
3.9 percent in the current year, 1.5 to 4.5 per- would change from that point forward.

# Tables

## Page_13_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |      |      |      |            |      |      |      |      |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|------|------------|------|------|------|------|
| 2013                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | 2014 | 2015 | 2016 | Longer run | 2013 | 2014 | 2015 | 2016 |
| 2.0 to 2.3 2.9 to 3.1 3.0 to 3.5 2.5 to 3.3 2.2 to 2.5
2.3 to 2.6 3.0 to 3.5 2.9 to 3.6 n.a. 2.3 to 2.5
7.1 to 7.3 6.4 to 6.8 5.9 to 6.2 5.4 to 5.9 5.2 to 5.8
7.2 to 7.3 6.5 to 6.8 5.8 to 6.2 n.a. 5.2 to 6.0
1.1 to 1.2 1.3 to 1.8 1.6 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 2.0
0.8 to 1.2 1.4 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 n.a. 2.0
1.2 to 1.3 1.5 to 1.7 1.7 to 2.0 1.9 to 2.0
1.2 to 1.3 1.5 to 1.8 1.7 to 2.0 n.a. |      |      |      |            |      |      |      |      |