# 20130619_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:37:25*
*Pages: 25, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
June 18–19, 2013
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability Pol-
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the icy and Research, Board of Governors
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues-
day, June 18, 2013, at 1:30 p.m. and continued on James A. Clouse and William Nelson, Deputy Direc-
Wednesday, June 19, 2013, at 9:00 a.m. tors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gov-
ernors; Matthew J. Eichner, Deputy Director, Divi-
PRESENT:
sion of Research and Statistics, Board of Gover-
Ben Bernanke, Chairman
nors; Maryann F. Hunter, Deputy Director, Divi-
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman
sion of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board
James Bullard
of Governors
Elizabeth Duke
Charles L. Evans
Jon W. Faust, Special Adviser to the Board, Office of
Esther L. George
Board Members, Board of Governors
Jerome H. Powell
Sarah Bloom Raskin
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Eric Rosengren
Board Members, Board of Governors
Jeremy C. Stein
Daniel K. Tarullo
Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers,
Janet L. Yellen
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Christine Cumming, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana
Daniel M. Covitz, Eric M. Engen, and Thomas Lau-
Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, Alternate
bach, Associate Directors, Division of Research
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and John C.
Sean D. Campbell and Joshua Gallin, Deputy Associate
Williams, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
Directors, Division of Research and Statistics,
of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respec-
Board of Governors; Jane E. Ihrig and David
tively
López-Salido, Deputy Associate Directors, Divi-
sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Gregory L. Stefani, First Vice President, Federal Re-
serve Bank of Cleveland
Joseph W. Gruber, Assistant Director, Division of In-
ternational Finance, Board of Governors
William B. English, Secretary and Economist
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary
Jeremy B. Rudd, Adviser, Division of Research and
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Statistics, Board of Governors
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Mone-
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
tary Affairs, Board of Governors
Steven B. Kamin, Economist
David W. Wilcox, Economist
Deborah J. Lindner, Group Manager, Division of Re-
search and Statistics, Board of Governors
Thomas A. Connors, Troy Davig, Michael P. Leahy,
James J. McAndrews, Stephen A. Meyer, David
Patrice Robitaille, Senior Economist, Division of Inter-
Reifschneider, Geoffrey Tootell, Christopher J.
national Finance, Board of Governors
Waller, and William Wascher, Associate Econo-
mists
Seung J. Lee, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Peter M. Garavuso, Records Management Analyst, Di- inate residual holdings. A couple of participants stated
vision of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors that they preferred that the Committee make no deci-
sion about sales of MBS until closer to the start of the
James M. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve normalization process. Participants agreed that the
Bank of Minneapolis Committee’s focus continued to be on providing ap-
propriate monetary accommodation to promote a
David Altig and Loretta J. Mester, Executive Vice Pres- stronger recovery in the context of price stability and
idents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and Phil- so judged that additional discussion regarding policy
adelphia, respectively normalization should be deferred.
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
Lorie K. Logan, David Marshall, Mark E. Schweitzer,
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
and Kei-Mu Yi, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
The Manager of the SOMA reported on developments
Reserve Banks of New York, Chicago, Cleveland,
in domestic and foreign financial markets as well as the
and Minneapolis, respectively
System open market operations during the period since
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) met on
Evan F. Koenig, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
April 30–May 1, 2013. The review included a report
of Dallas
that the System’s purchases of longer-term assets did
not appear to have had an adverse effect on the func-
Andreas L. Hornstein, Senior Advisor, Federal Reserve
tioning of the markets for Treasury securities or agency
Bank of Richmond
MBS, and that the Open Market Desk’s operations in
both sectors had proceeded smoothly. By unanimous
John Fernald, Senior Research Adviser, Federal Re-
vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic trans-
serve Bank of San Francisco
actions over the intermeeting period. There were no
intervention operations in foreign currencies for the
System’s account over the intermeeting period.
Discussion of Guidelines for Policy Normalization
In light of the changes in the System Open Market Ac- Staff Review of the Economic Situation
count (SOMA) portfolio over the past two years, the The information reviewed for the June 18–19 meeting
Committee again discussed its strategy for the eventual suggested that economic activity continued to increase
normalization of the stance of monetary policy and the at a moderate rate in the second quarter. Private-sector
size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance employment expanded further in recent months, and
sheet that was released in the minutes of the Commit- the unemployment rate in April and May was below its
tee’s June 2011 meeting. Although most participants first-quarter average, although it continued to be ele-
saw this review as prudent longer-range planning, some vated. Consumer price inflation was subdued, partly
felt that the discussion was premature. Meeting partic- reflecting transitory influences. However, measures of
ipants, in general, continued to view the broad princi- longer-run inflation expectations remained stable.
ples set out in 2011 as still applicable. Nonetheless,
Private nonfarm employment rose moderately in April
they agreed that many of the details of the eventual
and May, while total government employment contin-
normalization process would likely differ from those
ued to decline somewhat. The unemployment rate was
specified two years ago, that the appropriate details
7.6 percent in May, little changed from its level in April.
would depend in part on economic and financial devel-
The labor force participation rate edged up in May, but
opments between now and the time when it becomes
was still slightly below its first-quarter average, and the
appropriate to begin normalizing monetary policy, and
employment-to-population ratio increased a bit in re-
that the Committee would need to provide additional
cent months. The rate of long-duration unemployment
information about its intentions as that time approach-
declined slightly, while the share of workers employed
es. Participants continued to think that the Federal
part time for economic reasons was little changed; both
Reserve should, in the long run, hold predominantly
of these measures remained well above their pre-
Treasury securities. Most, however, now anticipated
recession levels. Forward-looking indicators of near-
that the Committee would not sell agency mortgage-
term labor market activity were mixed but generally
backed securities (MBS) as part of the normalization
pointed to some further improvement in labor market
process, although some indicated that limited sales
conditions in the coming months: Household expecta-
might be warranted in the longer run to reduce or elim-

--- Page 3 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_8_–_1_9,_ 2_0_1_3_________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
tions of the labor market situation improved; initial slightly above the level of shipments, pointing to mod-
claims for unemployment insurance were little changed, est gains in shipments in the near term. Other
on net, over the intermeeting period; and firms’ hiring forward-looking indicators, such as surveys of business
plans edged up. However, measures of job openings conditions and capital spending plans, also suggested
and the rate of gross private-sector hiring were about that outlays for business equipment would continue to
flat, on balance, in recent months and remained near rise at only a modest pace in the coming months.
their levels of a year ago. Nominal business spending for nonresidential con-
struction increased in April after it had declined in the
Manufacturing production increased slightly in May
first quarter. Business inventories in most industries
after declining in the previous two months, and the rate
appeared to be broadly aligned with sales in recent
of manufacturing capacity utilization in May was lower
months.
than in the first quarter. Automakers’ schedules indi-
cated that the pace of motor vehicle assemblies would Real federal government purchases appeared to be de-
hold roughly steady in the coming months, and broader clining less rapidly going into the second quarter than
indicators of manufacturing production, such as the they had during the first quarter, as decreases in de-
readings on new orders from national and regional fense spending slowed, on balance, in April and May.
manufacturing surveys, were generally at subdued levels The ongoing declines in real state and local government
that pointed to only modest increases in factory output purchases appeared to moderate over recent months;
in the near term. the payrolls of these governments expanded in April
and May, but state and local construction expenditures
Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose in
continued to decline noticeably.
April. In May, nominal retail sales, excluding those at
motor vehicle and parts outlets, increased briskly, while The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in March
light motor vehicle sales moved up solidly. Some key but widened in April, leaving the level of the trade defi-
factors that tend to support growth in household cit in April similar to its average in the first quarter.
spending were positive in recent months. After de- Both imports and exports fell in March but largely re-
creasing in the first quarter when payroll and income covered in April, although oil imports remained below
taxes increased, households’ real disposable income their first-quarter average. Exports of consumer goods
rose in April, in part reflecting a small decline in con- and automotive products reached new highs in April,
sumer prices. Households’ net worth likely increased in but exports of agricultural products declined.
recent months, as equity values and home prices rose
Overall U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE
further. Moreover, consumer sentiment in the Thom-
price index, edged down in April, while the consumer
son Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Con-
price index (CPI) rose somewhat in May. Both the CPI
sumers improved notably, on balance, in May and early
and the PCE price index increased at a subdued rate
June and was at its most upbeat level since the onset of
over the most recent 12-month period for each series.
the recession.
After declining in the previous two months, consumer
Conditions in the housing sector generally improved energy prices rose a little in May, and retail gasoline
further, but construction activity was still at a relatively prices, measured on a seasonally adjusted basis, were up
low level, and demand continued to be restrained by further in the first couple of weeks in June. Consumer
tight credit standards for mortgage loans. Starts of new food prices edged down in May after rising modestly in
single-family homes declined, on net, in April and May, April. Partly reflecting some transitory factors, such as
but permits rose, suggesting gains in construction in the a one-time reduction in Medicare prices associated with
coming months. Starts of new multifamily units de- the federal government spending sequestration, con-
creased in April but increased in May. Home prices sumer prices excluding food and energy only edged up
continued to rise rapidly through April, while sales of in April but rose slightly more in May. Near-term infla-
both new and existing homes advanced. tion expectations from the Michigan survey were little
changed in May and early June; longer-term inflation
Real business expenditures on equipment and software
expectations in the survey also were essentially flat and
appeared to slow somewhat going into the second
remained within the narrow range that they have occu-
quarter after expanding modestly earlier in the year.
pied for a number of years.
Nominal shipments of nondefense capital goods ex-
cluding aircraft decreased in April, but nominal new Measures of labor compensation indicated that gains in
orders for these capital goods increased and were nominal wages remained modest. Compensation per

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
hour in the nonfarm business sector increased moder- reduction in the pace of purchases under the FOMC’s
ately over the year ending in the first quarter, and, with flow-based asset purchase program. Nominal yields on
a small rise in productivity, unit labor costs advanced 5- to 30-year Treasury securities increased about 35 to
only a little. Gains in average hourly earnings for all 55 basis points. Yields on agency MBS rose more than
employees were muted, on balance, in April and May. those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities, leav-
ing option-adjusted spreads to Treasury securities no-
Foreign economic growth remained sluggish so far this
tably wider. The rise in longer-term Treasury yields
year. A slower pace of expansion in many emerging
appeared to reflect both an increase in term premiums
market economies (EMEs), including China, since the
and a rise in expected future short-term rates. The rise
beginning of the year offset an increase in the average
in term premiums, in turn, likely reflected in part a re-
rate of economic growth in the advanced foreign econ-
assessment of the pace and ultimate size of the Federal
omies. In Japan, where recent policy measures ap-
Reserve’s asset purchase program, as well as increased
peared to have boosted household confidence, eco-
uncertainty about the future path of monetary policy.
nomic growth picked up noticeably early in the year.
Recent indicators of Canadian economic activity also Measures of inflation compensation derived from
strengthened. However, indicators for the euro-area yields on nominal and inflation-protected Treasury se-
economies remained weak. A decline in commodity curities fell notably but ended the intermeeting period
prices and continued lackluster economic growth con- within their ranges over the past few years. Investor
tributed to a decline in foreign inflation. perceptions of a somewhat less accommodative tone of
Federal Reserve communications, as well as the softer-
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
than-expected reading for the April CPI, likely contrib-
Financial markets were volatile during the intermeeting
uted to the decline in inflation compensation.
period as investors reacted to incoming economic data
and Federal Reserve communications. Information Conditions in domestic and offshore dollar funding
about the U.S. economy was somewhat better, on bal- markets were generally little changed, on balance, over
ance, than investors had anticipated, apparently giving the intermeeting period. In secured funding markets,
them greater confidence in the economic outlook. rates on Treasury general collateral repurchase agree-
Federal Reserve communications over the period re- ments decreased, on net, in large part because of the
portedly were interpreted by market participants as seasonal decline in the supply of Treasury securities.
pointing to a less accommodative stance of future
Market sentiment toward large domestic banking or-
monetary policy than they previously had expected.
ganizations appeared to improve somewhat over the
Market-based indicators suggested that investors re- intermeeting period, likely related in part to further re-
vised up their expectations about the path of the feder- ductions in nonperforming loans and growing confi-
al funds rate in coming years. Forward rates two to dence in the economic outlook. Equity prices for large
three years ahead derived from overnight index swaps domestic banks outperformed broad equity indexes
shifted up 25 to 40 basis points over the intermeeting over the intermeeting period, as did the equity prices
period, likely reflecting both an increase in the expected for most other types of financial institutions. In con-
path for the federal funds rate and an increase in term trast, equity prices for agency mortgage real estate in-
premiums. In contrast to the readings from financial vestment trusts declined, reflecting the rise in longer-
market quotes, which suggested that investors had term interest rates, the underperformance of agency
come to expect the FOMC to increase its target for the MBS, and weaker-than-expected earnings reports.
federal funds rate sooner than they previously had an-
Responses to the June Senior Credit Officer Opinion
ticipated, the results from the Desk’s survey of primary
Survey on Dealer Financing Terms generally suggested
dealers conducted prior to the June meeting showed
little change over the past three months in the credit
little material change, on balance, in the dealers’ expec-
terms applicable to important classes of counterparties
tations of the most likely timing of the first increase in
and in the use of financial leverage by most classes of
the federal funds rate target.
counterparties covered by the survey. However, about
Nominal yields on Treasury securities rose sharply over one-fourth of dealers reported an increase in the use of
the intermeeting period amid some better-than- leverage by hedge funds.
expected U.S. economic data and Federal Reserve
Corporate bond yields rose significantly over the
communications that were interpreted by market par-
intermeeting period, and their spreads relative to
ticipants as signaling a possible earlier-than-expected

--- Page 5 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_8_–_1_9,_ 2_0_1_3_________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
comparable-maturity Treasury yields edged higher on mained relatively stable. Spreads of yields on Italian
net. Credit flows to nonfinancial businesses remained and Spanish government debt over yields on German
strong in May, especially through bond issuance. Gross bunds increased only a few basis points, while compa-
issuance of speculative-grade corporate bonds was par- rable spreads for Greek sovereign debt declined nota-
ticularly elevated early in the intermeeting period, but bly. The foreign exchange value of the dollar was little
such issuance slowed after mid-May in response to the changed, on average, relative to the currencies of the
rise in interest rates and in market volatility. Mean- advanced foreign economies, but appreciated against
while, the issuance of syndicated leveraged loans re- EME currencies amid weak incoming data on econom-
mained robust in April and May, supported by strong ic activity and monetary policy easing in some EMEs,
investor demand for floating-rate corporate debt in- along with rising U.S. Treasury yields. Emerging mar-
struments. ket mutual funds experienced sharp outflows in recent
weeks, while EME stock prices declined and EME
House prices continued to rise in recent months, with
credit spreads widened on net.
national home price indexes up between 5 and 12 per-
cent over the 12-month period ending in April. As a The staff reported on potential risks to financial stabil-
result, the number of mortgages with negative equity ity, including the stability of banking firms, nonbank
was estimated to have decreased substantially. Primary financial intermediaries, and asset markets. Most
mortgage rates increased with yields on MBS over the market-based measures of the health of the banking
intermeeting period, and the spread between primary sector—such as banks’ stock prices, credit default swap
mortgage rates and MBS yields remained near the low spreads, and equity correlations—pointed to an im-
end of its range over recent years. Consumer credit provement in the stability of the banking sector, in part
continued to expand at a solid pace because of the on- because of rising levels of liquidity and capital as well as
going expansion in auto and student loans; credit card diminished concerns about downside risks. However, a
debt remained about flat. Issuance of consumer asset- number of indicators pointed to a modest increase in
backed securities increased strongly again in May. risk-taking and leverage that was largely being interme-
diated through the shadow banking system. Signs of
Growth in total bank credit moderated in April and
upward pressures on the valuations of some risky assets
May compared with the first quarter, as core loans
were also noted. Overall, the risks to financial stability
slowed and securities declined slightly. Growth in
were viewed as roughly unchanged since March.
commercial and industrial loans at large banks de-
creased noticeably in recent months, reportedly reflect- Staff Economic Outlook
ing both increased paydowns and reduced originations. In the economic forecast prepared by the staff for the
In contrast, increases in commercial real estate loans June FOMC meeting, the projection for near-term
picked up, especially at large banks. growth of real gross domestic product (GDP) was little
changed from the one prepared for the previous meet-
The M2 monetary aggregate expanded at an annual rate
ing. However, the staff’s medium-term projection for
of about 5 percent from April through mid-June. The
real GDP was revised up somewhat. The staff raised
monetary base grew at an annual rate exceeding 40 per-
its projected paths for equity and home prices, which
cent over the same period, driven mainly by the in-
pushed up expected consumer spending over the me-
crease in reserve balances that resulted from the Feder-
dium term, and boosted its outlook for domestic oil
al Reserve’s asset purchases.
production, which reduced oil imports in the forecast.
Over the intermeeting period, yields on 10-year sover- These positive factors were partly offset in the staff’s
eign debt of the advanced foreign economies followed medium-term GDP projection by higher projected
the yields on comparable-maturity U.S. Treasury securi- paths for both longer-term interest rates and the for-
ties higher, and volatility in sovereign bond markets eign exchange value of the dollar. Nevertheless, with
rose, particularly in Japan. Japanese equity markets also fiscal policy expected to restrain economic growth this
displayed substantial volatility; equity prices fell sharply year, the staff still anticipated that the pace of expan-
late in the period and erased the gains that had been sion in real GDP would only moderately exceed the
registered since early April, when the Bank of Japan growth rate of potential output. The staff also contin-
announced that it would expand its asset purchases in ued to forecast that real GDP would accelerate gradual-
order to nearly double the size of its balance sheet. ly in 2014 and 2015, supported by accommodative
European equity indexes were little changed, on net, monetary policy, an eventual easing in the effects of
over the period, and euro-area financial conditions re- fiscal policy restraint on economic growth, increases in

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
consumer and business sentiment, and further im- judgment of appropriate monetary policy.1 The longer-
provements in credit availability and financial condi- run projections represent each participant’s assessment
tions. The expansion in economic activity was antici- of the rate to which each variable would be expected to
pated to slowly reduce the slack in labor and product converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy
markets over the projection period, and the unem- and in the absence of further shocks to the economy.
ployment rate was expected to decline gradually. In These economic projections and policy assessments are
addition, although the staff did not change its view of described in the Summary of Economic Projections,
the longer-run level of the natural rate of unemploy- which is attached as an addendum to these minutes.
ment, it judged that the natural rate was on a more
In their discussion of the economic situation, meeting
pronounced downward trajectory back toward its
participants generally indicated that the information
longer-run level than previously assumed; as a result,
received during the intermeeting period continued to
the staff’s projection for the unemployment rate over
suggest that the economy was expanding at a moderate
the next two years was revised down a little, relative to
pace. A number of participants mentioned that they
its previous forecast.
were encouraged by the apparent resilience of private
The staff’s forecast for inflation in the near term was spending so far this year despite considerable down-
also revised down a little from the projection prepared ward pressure from lower government spending and
for the previous FOMC meeting, reflecting in part higher taxes. In particular, consumer spending rose at
some of the recent softer-than-expected readings on a moderate rate, and the housing sector continued to
consumer prices. Nonetheless, the staff expected that strengthen. Business investment advanced, although
much of the recent softness in inflation would be tran- only modestly, and slower economic activity abroad
sitory, and thus did not materially change its medium- restrained domestic production. Overall conditions in
term projection. The staff projected that inflation the labor market improved further in recent months,
would pick up in the second half of this year, but given although the unemployment rate remained elevated.
the assumption of stable longer-run inflation expecta- Inflation continued to run below the Committee’s
tions and only modest changes in commodity and im- longer-run objective, but longer-term inflation expecta-
port prices as well as forecasts of gradually diminishing tions remained stable.
resource slack over the projection period, inflation was
Most participants anticipated that growth of real GDP
projected to still be relatively subdued through 2015.
would pick up somewhat in the second half of 2013.
The staff viewed the uncertainty around the forecast Growth of economic activity was projected to
for economic activity as normal relative to the experi- strengthen further during 2014 and 2015, supported by
ence of the past 20 years. However, the risks were still accommodative monetary policy; waning fiscal re-
viewed as skewed to the downside, in part because of straint; and ongoing improvements in household and
concerns about the situation in Europe and the ability business balance sheets, credit availability, and labor
of the U.S. economy to weather potential adverse market conditions. Accordingly, the unemployment
shocks. Although the staff saw the outlook for infla- rate was projected to gradually decline toward levels
tion as uncertain, the risks were viewed as balanced and consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate. Many
not unusually high. participants saw the downside risks to the medium-run
outlook for the economy and the labor market as hav-
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
ing diminished somewhat in recent months, or ex-
Economic Outlook
pressed greater confidence that stronger economic ac-
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, meeting par-
tivity was in train. However, some participants noted
ticipants—the 7 members of the Board of Governors
that they remained uncertain about the projected
and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks, all
pickup in growth of economic activity in coming quar-
of whom participate in the deliberations of the
ters, and thus about the prospects for further im-
FOMC—submitted their assessments of real output
provement in labor market conditions, given that, in
growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the tar-
get federal funds rate for each year from 2013 through
2015 and over the longer run, under each participant’s 1 Although President Pianalto was unable to attend the June
18–19, 2013, FOMC meeting, she submitted economic pro-
jections. First Vice President Gregory L. Stefani represented
the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland at the meeting.

--- Page 7 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_8_–_1_9,_ 2_0_1_3_________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
recent years, forecasts of a sustained pickup in growth ty. A pickup in bank lending to small businesses was
had not been realized. also reported. Although the manufacturing sector
slowed considerably during the spring, contacts in sev-
Participants noted that consumer spending continued
eral Districts reported that activity turned up more re-
to increase at a moderate rate in recent months despite
cently. Reports on activity in the airline, trucking, and
tax increases and only modest gains in wages. Among
warehousing industries were uneven. Agriculture re-
the factors viewed as supporting consumption were
mained robust, supported in part by strong demand
improvements in household balance sheets and in the
from emerging market economies. However, prospects
job market, as well as low interest rates. In addition,
for farm income were less positive as a result of the wet
consumer sentiment improved over the intermeeting
weather in the Midwest and expectations of lower pric-
period, which some participants attributed to rising
es for corn. The outlook for the energy sector re-
house prices and gains in the stock market. It was not-
mained positive.
ed that the mutually reinforcing dynamic of rising con-
fidence, declining risk premiums, improving credit While the federal sequestration and the tax increases
availability, increasing spending, and greater hiring was that became effective earlier in the year were expected
an important factor in the projected pickup in econom- to be a substantial drag on economic activity this year,
ic activity but also that this favorable dynamic could be the magnitude and timing of the effects remained un-
vulnerable to an adverse shock. A few participants ex- clear. Several participants commented that the direct
pressed some concern about the outlook for consumer effects of the cutbacks in federal spending, to date, did
spending, citing the weakness in labor income and not appear as great as had been expected, but that they
households’ cautious attitudes toward using debt. anticipated that fiscal policy would continue to restrain
economic growth in coming quarters. In particular,
Housing markets continued to strengthen, with partici-
one pointed out that the furloughs scheduled for the
pants variously reporting increases in house prices,
second half of the year were likely to reduce household
sales, and building permits; low inventories of homes
income and spending. A report on the favorable fiscal
on the market; and rising demand for construction
condition of one state was indicative of the improve-
supplies. The improvement in the housing sector was
ment in the budget situation at state and local govern-
seen as supporting the broader economy through relat-
ments.
ed spending and employment, with rising real estate
values boosting household wealth, confidence, and ac- Participants generally agreed that labor market condi-
cess to credit. Participants generally were optimistic tions had continued to improve, on balance, in recent
that the recovery in housing activity would be sus- months; many saw the cumulative decline in the unem-
tained, although a couple of participants were con- ployment rate and gains in nonfarm payrolls over the
cerned that the run-up in mortgage rates in recent past nine months as considerable. Reflecting these de-
weeks might begin to crimp demand. However, the velopments, participants’ forecasts for the unemploy-
recent increase in mortgage purchase applications was ment rate at this meeting were lower than those pre-
seen as suggesting that the demand for housing was pared for the September 2012 meeting. Among the
being driven by factors beyond low mortgage rates. encouraging aspects of labor market developments
since then were the step-up in average monthly gains in
Reports on business spending were mixed. A number
private employment, the breadth of job gains across
of participants continued to hear that businesses were
industries, the decline in layoffs, and a rise in voluntary
limiting their capital spending to projects intended to
quits in some industries. However, some participants
enhance productivity and that they remained reluctant
discussed a number of indicators that suggested that
to invest to expand capacity, or to step up hiring. Un-
the improvement in broad labor market conditions was
certainties about regulatory issues and fiscal policies as
less than might be implied by the decline in the unem-
well as weak economic activity abroad were cited as
ployment rate alone. Some pointed out that the rate of
factors weighing on business decisionmaking. Some
hiring still fell short of the pace that they saw as con-
businesses, particularly smaller firms, were again re-
sistent with more-noticeable progress in labor market
ported to be concerned about the implications of new
conditions, that a portion of the improvement in pay-
health-care regulations for their labor costs. Nonethe-
roll employment since the September meeting was due
less, a few participants reported that their business con-
to data revisions, or that there were no signs of an in-
tacts expressed somewhat greater confidence in the
crease in wage pressures. Others expressed concern
economic outlook or reported plans to expand capaci-
about the still-elevated level of long-duration jobless-

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
ness and the weakness in labor force participation. A number of participants offered views on risks to fi-
Most participants still saw slack remaining in the labor nancial stability. A couple of participants expressed
market, although they differed on the extent to which concerns that some financial institutions might not be
the progress to date had reduced that slack and how well positioned to weather a rapid run-up in interest
confident they were about future labor market im- rates. Two others emphasized the importance of bol-
provement. stering the resilience of money market funds against
disorderly outflows. And a few stated their view that a
Inflation was low in the months prior to the meeting,
prolonged period of low interest rates would encourage
with the trends in all broad measures remaining below
investors to take on excessive credit or interest rate risk
the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective. Sever-
and would distort some asset prices. However, others
al transitory factors, including a one-time reduction in
suggested that the recent rise in rates might have re-
Medicare costs, contributed to the recent very low in-
duced such incentives. While market volatility had in-
flation readings. In addition, energy prices declined,
creased of late, it was noted that the rise in measured
and nonfuel commodity prices were soft. Over the
volatility, while noticeable, occurred from a low level,
past year, both core and overall consumer price infla-
and that a broad index of financial stress remained be-
tion trended lower; participants cited various alternative
low average. One participant felt that the Committee
measures of consumer price inflation, including the
should explore ways to calibrate the magnitude of the
trimmed mean PCE and CPI as well as the sticky price
risks to financial stability so that those considerations
CPI, that suggested that the slowing was broad based.
could be more fully incorporated into deliberations on
Market-based measures of inflation expectations de-
monetary policy.
creased over the intermeeting period but remained
within their ranges over the past few years. Most par- Participants discussed how best to communicate the
ticipants expected inflation to begin to move up over Committee’s approach to decisions about its asset pur-
the coming year as economic activity strengthened, but chase program and how to reduce uncertainty about
many anticipated that it would remain below the how the Committee might adjust its purchases in re-
Committee’s 2 percent objective for some time. One sponse to economic developments. Importantly, par-
participant expressed concern about the risk of a more ticipants wanted to emphasize that the pace, composi-
rapid rise in inflation over the medium term, given the tion, and extent of asset purchases would continue to
highly accommodative stance of monetary policy. In be dependent on the Committee’s assessment of the
contrast, many others worried about the low level of implications of incoming information for the economic
inflation, and a number indicated that they would be outlook, as well as the cumulative progress toward the
watching closely for signs that the shift down in infla- Committee’s economic objectives since the institution
tion might persist or that inflation expectations were of the program last September. The discussion cen-
persistently moving lower. tered on the possibility of providing a rough descrip-
tion of the path for asset purchases that the Committee
In their discussion of financial market developments
would anticipate implementing if economic conditions
over the intermeeting period, participants weighed the
evolved in a manner broadly consistent with the out-
extent to which the rise in market interest rates and
comes the Committee saw as most likely. Several par-
increase in volatility reflected a reassessment of market
ticipants pointed to the challenge of making it clear that
participants’ expectations for monetary policy and the
policymakers necessarily weigh a broad range of eco-
extent to which it reflected growing confidence about
nomic variables and longer-run economic trends in
the economic outlook. It was noted that corporate
assessing the outlook. As an alternative, some suggest-
credit spreads had not widened substantially and that
ed providing forward guidance about asset purchases
the stock market had posted further gains, suggesting
based on numerical values for one or more economic
that the higher rates reflected, at least in part, increasing
variables, broadly akin to the Committee’s guidance
confidence that moderate economic growth would be
regarding its target for the federal funds rate, arguing
sustained. Several participants worried that higher
that such guidance would be more effective in reducing
mortgage rates and bond yields could slow the recovery
uncertainty and communicating the conditionality of
in the housing market and restrain business expansion.
policy. However, participants also noted possible dis-
However, some others commented that any adverse
advantages of such an approach, including that such
effects of the increase in rates on financial conditions
forward guidance might inappropriately constrain the
more broadly appeared to be limited.
Committee’s decisionmaking, or that it might prove

--- Page 9 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_8_–_1_9,_ 2_0_1_3_________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
difficult to communicate to investors and the general it becomes appropriate to increase the target for the
public. federal funds rate.
Since the September meeting, some participants had Committee Policy Action
become more confident of sustained improvement in Committee members viewed the information received
the outlook for the labor market and so thought that a over the intermeeting period as suggesting that eco-
downward adjustment in asset purchases had or would nomic activity had expanded at a moderate pace. La-
likely soon become appropriate; they saw a need to bor market conditions showed further improvement in
clearly communicate an intention to lower the pace of recent months, on balance, but the unemployment rate
purchases before long. However, to some other partic- remained elevated. Household spending and business
ipants, this approach appeared likely to limit the Com- fixed investment advanced, and the housing sector
mittee’s flexibility in adjusting asset purchases in re- strengthened further, but fiscal policy was restraining
sponse to changes in economic conditions, which they economic growth. The Committee expected that, with
viewed as a key element in the design of the purchase appropriate policy accommodation, economic growth
program. Others were concerned that stating an inten- would proceed at a moderate pace and result in a grad-
tion to slow the pace of asset purchases, even if the ual decline in the unemployment rate toward levels
intention were conditional on the economy developing consistent with its dual mandate. With economic activ-
about in line with the Committee’s expectations, might ity and employment continuing to grow at a moderate
be misinterpreted as signaling an end to the addition of pace despite tighter fiscal policy, and with global finan-
policy accommodation or even be seen as the initial cial conditions less strained, members generally saw the
step toward exit from the Committee’s highly accom- downside risks to the outlook for the economy and the
modative policy stance. It was suggested that any labor market as having diminished since the fall. Infla-
statement about asset purchases make clear that deci- tion was running below the Committee’s longer-run
sions concerning the pace of purchases are distinct objective, partly reflecting transitory influences, but
from decisions concerning the federal funds rate. longer-run inflation expectations were stable, and the
Committee anticipated that inflation over the medium
Participants generally agreed that the Committee
term would move closer to its 2 percent objective.
should provide additional clarity about its asset pur-
chase program relatively soon. A number thought that In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
the postmeeting statement might be the appropriate ahead, all members but one judged that the outlook for
vehicle for providing additional information on the economic activity and inflation warranted the continua-
Committee’s thinking. However, some saw potential tion of the Committee’s current highly accommodative
difficulties in being able to convey succinctly the de- stance of monetary policy in order to foster a stronger
sired information in the postmeeting statement. Oth- economic recovery and sustained improvement in labor
ers noted the need to ensure that any new statement market conditions in a context of price stability. In the
language intended to provide more information about view of one member, the improvement in the outlook
the asset purchase program be clearly integrated with for the labor market warranted a more deliberate
communication about the Committee’s other policy statement from the Committee that asset purchases
tools. At the conclusion of the discussion, most partic- would be reduced in the very near future. At the con-
ipants thought that the Chairman, during his postmeet- clusion of its discussion, the Committee decided to
ing press conference, should describe a likely path for continue adding policy accommodation by purchasing
asset purchases in coming quarters that was conditional additional MBS at a pace of $40 billion per month and
on economic outcomes broadly in line with the Com- longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of $45 billion
mittee’s expectations. In addition, he would make clear per month and to maintain its existing reinvestment
that decisions about asset purchases and other policy policies. In addition, the Committee reaffirmed its in-
tools would continue to be dependent on the Commit- tention to keep the target federal funds rate at 0 to
tee’s ongoing assessment of the economic outlook. He ¼ percent and retained its forward guidance that it an-
would also draw the distinction between the asset pur- ticipates that this exceptionally low range for the feder-
chase program and the forward guidance regarding the al funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the
target for the federal funds rate, noting that the Com- unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent, infla-
mittee anticipates that there will be a considerable time tion between one and two years ahead is projected to
between the end of asset purchases and the time when be no more than a half percentage point above the
Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
term inflation expectations continue to be well an- of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
chored. cute transactions in the System Account in accordance
with the following domestic policy directive:
Regarding the outlook for policy, members agreed that
monetary policy in coming quarters would depend on
“Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
the evolution of the economic outlook and progress
Federal Open Market Committee seeks
toward the Committee’s longer-run objectives of max-
monetary and financial conditions that will
imum employment and inflation of 2 percent. While
foster maximum employment and price sta-
recognizing the improvement in a number of indicators
bility. In particular, the Committee seeks
of economic activity and labor market conditions since
conditions in reserve markets consistent
the fall, many members indicated that further im-
with federal funds trading in a range from
provement in the outlook for the labor market would
0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the
be required before it would be appropriate to slow the
Desk to undertake open market operations
pace of asset purchases. Some added that they would,
as necessary to maintain such conditions.
as well, need to see more evidence that the projected
The Desk is directed to continue purchasing
acceleration in economic activity would occur, before
longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of
reducing the pace of asset purchases. For one member,
about $45 billion per month and to contin-
such a decision would also depend importantly on evi-
ue purchasing agency mortgage-backed se-
dence that inflation was moving back toward the
curities at a pace of about $40 billion per
Committee’s 2 percent objective; that member urged
month. The Committee also directs the
the Committee to modify its postmeeting statement to
Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon
say explicitly that the Committee will act to move infla-
swap transactions as necessary to facilitate
tion back toward its goal. A couple of other members
settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency
also worried that the downside risks to inflation had
mortgage-backed securities transactions.
increased, with one of them suggesting that the state-
The Committee directs the Desk to main-
ment more explicitly reflect this increased risk. How-
tain its policy of rolling over maturing
ever, several members judged that a reduction in asset
Treasury securities into new issues and its
purchases would likely soon be warranted, in light of
policy of reinvesting principal payments on
the cumulative decline in unemployment since the Sep-
all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed
tember meeting and ongoing increases in private pay-
securities in agency mortgage-backed securi-
rolls, which had increased their confidence in the out-
ties. The System Open Market Account
look for sustained improvement in labor market condi-
Manager and the Secretary will keep the
tions. Two of these members also indicated that the
Committee informed of ongoing develop-
Committee should begin curtailing its purchases rela-
ments regarding the System’s balance sheet
tively soon in order to prevent the potential negative
that could affect the attainment over time
consequences of the program from exceeding its antic-
of the Committee’s objectives of maximum
ipated benefits. Another member pointed out that if
employment and price stability.”
the program were ended because of concerns about
such consequences, the Committee would need to ex- The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
plore other options for providing appropriate monetary low to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
accommodation. Many members indicated that deci-
“Information received since the Federal
sions about the pace and composition of asset purchas-
Open Market Committee met in May sug-
es were distinct from decisions about the appropriate
gests that economic activity has been ex-
level of the federal funds rate, which would continue to
panding at a moderate pace. Labor market
be guided by the thresholds in the Committee’s state-
conditions have shown further improve-
ment. In general, members continued to anticipate that
ment in recent months, on balance, but the
maintaining the current exceptionally low level of the
unemployment rate remains elevated.
federal funds rate was likely to remain appropriate for a
Household spending and business fixed in-
considerable period after asset purchases are conclud-
vestment advanced, and the housing sector
ed.
has strengthened further, but fiscal policy is
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee restraining economic growth. Partly reflect-
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank ing transitory influences, inflation has been

--- Page 11 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_8_–_1_9,_ 2_0_1_3________________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
running below the Committee’s longer-run the size, pace, and composition of its asset
objective, but longer-term inflation expecta- purchases, the Committee will continue to
tions have remained stable. take appropriate account of the likely effica-
cy and costs of such purchases as well as the
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
extent of progress toward its economic ob-
Committee seeks to foster maximum em-
jectives.
ployment and price stability. The Commit-
tee expects that, with appropriate policy ac- To support continued progress toward max-
commodation, economic growth will pro- imum employment and price stability, the
ceed at a moderate pace and the unem- Committee expects that a highly accommo-
ployment rate will gradually decline toward dative stance of monetary policy will remain
levels the Committee judges consistent with appropriate for a considerable time after the
its dual mandate. The Committee sees the asset purchase program ends and the eco-
downside risks to the outlook for the econ- nomic recovery strengthens. In particular,
omy and the labor market as having dimin- the Committee decided to keep the target
ished since the fall. The Committee also range for the federal funds rate at 0 to
anticipates that inflation over the medium ¼ percent and currently anticipates that this
term likely will run at or below its 2 percent exceptionally low range for the federal
objective. funds rate will be appropriate at least as
long as the unemployment rate remains
To support a stronger economic recovery
above 6½ percent, inflation between one
and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
and two years ahead is projected to be no
is at the rate most consistent with its dual
more than a half percentage point above the
mandate, the Committee decided to contin-
Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and
ue purchasing additional agency mortgage-
longer-term inflation expectations continue
backed securities at a pace of $40 billion per
to be well anchored. In determining how
month and longer-term Treasury securities
long to maintain a highly accommodative
at a pace of $45 billion per month. The
stance of monetary policy, the Committee
Committee is maintaining its existing policy
will also consider other information, includ-
of reinvesting principal payments from its
ing additional measures of labor market
holdings of agency debt and agency mort-
conditions, indicators of inflation pressures
gage-backed securities in agency mortgage-
and inflation expectations, and readings on
backed securities and of rolling over matur-
financial developments. When the Commit-
ing Treasury securities at auction. Taken
tee decides to begin to remove policy ac-
together, these actions should maintain
commodation, it will take a balanced ap-
downward pressure on longer-term interest
proach consistent with its longer-run goals
rates, support mortgage markets, and help
of maximum employment and inflation of
to make broader financial conditions more
2 percent.”
accommodative.
Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C.
The Committee will closely monitor incom-
Dudley, Elizabeth Duke, Charles L. Evans, Jerome H.
ing information on economic and financial
Powell, Sarah Bloom Raskin, Eric Rosengren, Jeremy
developments in coming months. The
C. Stein, Daniel K. Tarullo, and Janet L. Yellen.
Committee will continue its purchases of
Treasury and agency mortgage-backed secu- Voting against this action: James Bullard and Esther
rities, and employ its other policy tools as L. George.
appropriate, until the outlook for the labor
Mr. Bullard dissented because he believed that, in light
market has improved substantially in a con-
of recent low readings on inflation, the Committee
text of price stability. The Committee is
should signal more strongly its willingness to defend its
prepared to increase or reduce the pace of
goal of 2 percent inflation. He pointed out that infla-
its purchases to maintain appropriate policy
tion had trended down since the beginning of 2012 and
accommodation as the outlook for the labor
was now well below target. Going forward, he viewed
market or inflation changes. In determining
it as particularly important for the Committee to moni-

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
tor price developments closely and to adapt its policy in 2013. The meeting adjourned at 11:25 a.m. on June 19,
response to incoming economic information. 2013.
Ms. George dissented because she viewed the ongoing Notation Vote
improvement in labor market conditions and in the By notation vote completed on May 21, 2013, the
outlook as warranting a deliberate statement from the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
Committee at this meeting that the pace of its asset FOMC meeting held on April 30–May 1, 2013.
purchases would be reduced in the very near future.
She continued to have concerns about maintaining ag-
gressive monetary stimulus in the face of a growing
economy and pointed to the potential for financial im-
balances to emerge as a result of the high level of mon-
etary accommodation. _____________________________
William B. English
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
Secretary
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, July 30–31,

--- Page 13 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the June 18–19, 2013, Federal Overall, FOMC participants projected that, under ap-
Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, meeting propriate monetary policy, the pace of economic re-
participants—the 7 members of the Board of Gover- covery would gradually pick up over the 2013–15 peri-
nors and the 12 presidents of the Federal Reserve od, and inflation would move up from recent very low
Banks, all of whom participate in the deliberations of readings but remain subdued (table 1 and figure 1).
the FOMC—submitted their assessments of real out- Almost all of the participants projected that inflation,
put growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and the as measured by the annual change in the price index for
target federal funds rate for each year from 2013 personal consumption expenditures (PCE), would be
through 2015 and over the longer run.¹ Each partici- running at or a little below the Committee’s 2 percent
pant’s assessment was based on information available objective in 2015.
at the time of the meeting plus his or her judgment of
As shown in figure 2, most participants judged that
appropriate monetary policy and assumptions about the
highly accommodative monetary policy was likely to be
factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The
warranted over the next few years to support continued
longer-run projections represent each participant’s
progress toward maximum employment and a gradual
judgment of the value to which each variable would be
return toward 2 percent inflation. Moreover, all partic-
expected to converge, over time, under appropriate
ipants but one judged that it would be appropriate to
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks
continue purchasing both agency mortgage-backed se-
to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is
curities (MBS) and longer-term Treasury securities at
defined as the future path of policy that each partici-
least until later this year.
pant deems most likely to foster outcomes for econom-
ic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her indi- A majority of participants saw the uncertainty associat-
vidual interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objectives ed with their outlook for economic growth and the
of maximum employment and stable prices. unemployment rate as similar to that of the past
20 years. An equal number of participants also indicat-
_______________________
ed that the risks to the outlook for real gross domestic
¹ Although President Pianalto was unable to attend the
product (GDP) growth and the unemployment rate
June 18–19, 2013, FOMC meeting, she submitted economic
were broadly balanced. Some participants, however,
projections.
continued to see downside risks to growth and upside
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, June 2013
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2013 2014 2015 Longer run 2013 2014 2015 Longer run
Change in real GDP . . . . . 2.3 to 2.6 3.0 to 3.5 2.9 to 3.6 2.3 to 2.5 2.0 to 2.6 2.2 to 3.6 2.3 to 3.8 2.0 to 3.0
March projection . . . . . 2.3 to 2.8 2.9 to 3.4 2.9 to 3.7 2.3 to 2.5 2.0 to 3.0 2.6 to 3.8 2.5 to 3.8 2.0 to 3.0
Unemployment rate . . . . . 7.2 to 7.3 6.5 to 6.8 5.8 to 6.2 5.2 to 6.0 6.9 to 7.5 6.2 to 6.9 5.7 to 6.4 5.0 to 6.0
March projection . . . . . 7.3 to 7.5 6.7 to 7.0 6.0 to 6.5 5.2 to 6.0 6.9 to 7.6 6.1 to 7.1 5.7 to 6.5 5.0 to 6.0
PCE inflation . . . . . . . . . . . 0.8 to 1.2 1.4 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 2.0 0.8 to 1.5 1.4 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.3 2.0
March projection . . . . . 1.3 to 1.7 1.5 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 2.0 1.3 to 2.0 1.4 to 2.1 1.6 to 2.6 2.0
Core PCE inflation3 . . . . . 1.2 to 1.3 1.5 to 1.8 1.7 to 2.0 1.1 to 1.5 1.5 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.3
March projection . . . . . 1.5 to 1.6 1.7 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.1 1.5 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.1 1.7 to 2.6
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the pre-
vious year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index
for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the aver-
age civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate
monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under ap-
propriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The March projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Fed-
eral Open Market Committee on March 19–20, 2013.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

--- Page 14 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure1. Centraltendenciesandrangesofeconomicprojections,2013–15andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
5
Central tendency of projections
4
Range of projections
3
2
1
+
Actual 0
-
1
2
3
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesofthevariablesare
annual.

--- Page 15 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_8_–_1_9_, _2_0_1_3______________P_a_g_e_ _3
Figure2. OverviewofFOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy
Number of participants
Appropriate timing of policy firming 14
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
3
2
1 1
1
2013 2014 2015 2016
Appropriate pace of policy firming Percent
Target federal funds rate at year end
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2013 2014 2015 Longer run
Note: Intheupperpanel,theheightofeachbardenotesthenumberofFOMCparticipantswhojudgethat,under
appropriatemonetarypolicy,thefirstincreaseinthetargetfederalfundsratefromitscurrentrangeof0to1/4percent
willoccurinthespecifiedcalendaryear. InMarch2013,thenumbersofFOMCparticipantswhojudgedthatthefirst
increase in the target federal funds rate would occur in 2013, 2014, 2015, and 2016 were, respectively, 1, 4, 13, and 1.
Inthelowerpanel,eachshadedcircleindicatesthevalue(roundedtothenearest1/4percentagepoint)ofanindividual
participant’sjudgmentoftheappropriatelevelofthetargetfederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryear
oroverthelongerrun.

--- Page 16 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
risks to unemployment. A majority of participants in- As shown in figures 3.A and 3.B, the distributions of
dicated that the uncertainty surrounding their projec- participants’ views regarding the likely outcomes for
tions for PCE inflation was similar to historical norms, real GDP growth and the unemployment rate were
and nearly all considered the risks to inflation to be relatively narrow for 2013. Their projections for eco-
either broadly balanced or weighted to the downside. nomic activity were more diverse for 2014 and 2015,
reflecting their individual assessments of appropriate
The Outlook for Economic Activity
monetary policy and its economic effects, the likely rate
Participants projected that, conditional on their indi-
of improvement in the housing sector and households’
vidual assumptions about appropriate monetary policy,
balance sheets, the domestic implications of foreign
the economy would grow at a faster pace in 2013 than
economic developments, the prospective path for U.S.
it had in 2012. They also generally judged that growth
fiscal policy, the extent of structural dislocations to the
would strengthen further in 2014 and 2015, in most
labor market, and a number of other factors. The dis-
cases to a rate above their estimates of the longer-run
persion of participants’ projections for 2015 and for the
rate of output growth. Most participants noted that the
longer run was little changed relative to March; there
high degree of monetary policy accommodation as-
was some reduction in the upper ends of the distribu-
sumed in their projections, continued improvement in
tions in 2013 and 2014 for both real GDP growth and
the housing sector and the accompanying rise in
the unemployment rate.
household net worth, and the absence of further fiscal
tightening should result in a pickup in growth; howev- The Outlook for Inflation
er, they pointed to the foreign economic outlook as an All participants marked down their projections for both
ongoing downside risk. PCE and core PCE inflation in 2013, reflecting the low
readings on inflation so far this year. Participants gen-
The central tendency of participants’ projections for
erally judged that the recent slowing in inflation partly
real GDP growth was 2.3 to 2.6 percent for 2013,
reflected transitory factors, and their projections for
3.0 to 3.5 percent for 2014, and 2.9 to 3.6 percent for
inflation under appropriate monetary policy over the
2015. Most participants noted that their projections
period 2014–15 were only a little lower than in March.
were little changed since March, with the downward
Participants projected that both headline and core infla-
revisions to growth in 2013 reflecting the somewhat
tion would move up but remain subdued, with nearly
slower-than-anticipated growth in the first half. The
all projecting that inflation would be equal to, or
central tendency for the longer-run rate of growth of
somewhat below, the FOMC’s longer-run objective of
real GDP was 2.3 to 2.5 percent, unchanged from
2 percent in each year. Specifically, the central tenden-
March.
cy of participants’ projections for overall inflation, as
Participants anticipated a gradual decline in the unem- measured by the growth in the PCE price index, moved
ployment rate over the forecast period; a large majority down to 0.8 to 1.2 percent in 2013 and was 1.4 to
projected that the unemployment rate would not reach 2.0 percent in 2014 and 1.6 to 2.0 percent in 2015. The
their estimates of its longer-run level before 2016. The central tendency of the forecasts for core inflation
central tendencies of participants’ forecasts for the un- shifted down slightly in 2013 and 2014, to 1.2 to
employment rate were 7.2 to 7.3 percent at the end of 1.3 percent and 1.5 to 1.8 percent, respectively; the cen-
2013, 6.5 to 6.8 percent at the end of 2014, and 5.8 to tral tendency in 2015 was little changed and broadly
6.2 percent at the end of 2015. These projections were similar to that of headline inflation. In discussing fac-
slightly lower than in March, with participants reacting tors likely to return inflation to near the Committee’s
to recent data indicating that the unemployment rate inflation objective of 2 percent, several participants
had declined by a little more than they had previously noted that the reversal of transitory factors currently
expected. The central tendency of participants’ esti- holding down inflation would cause inflation to move
mates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment up a little in the near term. In addition, many partici-
that would prevail under appropriate monetary policy pants viewed the combination of stable inflation expec-
and in the absence of further shocks to the economy tations and diminishing resource slack as likely to lead
was 5.2 to 6.0 percent, the same as in March. Most to a gradual pickup in inflation toward the Committee’s
participants projected that the unemployment rate longer-run objective.
would converge to their estimates of its longer-run
Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the diver-
normal rate in five or six years, while some judged that
sity of participants’ views about the outlook for infla-
less time would be needed.
tion. The range of participants’ projections for overall

--- Page 17 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_8_–_1_9_, _2_0_1_3______________P_a_g_e_ _5
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2013–15andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2013 20
June projections 18
March projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8
2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8
2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8
2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8
2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 18 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2013–15andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2013 20
June projections 18
March projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2 7. 4 7. 6
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2 7. 4 7. 6
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2 7. 4 7. 6
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5. 8 6. 0 6. 2 6. 4 6. 6 6. 8 7. 0 7. 2 7. 4 7. 6
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 19 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_8_–_1_9_, _2_0_1_3______________P_a_g_e_ _7
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2013–15andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2013 20
June projections 18
March projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2015 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2013–15
Number of participants
2013
20
June projections
March projections 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 1 1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3 2. 5
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2014
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 1 1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3 2. 5
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2015
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 1 1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3 2. 5
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_8_–_1_9_, _2_0_1_3______________P_a_g_e_ _9
and core inflation in 2013 shifted down, while those All participants saw the appropriate target for the fed-
ranges narrowed in 2014–15. The distributions for eral funds rate at the end of 2015 as still well below
core and overall inflation in 2015 remained concentrat- their assessments of its expected longer-run value. Es-
ed near the Committee’s longer-run objective, and all timates of the longer-run target federal funds rate
participants continued to project that overall inflation ranged from 3¼ to 4½ percent, reflecting the Commit-
would converge to the FOMC’s 2 percent goal over the tee’s inflation objective of 2 percent and participants’
longer run. individual judgments about the appropriate longer-run
level of the real federal funds rate in the absence of
Appropriate Monetary Policy
further shocks to the economy.
As indicated in figure 2, most participants judged that
exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate would Participants also described their views regarding the
remain appropriate for a couple of years. In particular, appropriate path of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.
14 participants thought that the first increase in the Given their respective economic outlooks, all partici-
target federal funds rate would not be warranted until pants but one judged that it would be appropriate to
sometime in 2015, and one judged that policy firming continue purchasing both agency MBS and longer-term
would likely not be appropriate until 2016. Four partic- Treasury securities. About half of these participants
ipants judged that an increase in the federal funds rate indicated that it likely would be appropriate to end as-
in 2013 or 2014 would be appropriate. set purchases late this year. Many other participants
anticipated that it likely would be appropriate to con-
All of the participants who judged that raising the fed-
tinue purchases into 2014. Several participants empha-
eral funds rate target would become appropriate in
sized that the asset purchase program was effective in
2015 also projected that the unemployment rate would
supporting the economic expansion, that the benefits
decline below 6½ percent during that year and that
continued to exceed the costs, or that continuing pur-
inflation would remain near or below 2 percent. In
chases would be necessary to achieve a substantial im-
addition, most of those participants also projected that
provement in the outlook for the labor market. A few
a sizable gap between the unemployment rate and the
participants, however, indicated that the Committee
longer-run normal level of the unemployment rate
could best foster its dual objectives and limit the poten-
would persist until 2015 or later. Three of the four
tial costs of the program by slowing, or stopping, its
participants who judged that policy firming should
purchases at the June meeting.
begin in 2013 or 2014 indicated that, in their judgment,
the Committee would need to act relatively soon in Key factors informing participants’ views of the appro-
order to keep inflation near the FOMC’s longer-run priate path for monetary policy included their judg-
objective of 2 percent and to keep longer-run inflation ments regarding the values of the unemployment rate
expectations well anchored. and other labor market indicators that would be con-
sistent with maximum employment; the extent to
Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’
which the economy fell short of maximum employ-
judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target
ment and the extent to which inflation was running
federal funds rate at the end of each calendar year from
below the Committee’s longer-term objective of 2 per-
2013 to 2015 and over the longer run. As previously
cent; and the implications of alternative policy paths for
noted, most participants judged that economic condi-
the likely extent of progress, over the medium-term, in
tions would warrant maintaining the current low level
returning employment and inflation to mandate-
of the federal funds rate at least until 2015. Among the
consistent levels. A couple of participants noted that
four participants who saw the federal funds rate leaving
persistent headwinds and somewhat slower productivi-
the effective lower bound earlier, their projections for
ty growth since the end of the recession made their
the federal funds rate at the end of 2014 ranged from
assessments of the longer-run normal level of the fed-
1 to 1½ percent; however, the median for all partici-
eral funds rate, and thus of the appropriate path for the
pants remained at the effective lower bound. Views on
federal funds rate, lower than would otherwise be the
the appropriate level of the federal funds rate at the end
case.
of 2015 varied, with the range of participants’ projec-
tions a bit narrower than in the March Summary of Uncertainty and Risks
Economic Projections and the median value unchanged A majority of participants reported that they saw the
at 1 percent. levels of uncertainty about their projections for real
GDP growth and unemployment as broadly similar to

--- Page 22 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthetargetfederalfundsrate,2013–15andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2013
June projections
20
March projections
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2014
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2015
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62
Percent range
Note: The target federal funds rate is measured as the level of the target rate at the end of the calendar year or
inthelongerrun.

--- Page 23 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_8_–_1_9_, _2_0_1_3_____________P__ag_e_ _1_1
the norm during the previous 20 years, with the re-
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
mainder generally indicating that they saw higher uncer- Percentage points
tainty about these economic outcomes (figure 4).2 In Variable 2013 2014 2015
March, a similar number of participants had seen the Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . . ±1.0 ±1.6 ±1.8
level of uncertainty about real GDP growth and the
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . . . ±0.4 ±1.2 ±1.8
unemployment rate as above average. A majority of
Total consumer prices2 . . . . . . . ±0.8 ±1.0 ±1.0
participants continued to judge that the risks to their
forecasts of real GDP growth and unemployment were
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root
mean squared error of projections for 1993 through 2012 that were
broadly balanced, with the remainder generally indicat- released in the summer by various private and government forecasters.
ing that they saw the risks to their forecasts for real As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assump-
tions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for
GDP growth as weighted to the downside and for un-
real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied
employment as weighted to the upside. The main fac- by the average size of projection errors made in the past. Further infor-
tors cited as contributing to the uncertainty and balance mation is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the
Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting
of risks about economic outcomes were the limits on
Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washing-
the ability of monetary policy to offset the effects of ton: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).
1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
adverse shocks when short-term interest rates are near
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
their effective lower bound, as well as challenges with that has been most widely used in government and private economic
forecasting the path of fiscal policy and economic and forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.
financial developments abroad.
inflation expectations and, hence, the relatively low
Participants reported little change in their assessments
level of uncertainty. Four participants saw the risks to
of the level of uncertainty and the balance of risks
their inflation forecasts as tilted to the downside, re-
around their forecasts for overall PCE inflation and
flecting, for example, risks of disinflation that could
core inflation. Fourteen participants judged the levels
arise from adverse shocks to the economy that policy
of uncertainty associated with their forecasts for those
would have limited scope to offset in the current envi-
inflation measures to be broadly similar to, or lower
ronment. Conversely, one participant saw the risks to
than, historical norms; the same number saw the risks
inflation as weighted to the upside, citing the present
to those projections as broadly balanced. A few partic-
highly accommodative stance of monetary policy and
ipants highlighted the likely role played by the Commit-
concerns about the Committee’s ability to shift to a less
tee’s adoption of a 2 percent inflation goal or its com-
accommodative policy stance when it becomes appro-
mitment to maintaining accommodative monetary poli-
priate to do so.
cy as contributing to the recent stability of longer-term
2 Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for
the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total
consumer price inflation over the period from 1993 through
2012. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncer-
tainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertain-
ty in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used
to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’
projections.

--- Page 24 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4. Uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth 20 Risks to GDP growth 20
June projections 18 June projections 18
March projections 16 March projections 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate 20 Risks to the unemployment rate 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation 20 Risks to PCE inflation 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation 20 Risks to core PCE inflation 20
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”Defini-
tionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 25 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_8_–_1_9_, _2_0_1_3_____________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by 4.0 percent in the current year, 1.4 to 4.6 per-
the members of the Board of Governors and cent in the second year, and 1.2 to 4.8 percent
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks in the third year. The corresponding 70 percent
inform discussions of monetary policy among confidence intervals for overall inflation would
policymakers and can aid public understand- be 1.2 to 2.8 percent in the current year and
ing of the basis for policy actions. Consider- 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second and third years.
able uncertainty attends these projections, Because current conditions may differ
however. The economic and statistical models from those that prevailed, on average, over his-
and relationships used to help produce eco- tory, participants provide judgments as to
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de- whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
scriptions of the real world, and the future jections of each variable is greater than, smaller
path of the economy can be affected by myr- than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
iad unforeseen developments and events. forecast uncertainty in the past, as shown in
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
participants consider not only what appears to to whether the risks to their projections are
be the most likely economic outcome as em- weighted to the upside, are weighted to the
bodied in their projections, but also the range downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of participants judge whether each variable is
their occurring, and the potential costs to the more likely to be above or below their projec-
economy should they occur. tions of the most likely outcome. These judg-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical ments about the uncertainty and the risks at-
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including tending each participant’s projections are dis-
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports tinct from the diversity of participants’ views
and those prepared by the Federal Reserve about the most likely outcomes. Forecast un-
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the certainty is concerned with the risks associated
Federal Open Market Committee. The pro- with a particular projection rather than with
jection error ranges shown in the table il- divergences across a number of different pro-
lustrate the considerable uncertainty associat- jections.
ed with economic forecasts. For example, As with real activity and inflation, the out-
suppose a participant projects that real gross look for the future path of the federal funds
domestic product (GDP) and total consumer rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This
prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, re- uncertainty arises primarily because each partic-
spectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the ipant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of
uncertainty attending those projections is simi- monetary policy depends importantly on the
lar to that experienced in the past and the risks evolution of real activity and inflation over
around the projections are broadly balanced, time. If economic conditions evolve in an un-
the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a expected manner, then assessments of the ap-
probability of about 70 percent that actual propriate setting of the federal funds rate
GDP would expand within a range of 2.0 to would change from that point forward.

# Tables

## Page_13_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |      |      |            |      |      |      |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|------------|------|------|------|
| 2013                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | 2014 | 2015 | Longer run | 2013 | 2014 | 2015 |
| 2.3 to 2.6 3.0 to 3.5 2.9 to 3.6 2.3 to 2.5
2.3 to 2.8 2.9 to 3.4 2.9 to 3.7 2.3 to 2.5
7.2 to 7.3 6.5 to 6.8 5.8 to 6.2 5.2 to 6.0
7.3 to 7.5 6.7 to 7.0 6.0 to 6.5 5.2 to 6.0
0.8 to 1.2 1.4 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 2.0
1.3 to 1.7 1.5 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 2.0
1.2 to 1.3 1.5 to 1.8 1.7 to 2.0
1.5 to 1.6 1.7 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.1 |      |      |            |      |      |      |