# 20160316_tealbook.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:45:35*
*Pages: 57, Tables: 2*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that
material was received on a confidential basis. Redacted material is indicated by
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content. All redacted
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of
Information Act.
Content last modified 01/14/2022.

--- Page 2 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR)
Report to the FOMC
on Economic Conditions
and Monetary Policy
Book B
Monetary Policy:
Strategies and Alternatives
March 10, 2016
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
by the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

--- Page 3 ---

Authorized for Public Release
(This page is intentionally blank.)

--- Page 4 ---

Monetary Policy Strategies
The top panel of the first exhibit, “Policy Rules and the Staff Projection,”
provides near-term prescriptions for the federal funds rate from four policy rules: the
Taylor (1993) rule, the Taylor (1999) rule, an inertial version of the Taylor (1999) rule,
and a first-difference rule.1 These prescriptions take as given the staff’s baseline
projections for real activity and inflation in the near term, shown in the middle panels.
The Taylor (1993) and Taylor (1999) rules call for sizable adjustments in the policy rate
to values of about 2¾ percent by the third quarter of 2016, while the inertial Taylor
(1999) rule, which places a considerable weight on keeping the federal funds rate close to
its previous quarterly value, calls for raising the policy rate to just under 1¼ percent over
the same period. The first-difference rule prescribes more moderate increases in the level
of the federal funds rate to just above the current target range, as it also places
considerable weight on the lagged federal funds rate. Reflecting the upward revision to
the projected path for inflation over 2016, the Taylor rules’ prescriptions are higher than
those reported in the January Tealbook. The first-difference rule is revised up only
slightly—calling for a policy rate by the third quarter of 2016 that is similar to the one
computed using the January Tealbook outlook—because its forward-looking nature
means that it is less sensitive to this revision in the near-term outlook for inflation.
The bottom panel of the first exhibit reports the estimate of a Tealbook-consistent,
medium-term notion of the equilibrium real federal funds rate that is generated using the
FRB/US model. This Tealbook-consistent FRB/US r* is an estimate of the real federal
funds rate that, if maintained over a 12-quarter period, would close the output gap in the
final quarter of that period. The current estimate of r*, at 1.33 percent, is almost
unchanged from the estimate derived from the staff’s outlook in January. The panel also
reports the average of the real federal funds rate in the Tealbook baseline projection for
the same 12-quarter period used to compute r*.2 This average is 0.41 percent,
1 The appendix to this section provides details on each of the four rules, and also describes the
nominal income targeting rule that is used in the special exhibit.
2 While r* and the average projected real federal funds rate are calculated over the same
12-quarter period, they need not be associated with the same macroeconomic outcomes even when their
values are identical. The reason is that, in the r* simulations, the real federal funds rate is held constant
over the entire 12-quarter period, whereas in the Tealbook baseline, the real federal funds rate can vary
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 1 of 54

--- Page 5 ---

Policy Rules and the Staff Projection
Near−Term Prescriptions of Selected Policy Rules1
(Percent)
2016:Q2 2016:Q3
Taylor (1993) Rule 2.65 2.67
Previous Tealbook 2.26 2.37
Taylor (1999) Rule 2.71 2.82
Previous Tealbook 2.31 2.56
Inertial Taylor (1999) Rule 0.89 1.18
Previous Tealbook outlook 0.76 1.03
First−difference rule 0.54 0.55
Previous Tealbook outlook 0.40 0.50
****************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************
Key Elements of the Staff Projection
PCE Prices Excluding Food and Energy
GDP Gap
Percent Four−quarter average Percent
3 3.0
Current Tealbook
Previous Tealbook
2.5
2
2.0
1
1.5
0
1.0
−1
0.5
−2 0.0
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Real Federal Funds Rate Estimates2
(Percent)
Current Previous
Tealbook Tealbook
Tealbook−consistent FRB/US r* 1.33 1.30
Average projected real federal funds rate 0.41 0.43
Current real federal funds rate −1.00 −0.97
****************************************************************************************************************************************************************************************
1. For rules that have a lagged policy rate as a right−hand−side variable, the lines denoted "Previous Tealbook outlook"
report rule prescriptions based on the previous Tealbook‘s staff outlook, but jumping off from the realized value for the
policy rate last quarter.
2. The "Tealbook−consistent FRB/US r*" is the level of the real federal funds rate that, if maintained over a 12−quarter
period in the FRB/US model, sets the output gap equal to zero in the final quarter of that period. The "current real federal
funds rate" is the difference between the federal funds rate and the trailing four−quarter change in core PCE. The "average
projected real federal funds rate" is the average of the real federal funds rate under the Tealbook baseline projection
calculated over the same 12−quarter period as theTealbook FRB/US r*.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 2 of 54

--- Page 6 ---

about 1 percentage point below the estimate of r*. The panel further reports a measure of
the current real federal funds rate which, at –1 percent, is little changed from the January
Tealbook.3
The second exhibit, “Policy Rule Simulations,” reports dynamic simulations of
the FRB/US model under the Taylor (1993) rule, the Taylor (1999) rule, and a first-
difference rule. These simulations reflect the endogenous responses of inflation and the
output gap when the federal funds rate follows the paths implied by the different policy
rules.4 The results for each rule presented in these and subsequent simulations depend
importantly on the assumptions that policymakers will adhere to the rule in the future and
that market participants as well as price and wage setters fully understand the policy rule
that will be pursued and its implications for real activity and inflation.
The second exhibit also displays the implications of following the baseline
monetary policy assumptions in the current staff forecast. The federal funds rate is
assumed to follow the prescriptions of the inertial version of the Taylor (1999) rule. The
nominal federal funds rate increases about 25 basis points per quarter for the next three
years, reaching about 3¼ percent by the end of 2018. The pace of tightening
subsequently slows, and the federal funds rate peaks at around 4 percent in 2021—
consistent with the higher projected level of resource utilization around that time—before
eventually returning to its longer-run normal level of 3¼ percent.
The Taylor (1993) and Taylor (1999) rules call for an immediate sharp tightening
and produce paths for the real federal funds rate that lie significantly above the Tealbook
baseline path over the next few years. The sharp tightening mostly reflects these rules’
intercept terms, which are consistent with an equilibrium longer-run real federal funds
rate of 1¼ percent. These rules lead to higher trajectories of the unemployment rate
relative to its path under the baseline projection through at least the end of 2019. The
Taylor (1999) rule prescribes somewhat higher policy rates than the Taylor (1993) rule
over the period shown because it places more weight on the output gap. As a
over time. Distinct paths of real short-term rates can, in turn, generate different paths for inflation and
economic activity, even if they have the same 12-quarter average.
3 The current real federal funds rate is constructed as the difference between the midpoint of the
prevailing target range for the federal funds rate and the trailing four-quarter change in the core PCE price
index.
4 Because of these endogenous responses, prescriptions from the dynamic simulations can differ
from those shown in the top panel of the first exhibit.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 3 of 54

--- Page 7 ---

Policy Rule Simulations
Nominal Federal Funds Rate Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
6 6.0
Taylor (1993) rule
Staff's estimate of the natural rate
Taylor (1999) rule
5
First−difference rule
Tealbook baseline
4
5.5
3
2
5.0
1
0
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
4.5
Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent
3
4.0
2
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
1
PCE Inflation
0 Four−quarter average Percent
3.0
−1
2.5
−2
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
2.0
Real 10−year Treasury Yield
Percent
3
1.5
2 1.0
0.5
1
0.0
0
−0.5
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Note: The policy rule simulations in this exhibit are based on rules that respond to core inflation. This choice of rule
specification was made in light of the tendency for current and near−term core inflation rates to outperform headline
inflation rates as predictors of the medium−term behavior of headline inflation.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 4 of 54

--- Page 8 ---

consequence, the Taylor (1999) rule also generates a higher trajectory of the
unemployment rate and a slightly lower trajectory of inflation than the Taylor (1993)
rule.
In contrast to the Taylor-type rules, the first-difference rule prescribes a pace of
increase in the federal funds rate that is similar to the Tealbook baseline through 2018.
At that point, the federal funds rate levels off under the first-difference rule, whereas it
keeps rising for a time under the Tealbook baseline. This divergence occurs because the
first-difference rule, which responds to the expected change in the output gap rather than
to its level, reacts to the slower pace of economic growth projected late in the decade.
The lower path of the federal funds rate in the medium run under the first-difference rule,
in conjunction with expectations of higher price and wage inflation in the future, leads to
lower long-term real rates and thus to higher levels of resource utilization and inflation in
the short run. The first-difference rule generates outcomes for the unemployment rate
over the forecast period that are markedly below the staff’s estimate of the natural rate
and the unemployment rate paths generated under the other policy rules. Relative to the
other simple policy rules, under this rule inflation runs a bit closer to the Committee’s
2 percent longer-run inflation objective over the next few years before overshooting the
target by a modest margin.
The third exhibit, “Optimal Control Policy under Commitment,” compares
optimal control simulations for this Tealbook’s outlook with those reported in January.
Policymakers are assumed to place equal weights on keeping headline PCE inflation
close to the Committee’s 2 percent goal, on keeping the unemployment rate close to the
staff’s estimate of the natural rate of unemployment, and on minimizing changes in the
federal funds rate. The concept of optimal control that is employed here corresponds to a
commitment policy under which the plans that policymakers make today are assumed to
constrain future policy choices.5
The optimal control path for the real federal funds rate is significantly higher than
the path in the Tealbook outlook. In the current baseline projection, unemployment falls
well below the staff’s estimate of the natural rate over the next several years. Under the
5 The results for optimal control policy under discretion (in which policymakers cannot credibly
commit to carrying out a plan involving policy choices that would be suboptimal at the time that these
choices have to be implemented) are similar.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 5 of 54

--- Page 9 ---

Optimal Control Policy under Commitment
Nominal Federal Funds Rate Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
6 6.0
Optimal control (current Tealbook)
Staff's estimate of the natural rate
Optimal control (previous Tealbook)
5
Tealbook baseline
4
5.5
3
2
5.0
1
0
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
4.5
Real Federal Funds Rate
Percent
4.0
3
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
2
1
PCE Inflation
Four−quarter average Percent
0 3.0
−1
2.5
−2
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
2.0
Real 10−year Treasury Yield
Percent
3
1.5
2 1.0
0.5
1
0.0
0
−0.5
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 6 of 54

--- Page 10 ---

preferences embedded in the standard implementation of optimal control, policymakers
judge this undershooting of the natural rate to be costly, leading them to tighten policy
more than in the Tealbook baseline.6 Accordingly, the path for the real federal funds rate
is almost 1 percentage point higher, on average, than the Tealbook baseline path over the
period shown. The trajectory for the real 10-year Treasury yield is also higher. The
tighter policy under optimal control results in a path of the unemployment rate that runs
substantially closer to the staff’s estimate of the natural rate of unemployment; headline
PCE inflation is slightly lower than in the Tealbook baseline over the simulation period,
consistent with lower levels of resource utilization.
Relative to the optimal control path shown in the January Tealbook, the path for
the real federal funds rate is somewhat higher over the period shown but the real 10-year
Treasury yield is lower over the next few years, due to the revised outlook for term
premiums in the current Tealbook baseline projection. On net, this leads to a lower path
for the unemployment rate, although it is important to note that the staff’s downward
revision to the estimated natural rate of unemployment, as well as the upward revision to
near-term inflation, dampen the loss associated with this lower trajectory.
NOMINAL INCOME TARGETING RULES
With the federal funds rate near its effective lower bound (ELB) and lingering
concerns about the outlook for global economic growth, the Committee may wish to
examine possible ways to deliver additional monetary stimulus so as to insure against
adverse macroeconomic outcomes. This special exhibit uses the FRB/US model to
explore the implications of nominal income (NI) targeting rules—in which monetary
policy reacts to the gap between the level of actual nominal GDP and some
predetermined level—under both the staff’s baseline outlook and a recession scenario.
Even when the current policy rate is constrained by the ELB, NI targeting, which
promises to make up for cumulative past undershooting of nominal income growth, can
stimulate current economic activity by generating a lower expected path for the federal
funds rate.
6 In optimal control, the assumption that policymakers place less weight on the unemployment gap
falling below the staff’s estimate of the natural rate than posited under the standard case can result in
policymakers favoring a more accommodative policy than the Tealbook baseline. See the Monetary Policy
Strategies section of the October 2015 Tealbook B for an illustration of such a scenario.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 7 of 54

--- Page 11 ---

The amount of stimulus that NI targeting delivers depends importantly on the
target path for nominal income and, in particular, on the initial shortfall in nominal
income that policymakers seek to offset. To illustrate this property, we use an NI
targeting rule that targets a path for the level of nominal income anchored in 2015:Q4,
and thus effectively only promises to make up for current and future shortfalls in nominal
income. We compare macroeconomic outcomes under this rule with outcomes associated
with an NI targeting rule that seeks to make up for the cumulative shortfall in nominal
income growth since 2011:Q4, just before the Committee announced its 2 percent
inflation objective. Under both rules, target nominal income grows at a rate consistent
with the Committee’s 2 percent inflation target and the staff’s estimate of the path of real
potential output; as a result, the 2011:Q4 NI targeting rule inherits a nominal income
shortfall of about 2¾ percent that is due to inflation having run below the Committee’s
inflation objective.7
The panels on the left column of the fourth exhibit, “Nominal Income (NI)
Targeting,” show the effects of following the 2011:Q4 and 2015:Q4 NI targeting rules
conditional on the staff’s baseline outlook from the January 2016 Tealbook. The nominal
federal funds rate prescribed by the 2015:Q4 NI targeting rule (the green line) tracks the
Tealbook baseline (the black line) projection closely over the first two years of the
simulation, but is lower in later years. As a consequence, the path for the unemployment
rate is slightly lower under this NI targeting rule than under the baseline, but overall the
effects of the two policies are quite similar. The 2011:Q4 NI targeting rule (the blue line)
is significantly more accommodative because it inherits a large shortfall in nominal
income. Under this rule, the federal funds rate does not exceed 1 percent until the end of
2017, over a year later than under the 2015:Q4 NI targeting rule.8 As a result, the
unemployment rate undershoots the staff’s estimate of the natural rate by about
½ percentage point more than it does under the 2015:Q4 NI targeting rule. Moreover,
7 As detailed in the appendix, the nominal income gap can be expressed as the sum of the current
estimate of the output gap and the shortfall of the GDP deflator from the level it would have attained had it
increased at an annual rate of 2 percent since the date associated with the rule. Because the current output
gap is estimated to be 0.1 percent in 2016:Q2, the 2011:Q4 NI targeting rule is effectively only making up
for past misses in inflation.
8 An NI targeting rule with an anchor date of 2007:Q4, shown in past Tealbooks, would call for an
even more accommodative path for the policy rate.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 8 of 54

--- Page 12 ---

Nominal Income (NI) Targeting
January Baseline Recession Scenario
Nominal Federal Funds Rate Nominal Fed Funds Rate
Percent Percent
5 5
2011:Q4 NI targeting 2011:Q4 NI targeting
2015:Q4 NI targeting 2015:Q4 NI targeting
January Tealbook baseline 4 Recession scenario 4
3 3
2 2
1 1
0 0
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Unemployment Rate Unemployment Rate
Percent Percent
6.0 9
Staff's estimate of the natural rate Staff's estimate of the natural rate
5.5 8
5.0 7
4.5 6
4.0 5
3.5 4
3.0 3
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
PCE Inflation PCE Inflation
Four−quarter average Percent Four−quarter average Percent
3 3
2 2
1 1
0 0
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Note: In the right column, the recession scenario is the same one discussed in the FOMC memo titled "Unconventional
Policy Responses to a Recession" by Hess Chung and Edward Herbst, sent to the Committee on March 4, 2016.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 9 of 54

--- Page 13 ---

unlike the 2015:Q4 NI targeting rule, inflation overshoots the Committee’s 2 percent
objective persistently, albeit by a small amount.
Even NI targeting rules that place less emphasis on addressing past shortfalls in
nominal income may be effective at providing stimulus in the event of negative shocks
that push the federal funds rate back down to the ELB. The panels on the right column of
the exhibit show the same two NI targeting rules under a recession scenario that causes a
large shortfall in nominal income starting in 2016:Q2.9 Both NI targeting rules are
considerably more accommodative than the inertial Taylor (1999) rule used in the
construction of the baseline recession scenario: Under the NI rules, the federal funds rate
remains at the ELB longer than under the inertial Taylor rule, and rises more gradually
after departing from the ELB. Accordingly, the unemployment rate falls more rapidly
than in the baseline recession scenario. Inflation rises back to the Committee’s 2 percent
target more quickly and afterwards is above this target for an extended period of time,
with a somewhat greater degree of overshooting under the 2011:Q4 NI targeting rule.
Overall, both NI targeting rules prove effective at mitigating the persistently high
unemployment associated with the recession, though these outcomes are accompanied by
a sustained period with inflation slightly above 2 percent. Of course, the ability of NI
targeting rules to deliver such outcomes relies heavily on the assumptions that
policymakers can credibly commit to such policies and communicate them clearly, and
that private sector agents understand and anticipate their effects.
The final two exhibits, “Outcomes under Alternative Policies” and “Outcomes
under Alternative Policies, Quarterly,” tabulate the simulation results for key variables
under the policy rules described earlier.
9 This recession scenario is the same one discussed in the FOMC memo titled “Unconventional
Policy Responses to a Recession” by Hess Chung and Edward Herbst, sent to the Committee on March 4,
2016, and thus allows a direct comparison of the macroeconomic effects of the NI targeting rules to the
unconventional policies considered in that memo.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 10 of 54

--- Page 14 ---

Outcomes under Alternative Policies
(Percent change, annual rate, from end of preceding period except as noted)
2015
Measure and policy 2016 2017 2018 2019
H2
Real GDP
Extended Tealbook baseline¹ 1.6 2.2 2.2 2.0 1.8
Taylor (1993) 1.6 2.0 2.1 2.1 1.9
Taylor (1999) 1.6 2.0 2.0 2.0 1.9
Inertial Taylor (1999) 1.6 2.2 2.2 2.0 1.8
First-difference 1.6 2.3 2.5 2.2 2.0
Optimal control 1.6 2.0 1.7 1.7 1.7
Unemployment Rate²
Extended Tealbook baseline¹ 5.0 4.8 4.5 4.3 4.3
Taylor (1993) 5.0 4.9 4.6 4.4 4.3
Taylor (1999) 5.0 4.9 4.7 4.5 4.5
Inertial Taylor (1999) 5.0 4.8 4.5 4.3 4.3
First-difference 5.0 4.7 4.3 4.0 3.9
Optimal control 5.0 4.9 4.8 4.8 4.8
Total PCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline¹ 0.8 1.0 1.6 1.8 1.9
Taylor (1993) 0.8 1.1 1.7 1.9 2.0
Taylor (1999) 0.8 1.0 1.6 1.8 1.9
Inertial Taylor (1999) 0.8 1.0 1.6 1.8 1.9
First-difference 0.8 1.1 1.8 2.0 2.1
Optimal control 0.8 1.0 1.5 1.7 1.8
CorePCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline¹ 1.4 1.4 1.6 1.8 1.9
Taylor (1993) 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.9 2.0
Taylor (1999) 1.4 1.4 1.5 1.8 1.9
Inertial Taylor (1999) 1.4 1.4 1.6 1.8 1.9
First-difference 1.4 1.5 1.8 2.1 2.2
Optimal control 1.4 1.4 1.5 1.7 1.9
Nominal federal funds rate²
Extended Tealbook baseline¹ 0.2 1.4 2.3 3.2 3.7
Taylor (1993) 0.2 2.6 3.1 3.6 3.8
Taylor (1999) 0.2 2.7 3.2 3.9 4.1
Inertial Taylor (1999) 0.2 1.4 2.3 3.2 3.7
First-difference 0.2 1.2 2.3 3.1 3.3
Optimal control 0.2 2.0 3.5 4.5 5.0
1. Inthe Tealbook baseline, the federal funds rate follows the prescriptions of the inertial Taylor (1999) rule.
2. Percent,av erage for the final quarter of the period.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 11 of 54

--- Page 15 ---

Outcomes under Alternative Policies, Quarterly
(Four-quarter percent change, except as noted)
2016 2017
Measure and policy
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Real GDP
Extended Tealbook baseline¹ 2.2 1.8 1.9 2.2 2.2 2.3 2.2 2.2
Taylor (1993) 2.2 1.8 1.8 2.0 1.9 2.0 2.1 2.1
Taylor (1999) 2.2 1.8 1.8 2.0 1.9 1.9 1.9 2.0
Inertial Taylor (1999) 2.2 1.8 1.9 2.2 2.2 2.3 2.2 2.2
First-difference 2.2 1.8 1.9 2.3 2.4 2.5 2.5 2.5
Optimal control 2.2 1.8 1.8 2.0 1.8 1.8 1.7 1.7
Unemployment Rate²
Extended Tealbook baseline¹ 4.9 4.9 4.8 4.8 4.7 4.6 4.6 4.5
Taylor (1993) 4.9 4.9 4.9 4.9 4.8 4.8 4.7 4.6
Taylor (1999) 4.9 4.9 4.9 4.9 4.9 4.8 4.7 4.7
Inertial Taylor (1999) 4.9 4.9 4.8 4.8 4.7 4.6 4.5 4.5
First-difference 4.9 4.9 4.8 4.7 4.6 4.5 4.4 4.3
Optimal control 4.9 4.9 4.9 4.9 4.8 4.8 4.8 4.8
Total PCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline¹ 1.0 0.8 0.8 1.0 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.6
Taylor (1993) 1.0 0.8 0.8 1.1 1.5 1.6 1.6 1.7
Taylor (1999) 1.0 0.8 0.8 1.0 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.6
Inertial Taylor (1999) 1.0 0.8 0.8 1.0 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.6
First-difference 1.0 0.8 0.8 1.1 1.6 1.7 1.7 1.8
Optimal control 1.0 0.8 0.8 1.0 1.4 1.4 1.5 1.5
CorePCE prices
Extended Tealbook baseline¹ 1.6 1.5 1.5 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.5 1.6
Taylor (1993) 1.6 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.4 1.4 1.5 1.6
Taylor (1999) 1.6 1.5 1.5 1.4 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.5
Inertial Taylor (1999) 1.6 1.5 1.5 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.5 1.6
First-difference 1.6 1.6 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.8
Optimal control 1.6 1.5 1.5 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.4 1.5
Nominal federal funds rate²
Extended Tealbook baseline¹ 0.6 0.9 1.2 1.4 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
Taylor (1993) 0.6 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.5 2.6 2.8 3.1
Taylor (1999) 0.6 2.7 2.7 2.7 2.6 2.7 3.0 3.2
Inertial Taylor (1999) 0.6 0.9 1.2 1.4 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
First-difference 0.6 0.7 0.9 1.2 1.5 1.8 2.0 2.3
Optimal control 0.6 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.4 2.8 3.2 3.5
1. Inthe Tealbook baseline, the federal funds rate follows the prescriptions of the inertial Taylor (1999) rule.
2. Percent,av erage for the quarter.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 12 of 54

--- Page 16 ---

Appendix
POLICY RULES USED IN “MONETARY POLICY STRATEGIES”
The table below gives the expressions for the four policy rules regularly reported in
“Monetary Policy Strategies.” In the table, (cid:1844) denotes the nominal federal funds rate for quarter
(cid:3047)
t, while the right-hand-side variables include the staff’s projection of trailing four-quarter core
PCE inflation for the current quarter and three quarters ahead ((cid:2024) and (cid:2024) ), the output gap
(cid:3047) (cid:3047)(cid:2878)(cid:2871)|(cid:3047)
estimate for the current period (gap), and the forecast of the three-quarter-ahead annual change in
t
the output gap (4gap ). The value of policymakers’ longer-run inflation objective, denoted
t+3|t
πLR, is 2 percent.
Taylor (1993) rule (cid:1844) (cid:3404) (cid:1870)(cid:3013)(cid:3019) (cid:3397)(cid:2024) (cid:3397)0.5(cid:4666)(cid:2024) (cid:3398) (cid:2024)(cid:3013)(cid:3019)(cid:4667)(cid:3397)0.5(cid:1859)(cid:1853)(cid:1868)
(cid:3047) (cid:3047) (cid:3047) (cid:3047)
Taylor (1999) rule (cid:1844) (cid:3404) (cid:1870)(cid:3013)(cid:3019) (cid:3397)(cid:2024) (cid:3397)0.5(cid:4666)(cid:2024) (cid:3398) (cid:2024)(cid:3013)(cid:3019)(cid:4667)(cid:3397)(cid:1859)(cid:1853)(cid:1868)
(cid:3047) (cid:3047) (cid:3047) (cid:3047)
Inertial Taylor (1999) rule (cid:1844) (cid:3404) 0.85(cid:1844) (cid:3397)0.15(cid:4666)(cid:1870)(cid:3013)(cid:3019) (cid:3397)(cid:2024) (cid:3397)0.5(cid:4666)(cid:2024) (cid:3398)(cid:2024)(cid:3013)(cid:3019)(cid:4667)(cid:3397)(cid:1859)(cid:1853)(cid:1868) (cid:4667)
(cid:3047) (cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869) (cid:3047) (cid:3047) (cid:3047)
First-difference rule (cid:1844) (cid:3404) (cid:1844) (cid:3397)0.5(cid:3435)(cid:2024) (cid:3398)(cid:2024)(cid:3013)(cid:3019)(cid:3439)(cid:3397)0.5Δ(cid:2872)(cid:1859)(cid:1853)(cid:1868)
(cid:3047) (cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869) (cid:3047)(cid:2878)(cid:2871)|(cid:3047) (cid:3047)(cid:2878)(cid:2871)|(cid:3047)
The first two of the selected rules were studied by Taylor (1993, 1999), while the inertial
version of the Taylor (1999) rule has been featured prominently in analysis by Board staff.1 The
intercepts of these rules are chosen so that they are consistent with a 2 percent longer-run
inflation objective and a longer-run real federal funds rate, denoted (cid:1870)(cid:3013)(cid:3019), of 1¼ percent, a value
used in the FRB/US model. The prescriptions of the first-difference rule do not depend on the
level of the output gap or the longer-run real interest rate; see Orphanides (2003).
Near-term prescriptions from the four policy rules are calculated using Tealbook
projections for inflation and the output gap. For the rules that include the lagged policy rate as a
right-hand-side variable—the inertial Taylor (1999) rule and the first-difference rule—the lines
labeled “Previous Tealbook outlook” report prescriptions derived from the previous Tealbook
projections for inflation and the output gap, while using the same lagged funds rate value as in the
prescriptions computed for the current Tealbook. When the Tealbook is published early in a
quarter, this lagged funds rate value is set equal to the actual value of the lagged funds rate in the
previous quarter, and prescriptions are shown for the current quarter. When the Tealbook is
published late in a quarter, the prescriptions are shown for the next quarter, and the lagged policy
rate, for each of these rules, including those that use the “Previous Tealbook outlook,” is set equal
to the average value for the policy rate thus far in the quarter. For the subsequent quarter, these
rules use the lagged values from their simulated, unconstrained prescriptions.
1 See, for example, Erceg and others (2012).
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 13 of 54

--- Page 17 ---

REAL FEDERAL FUNDS RATE ESTIMATES
The bottom panel of the exhibit, “Policy Rules and the Staff Projection,” provides an
estimate of one notion of the equilibrium real federal funds rate, r*. This measure is an estimate
of the real federal funds rate that, if maintained over a 12-quarter period (beginning in the current
quarter), makes the output gap equal to zero in the final quarter of that period using the output
projection from FRB/US, the staff’s large-scale econometric model of the U.S. economy. This
“Tealbook-consistent FRB/US r*” depends on broad array of economic factors, some of which
take the form of projected values of the model’s exogenous variables. It is generated after the
paths of exogenous variables in the FRB/US model are adjusted so that they match those in the
extended Tealbook forecast. Model simulations then determine the value of the real federal funds
rate that closes the output gap conditional on the exogenous variables in the extended baseline
forecast.
The “current real federal funds rate” reported in the panel is constructed as the difference
between the midpoint of the prevailing target range for the federal funds rate and the trailing four-
quarter change in the core PCE price index.
The “average projected real federal funds rate” reported in the panel is the average of the
real federal funds rate under the Tealbook baseline projection calculated over the same
12−quarter period as the Tealbook-consistent FRB/US r*. The average projected real federal
funds rate and r* need not be associated with the same macroeconomic outcomes even when their
values are identical. The reason is that, in the r* simulations, the real federal funds rate is held
constant over the entire 12-quarter period to close the output gap at the end of this timeframe
whereas, in the Tealbook baseline, the real federal funds rate can vary over time. Distinct paths
of real short-term rates can, in turn, generate different paths for inflation and economic activity.
FRB/US MODEL SIMULATIONS
The exhibits of “Monetary Policy Strategies” that report results from simulations of
alternative policies are derived from dynamic simulations of the FRB/US model. Each simulated
policy rule is assumed to be in force over the whole period covered by the simulation; this period
extends several decades beyond the time horizon shown in the exhibits. The simulations are
conducted under the assumption that market participants as well as price and wage setters have
perfect foresight, and are predicated on the staff’s extended Tealbook projection, which includes
the macroeconomic effects of the Committee’s large-scale asset purchase programs. When the
Tealbook is published early in a quarter, all of the simulations begin in that quarter. However,
when the Tealbook is published late in a quarter, all of the simulations begin in the subsequent
quarter.
COMPUTATION OF THE OPTIMAL CONTROL POLICY UNDER COMMITMENT
The optimal control simulations posit that policymakers minimize a discounted sum of
weighted squared deviations of four-quarter headline PCE inflation ((cid:2024)(cid:3043)(cid:3030)(cid:3032)) from the Committee’s
(cid:3047)
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 14 of 54

--- Page 18 ---

2 percent objective, of squared deviations of the unemployment rate from the staff’s estimate of
the natural rate (this difference is also known as the unemployment rate gap, (cid:1873)(cid:1859)(cid:1853)(cid:1868) ), and of
(cid:3047)
squared changes in the federal funds rate. The resulting loss function, shown below, embeds the
assumptions that policymakers discount the future using a quarterly discount factor (cid:2010) (cid:3404) 0.9963
and place equal weights on squared deviations of inflation, the unemployment gap, and federal
funds rate changes (that is, (cid:2019) (cid:3404) (cid:2019) (cid:3404) (cid:2019) ).
(cid:3095) (cid:3048)(cid:3034)(cid:3028)(cid:3043) (cid:3019)
(cid:3021)
(cid:2168) (cid:3404) (cid:3533) (cid:2236)(cid:2254)(cid:3419)(cid:2019) (cid:4666)(cid:2024) (cid:1868)(cid:1855)(cid:1857) (cid:3398) (cid:2024)(cid:3013)(cid:3019)(cid:4667)(cid:2779)(cid:3397)(cid:2019) (cid:4666)(cid:1873)(cid:1859)(cid:1853)(cid:1868) (cid:4667)(cid:2779)(cid:3397)(cid:2019) (cid:4666)(cid:1844) (cid:3398)(cid:1844) (cid:4667)(cid:2779)(cid:3423)
(cid:2202) (cid:3095) (cid:1872)(cid:3397)(cid:2028) (cid:3048)(cid:3034)(cid:3028)(cid:3043) (cid:3047)(cid:2878)(cid:3099) (cid:3019) (cid:3047)(cid:2878)(cid:2254) (cid:3047)(cid:2878)(cid:2254)(cid:2879)(cid:2778)
(cid:2254)(cid:2880)(cid:2777)
The optimal control policy is the path for the federal funds rate that minimizes the above
loss function in the FRB/US model, subject to the effective lower bound constraint on nominal
interest rates, under the assumption of perfect foresight, and conditional on the staff’s extended
Tealbook projection. Policy tools other than the federal funds rate are taken as given and
subsumed within the Tealbook baseline. The path chosen by policymakers today is assumed to
be credible, meaning that decision makers in the model see this path as being a binding
commitment on the future Committees; the optimal control policy takes as given the lagged value
of the federal funds rate but is otherwise unconstrained by policy decisions made prior to the
simulation period. The discounted losses are calculated over a period that ends sufficiently far
into the future that extending that period farther would not affect the policy prescriptions shown
in the exhibits.
NOMINAL INCOME TARGETING RULE
The nominal income targeting rule, used in the special exhibit for this Tealbook, responds
to the nominal income gap, which is defined as the difference between nominal income (cid:1877)(cid:1866) (100
(cid:3047)
times the log of the level of nominal GDP) and a target value (cid:1877)(cid:1866)∗ (100 times the log of target
(cid:3047)
nominal GDP).
(cid:1844) (cid:3404) 0.75(cid:1844) (cid:3397)0.25(cid:4666)(cid:1870)(cid:3013)(cid:3019) (cid:3397)(cid:2024) (cid:3397) (cid:1877)(cid:1866) (cid:3398)(cid:1877)(cid:1866)∗(cid:4667)
(cid:3047) (cid:3047)(cid:2879)(cid:2869) (cid:3047) (cid:3047) (cid:3047)
The target value (cid:1877)(cid:1866)∗ grows at a rate equal to 2 percentage points per year faster than the
(cid:3047)
staff’s estimate of potential GDP.2 In the special exhibit, the initial value for (cid:1877)(cid:1866)∗ is computed in
(cid:3047)
two ways. In the first calibration of the rule, the initial target value is set so that policymakers
address only nominal income shortfalls since 2015:Q4, while in the second calibration, the initial
value for (cid:1877)(cid:1866)∗ is constructed so that the rule seeks to offset the cumulative nominal income gap
(cid:3047)
since 2011:Q4. For each of these rule specifications, the nominal income gap can be expressed as
the sum of the current estimate of the output gap and the shortfall of the GDP deflator from the
2 This implies that, as with many other simple policy rules, a revision to the estimate of potential
GDP would change the prescription of the rule.
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 15 of 54

--- Page 19 ---

level it would have attained had it grown at a 2 percent annual pace since the date associated with
the rule.3
References
Erceg, Christopher, Michael Kiley, and David López-Salido (2011). “Alternative Monetary
Frameworks.” Memo sent to the Committee on October 6, 2011.
Erceg, Christopher, Jon Faust, Michael Kiley, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David López-Salido,
Stephen Meyer, Edward Nelson, David Reifschneider, and Robert Tetlow (2012). “An
Overview of Simple Policy Rules and Their Use in Policymaking in Normal Times and
Under Current Conditions.” Memo sent to the Committee on July 18, 2012.
McCallum, Bennett T., and Edward Nelson (1999). “Nominal Income Targeting in an Open-
Economy Optimizing Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 43 (June),
pp. 553–578.
Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 50 (July), pp. 9831022.
Taylor, John B. (1993). “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 39 (December), pp. 195214.
Taylor, John B. (1999). “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B. Taylor,
ed., Monetary Policy Rules. University of Chicago Press, pp. 319341.
3 For a discussion of the properties of NI targeting regimes, see Erceg and others (2011).
seigetartS
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 16 of 54

--- Page 20 ---

Monetary Policy Alternatives
The draft statements—labeled Alternative A, Alternative B, and Alternative C—
offer similar assessments of incoming data on domestic economic activity and the labor
market. Where they differ is in their characterization of inflation expectations and the
outlook for inflation, of the risks attending the outlook in light of financial market
turbulence and developments abroad, and of the implications for adjustments in the
stance of monetary policy at this and subsequent meetings. In particular, Alternative B
maintains the current target range while keeping open the option for target range
adjustments at upcoming meetings, Alternative A specifies conditions for raising the
target range that, in the staff’s view, are unlikely to be met in the near term, and
Alternative C increases the target range.
All three statements begin by acknowledging that “economic activity has been
expanding at a moderate pace,” with Alternative B and Alternative C emphasizing the
economy’s resilience to date by pointing out that this expansion has been occurring
“despite the global economic and financial developments of recent months.” The draft
statements next note that household spending “has been increasing at a solid rate” while
business fixed investment and net exports “have been soft.” The three statements then
report that recent indicators point to “strengthening of the labor market.” This language
recognizes that, from November to February, total nonfarm payroll employment
expanded, on average, by a solid 228,000 jobs per month, the unemployment rate ticked
down to 4.9 percent, and the labor force participation rate rose 0.4 percentage point.
The three draft statements observe that inflation picked up in recent months but
also note that it has continued to run below 2 percent. Alternative B and Alternative C
both suggest that measures of inflation compensation and survey-based measures of
longer-run inflation expectations are little changed, on balance, but Alternative B draws
attention to the low levels of some of these measures whereas Alternative C does not.
Alternative A conveys greater concern about readings from these measures by stating that
they point to increased risks that inflation “will fail to rise to 2 percent over the medium
term.” With respect to the Committee’s modal outlook for inflation, Alternative A and
Alternative B both reaffirm the Committee’s expectation that inflation will “remain low
in the near term,” in part because of earlier declines in energy prices, but that inflation
will rise to 2 percent over the medium term as the transitory effects of these declines
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 17 of 54

--- Page 21 ---

dissipate and as the labor market strengthens further. Alternative C dispenses with any
mention of expected softness in the near term; it simply states the Committee’s
anticipation that inflation will rise to 2 percent as transitory influences dissipate.
Financial conditions deteriorated early in the intermeeting period, with equity
prices falling and credit spreads on risky corporate bonds rising. Subsequently, investor
sentiment improved markedly, and financial conditions ended the period generally less
tight than at the time of the January meeting. The reasons for this improvement in
sentiment are unclear, as the factors that have fuelled concerns over the global outlook in
recent months—such as the possibility of a hard landing in China, unsettling news about
the health of European banks, and excessive corporate debt in emerging market
economies—remain largely unaddressed. Stepping back, on balance since the December
FOMC meeting, the S&P 500 stock price index is down 4 percent, 10-year nominal
Treasury yields are down about 35 basis points, and the levels of the federal funds rate
implied by OIS quotes for year-end 2016 and year-end 2017 are down nearly 20 basis
points and about 40 basis points, respectively.
The draft statements suggest that the global economic and financial developments
of the past few months have not had a material effect on the Committee’s medium-term
baseline outlook; however, they offer differing characterizations of the risks to the U.S.
economy stemming from these developments. Alternative B acknowledges that these
developments “continue to pose risks” whereas Alternative A cautions that they “pose
downside risks.” Alternative C returns to December statement language in affirming that
the Committee “sees the risks to the outlook for both economic activity and the labor
market as balanced.”
Turning to the policy decision, Alternative B repeats language from the January
statement by indicating that the decision to hold the target range at this meeting will
support “further improvement in labor market conditions and a return to 2 percent
inflation.” But the new opening words of paragraph 3 suggest that the Committee’s
decision is based not only on its economic outlook but also on its risk assessment, and
thus suggest that risk management considerations contributed to the decision to maintain
the current target range. Alternative B preserves the option to alter the target range at any
future meeting and leaves unchanged the guidance regarding future target range
adjustments and balance sheet management. By contrast, Alternative A communicates a
judgment that the “economic outlook and associated risks” warrant not increasing the
target range “until inflation moves closer to 2 percent on a sustained basis and the risks to
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 18 of 54

--- Page 22 ---

the economic outlook are more closely balanced;” the staff forecast presented in
Tealbook A suggests that the inflation condition is unlikely to be met in short order. In
any case, by the time these inflation and risk conditions are met, the labor market could
have strengthened substantially further, a situation that would call for relatively rapid
increases in the target range. Accordingly, Alternative A drops the indication that future
adjustments to the stance of policy will be “only gradual.” Alternative C raises the target
range by 25 basis points and maintains the existing guidance about future monetary
policy actions, consistent with a view that the economy has evolved in a way that makes
it appropriate to follow a path of policy rate increases like the median path in the
December Summary of Economic Projections (SEP).
The next pages contain the January postmeeting statement, the three draft
statements, and summaries of the arguments for each alternative. These elements are
followed by drafts of the implementation note regarding the decisions taken by the
Federal Reserve to implement the monetary policy stance announced by the Committee.
The first draft could be issued if the Committee decides to maintain the current setting of
the target range for the federal funds rate, as in Alternative A and Alternative B, and the
second draft could be issued if the Committee decides to raise the target range for the
federal funds rate, as in Alternative C. In either case, the implementation note, which
contains the Committee’s domestic policy directive to the Desk, will be released with the
Committee’s postmeeting statement.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 19 of 54

--- Page 23 ---

JANUARY 2016 FOMC STATEMENT
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December
suggests that labor market conditions improved further even as economic growth
slowed late last year. Household spending and business fixed investment have been
increasing at moderate rates in recent months, and the housing sector has improved
further; however, net exports have been soft and inventory investment slowed. A
range of recent labor market indicators, including strong job gains, points to some
additional decline in underutilization of labor resources. Inflation has continued to
run below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective, partly reflecting declines
in energy prices and in prices of non-energy imports. Market-based measures of
inflation compensation declined further; survey-based measures of longer-term
inflation expectations are little changed, on balance, in recent months.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee currently expects that, with gradual
adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a
moderate pace and labor market indicators will continue to strengthen. Inflation is
expected to remain low in the near term, in part because of the further declines in
energy prices, but to rise to 2 percent over the medium term as the transitory effects
of declines in energy and import prices dissipate and the labor market strengthens
further. The Committee is closely monitoring global economic and financial
developments and is assessing their implications for the labor market and inflation,
and for the balance of risks to the outlook.
3. Given the economic outlook, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for
the federal funds rate at ¼ to ½ percent. The stance of monetary policy remains
accommodative, thereby supporting further improvement in labor market conditions
and a return to 2 percent inflation.
4. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the
federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic
conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.
This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including
measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation
expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. In light of
the current shortfall of inflation from 2 percent, the Committee will carefully monitor
actual and expected progress toward its inflation goal. The Committee expects that
economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases
in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time,
below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path
of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by
incoming data.
5. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 20 of 54

--- Page 24 ---

mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction, and it anticipates doing so until normalization of the level of the federal
funds rate is well under way. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of
longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative
financial conditions
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 21 of 54

--- Page 25 ---

MARCH 2016 ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December
January suggests that labor market conditions improved further even as economic
growth slowed late last year economic activity has been expanding at a moderate
pace. Household spending and business fixed investment have has been increasing at
moderate rates a solid rate in recent months, and the housing sector has improved
further; however, business fixed investment and net exports have been soft and
inventory investment slowed. A range of recent labor market indicators, including
strong job gains, points to some additional decline in underutilization of labor
resources strengthening of the labor market. Inflation has picked up in recent
months; however, it continued to run below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run
objective, partly reflecting declines in energy prices and in prices of non-energy
imports. Market-based measures of inflation compensation declined further remain
near historically low levels; some survey-based measures of longer-term inflation
expectations are little changed, on balance, in recent months declined further.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee currently expects that, with gradual
adjustments in the stance of appropriately accommodative monetary policy,
economic activity will expand at a moderate pace and labor market indicators will
continue to strengthen. However, global economic and financial developments in
recent months pose downside risks to the outlook for economic activity and the
labor market. Inflation is expected to remain low in the near term, in part because of
the further earlier declines in energy prices, but to rise to 2 percent over the medium
term as the transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices dissipate and the
labor market strengthens further. The Committee is closely monitoring global
economic and financial developments and is assessing their implications for the labor
market and inflation, and for the balance of risks to the outlook. In light of
continued low readings from measures of longer-term inflation compensation
and expectations, the Committee judges that the risks that inflation will fail to
rise to 2 percent over the medium term have increased.
3. Given the economic outlook and associated risks, the Committee decided to
maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at ¼ to ½ percent. The stance of
monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting further improvement in
labor market conditions and a return to 2 percent inflation. The Committee
anticipates that it will not increase this target range until inflation moves closer
to 2 percent on a sustained basis and the risks to the economic outlook are more
closely balanced.
4. In determining the When adjustments to the target range become appropriate,
their timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds
rate, the Committee will assess will depend on the Committee’s assessment of
realized and expected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maximum
employment and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will take into account a wide
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 22 of 54

--- Page 26 ---

range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of
inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial and
international developments. In light of the current shortfall of inflation from 2
percent, the Committee will carefully monitor actual and expected progress toward its
inflation goal. The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a
manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the federal
funds rate is likely to will remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to
prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path of the federal funds rate will
depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data.
5. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction, and it anticipates doing so until normalization of the level of the federal
funds rate is well under way. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of
longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative
financial conditions.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 23 of 54

--- Page 27 ---

MARCH 2016 ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December
January suggests that labor market conditions improved further even as economic
growth slowed late last year economic activity has been expanding at a moderate
pace despite the global economic and financial developments of recent months.
Household spending and business fixed investment have has been increasing at
moderate rates in recent months a solid rate, and the housing sector has improved
further; however, business fixed investment and net exports have been soft and
inventory investment slowed. A range of recent labor market indicators, including
strong job gains, points to some additional decline in underutilization of labor
resources strengthening of the labor market. Inflation has picked up in recent
months; however, it continued to run below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run
objective, partly reflecting declines in energy prices and in prices of non-energy
imports. Market-based measures of inflation compensation declined further remain
low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed,
on balance, in recent months.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee currently expects that, with gradual
adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a
moderate pace and labor market indicators will continue to strengthen. However,
global economic and financial developments continue to pose risks. Inflation is
expected to remain low in the near term, in part because of the further earlier
declines in energy prices, but to rise to 2 percent over the medium term as the
transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices dissipate and the labor
market strengthens further. The Committee is closely monitoring global economic
and financial developments and is assessing their implications for the labor market
and inflation, and for the balance of risks to the outlook. The Committee continues
to monitor inflation developments closely.
3. Given the economic outlook Against this backdrop, the Committee decided to
maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at ¼ to ½ percent. The stance of
monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting further improvement in
labor market conditions and a return to 2 percent inflation.
4. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the
federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic
conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.
This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including
measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation
expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. In light of
the current shortfall of inflation from 2 percent, the Committee will carefully monitor
actual and expected progress toward its inflation goal. The Committee expects that
economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases
in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time,
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 24 of 54

--- Page 28 ---

below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path
of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by
incoming data.
5. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction, and it anticipates doing so until normalization of the level of the federal
funds rate is well under way. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of
longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative
financial conditions.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 25 of 54

--- Page 29 ---

MARCH 2016 ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in December
January suggests that labor market conditions improved further even as economic
growth slowed late last year economic activity has been expanding at a moderate
pace despite the global economic and financial developments of recent months.
Household spending and business fixed investment have has been increasing at
moderate rates in recent months a solid rate, and the housing sector has improved
further; however, business fixed investment and net exports have been soft and
inventory investment slowed. A range of recent labor market indicators, including
strong job gains, points to some additional decline in underutilization of labor
resources strengthening of the labor market. Inflation has continued to run below
the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective, partly reflecting earlier declines in
energy prices and in prices of non-energy imports, but it has risen in recent months.
Market-based measures of inflation compensation declined further; and survey-based
measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed, on balance, in
recent months.
2. Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Committee seeks to foster maximum
employment and price stability. The Committee currently expects that, with gradual
adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity will expand at a
moderate pace and labor market indicators will continue to strengthen. Overall,
taking into account domestic and international developments, the Committee
sees the risks to the outlook for both economic activity and the labor market as
balanced. Inflation is expected to remain low in the near term, in part because of the
further declines in energy prices, but to rise to 2 percent over the medium term as the
transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices dissipate and the labor
market strengthens further. The Committee is closely monitoring global economic
and financial developments and is assessing their implications for the labor market
and inflation, and for the balance of risks to the outlook continues to monitor
inflation developments closely.
3. Given the economic outlook Against this backdrop, the Committee decided to
maintain increase the target range for the federal funds rate at ¼ to ½ to ¾ percent.
The stance of monetary policy remains accommodative, thereby supporting further
improvement in labor market conditions and a return to 2 percent inflation.
4. In determining the timing and size of future adjustments to the target range for the
federal funds rate, the Committee will assess realized and expected economic
conditions relative to its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.
This assessment will take into account a wide range of information, including
measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation
expectations, and readings on financial and international developments. In light of
the current shortfall of inflation from 2 percent, the Committee will carefully monitor
actual and expected progress toward its inflation goal. The Committee expects that
economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 26 of 54

--- Page 30 ---

in the federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time,
below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the actual path
of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by
incoming data.
5. The Committee is maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments
from its holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
auction, and it anticipates doing so until normalization of the level of the federal
funds rate is well under way. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of
longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain accommodative
financial conditions.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 27 of 54

--- Page 31 ---

THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B
Policymakers may see the available information as suggesting that economic
activity and the labor market are evolving in ways that are broadly consistent with their
modal forecasts at the time of the December FOMC meeting. The earlier downside
surprise to fourth-quarter real GDP growth was partly revised away, leaving the estimate
of GDP growth in 2015 modestly below the median response in the December SEP.
First-quarter indicators of real activity, including personal consumption expenditures in
January as well as consumer confidence and light vehicle sales through February, appear
consistent with moderate growth. Labor market conditions have strengthened further,
with nonfarm payroll employment expanding solidly through February and the labor
force participation rate moving up. Although global financial conditions have generally
improved of late, the factors that led to their sharp deterioration earlier this year remain
largely unaddressed, suggesting that concerns over the global outlook are likely to persist.
Turning to inflation, policymakers may judge that developments have been mixed and
further complicate the task of disentangling the persistent and temporary components:
Although inflation picked up recently, it remains below 2 percent and at least part of the
firming seems to be due to erratic components and transitory seasonal movements. On
the other hand, while measures of inflation compensation and longer-run inflation
expectations have remained soft, and have even edged down in some cases, policymakers
may judge that this softness likely reflects changes in risk and liquidity premiums and the
known sensitivity of survey responses to gasoline prices. Given these considerations,
Committee members may find it prudent to maintain the current target range, as in
Alternative B, until they have greater confidence that the economy will remain on a path
consistent with achieving their mandated objectives.
Policymakers may judge that global economic and financial developments
continue to pose risks to their economic outlook, and they might want to convey that risk
management considerations are playing a role in their March policy decision. They may
note that, under certain conditions, it is optimal to follow a shallower policy rate path in
response to increased uncertainty about the economic outlook when there is a material
possibility that the effective lower bound (ELB) could bind for a protracted period going
forward than when there is little or no risk of being constrained by the ELB. In the
current context, they might conclude that waiting for greater clarity regarding the
economic outlook before taking the next step in normalizing the stance of monetary
policy might provide some insurance against costly downside risks and that waiting has
the added benefit of confirming to the public that policy is not on a preset course.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 28 of 54

--- Page 32 ---

Some participants may judge it unlikely that an increase in the target range will be
warranted in the near term. In light of historically low readings on measures of inflation
compensation and expectations, they may have become less confident that inflation will
move up to 2 percent. Or they may view the low sensitivity of inflation to resource
utilization as requiring a period of unemployment well below its longer-run normal rate
to ensure a return of inflation to 2 percent over the medium run. Nevertheless, those who
judge that the outlook is sufficiently uncertain to make near-term rate hikes inadvisable
may conclude that, by not increasing the target range in March, the Committee would go
far enough, for now, in signaling that policy is not on a preset course, that the FOMC is
committed to achieving its inflation goal, and that the FOMC is mindful of its limited
ability to offset adverse shocks in the vicinity of the ELB. Moreover, they might judge
that the statement should signal that the Committee is closely monitoring inflation
developments, as in Alternative B.
Other policymakers may see incoming data, in particular strong job gains and
solid consumption indicators, as reinforcing their view that the ongoing economic
expansion is resilient and that worries about the recent market volatility and foreign
developments significantly restraining the U.S. economy are exaggerated. Looking
through temporary influences from energy and import prices, these policymakers may
view the recent uptick in core inflation, the moderate rebound in oil prices, and the
further strengthening of the labor market as suggesting that inflation will, as they had
previously expected, rise toward 2 percent over the medium term. If so, these
policymakers may lean toward continuing on the path of gradual policy normalization
envisioned in December. That said, they may believe that postponing the decision to
raise the target range until a later meeting entails little, if any, extra risks that the
economy could overheat or that financial imbalances could emerge, because real GDP
growth remains moderate, inflation continues to run below 2 percent, wage growth is
tepid, measures of longer-term inflation expectations are at or below normal levels, and
asset valuation pressures are generally moderate. Moreover, these policymakers may
recognize that the Committee could readily tighten policy rapidly were it necessary, and
that the language in Alternative B emphasizing the Committee’s pursuit of a data-
dependent approach indicates that the Committee stands ready to do so.
A decision to maintain the current target range would be in line with the
expectations of financial market participants. According to the Desk’s latest Survey of
Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants, respondents perceive there to be only
a remote chance that the Committee will change the target range at this meeting.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 29 of 54

--- Page 33 ---

Moreover, respondents do not anticipate any changes to the Committee’s forward
guidance or reinvestment policy, which Alternative B both maintains. Whether market
participants will perceive the statement as more or less accommodative, on balance, than
they had anticipated is unclear. On the one hand, the statement acknowledges that
“global economic and financial developments continue to pose risks,” which some
market participants might interpret as the Committee showing greater concerns than they
had anticipated. On the other hand, the statement contrasts these concerns with a
relatively upbeat assessment of the U.S. economy, which might boost market
participants’ confidence in economic prospects. Obviously, the market reaction to the
March decision could also be sensitive to the content of the accompanying SEP.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A
Some policymakers might argue that the global economic and financial situation
poses substantial downside risks to the domestic economic outlook, and that recent
financial market turbulence offers an important reminder that the ability of U.S. and
foreign central banks to offset the effects of adverse economic shocks is limited. Despite
the improvement in the labor market to date, these policymakers may believe that more
needs to be done to reach maximum employment. And with the risks to economic
activity skewed to the downside, they might be concerned that progress toward that
objective might stall or be reversed. These policymakers might also stress that both core
and headline inflation have run below 2 percent for several years, and that headline
inflation will linger at low levels well into 2016 because of earlier movements in the
exchange value of the dollar and in the prices of oil and other commodities. With FOMC
participants, the staff, and many other forecasters having repeatedly overpredicted
inflation in recent years, some policymakers might want to see actual inflation move
more convincingly toward their objective rather than to continue to predicate their policy
decisions on inflation forecasts that hinge on a tenuous relationship with slack in labor or
product markets and on the assumption that inflation expectations are, and will remain,
well anchored. In sum, these policymakers might prefer a statement along the lines of
Alternative A, which asserts that the Committee anticipates that it will not increase the
target range “until inflation moves closer to 2 percent on a sustained basis and the risks to
the economic outlook are more closely balanced.”
These policymakers might favor including language indicating that recent global
developments pose downside risks to their outlook for economic activity and the labor
market. More generally, these policymakers might see alternative scenarios such as
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 30 of 54

--- Page 34 ---

“Global Recession” or “Less Effective Foreign Monetary Policy” in the “Risks and
Uncertainty” section of Tealbook A as increasingly likely. They might observe that the
scope to use conventional policy measures to support the economy in the event that such
scenarios materialize would be quickly exhausted, given the proximity to the effective
lower bound. On a related note, these policymakers might expect that the neutral rate of
interest is likely to remain low for an extended period, thus exacerbating the risk that
conventional policy could be constrained going forward. They might also judge that
unconventional monetary policies provide only a limited extra cushion against adverse
shocks unless the FOMC commits to maintaining extraordinary amounts of
accommodation for a prolonged period, a point illustrated in the memo “Unconventional
Policy Responses to a Recession” sent to the Committee on March 4, 2016. Because the
benefits of such forceful actions are uncertain and the risks they entail are not well
captured by economic models, these policymakers may worry that the scope for
unconventional policy actions is even more limited than suggested in the memo.
Therefore, these policymakers may believe that risk management considerations call for
signaling that any further removal of policy accommodation is some time off.
Policymakers might also worry that the failure of inflation to rise to target over
the past several years has become ingrained in longer-term inflation expectations. They
might note that the Michigan Survey measure of longer-term inflation expectations slid to
the lowest level in its nearly four-decade history in February, and that the New York
Fed’s measure of three-year-ahead expected inflation displays a similar downward drift.
They might add that market-based measures of inflation compensation have been at low
levels for so long that it is difficult to believe that these declines are entirely due to
liquidity and risk premiums. On balance, they may see the weakness in those various
measures as suggesting that the inflation expectations relevant for wage and price setting
have declined slightly, and note that staff, in effect, reached such a conclusion this round
when it lowered its estimate of underlying inflation over the medium term from
1.8 percent to 1.75 percent. Some policymakers might further dismiss the recent uptick
in core inflation as a transitory anomaly, and instead point to wage inflation falling back
to the low levels seen over the past several years as evidence that there is little upward
pressure from resource utilization and that inflation is likely to continue trending below
2 percent. These observations may lead these policymakers to conclude that there is little
reason to be confident that inflation will return to 2 percent in the medium term if the
Committee raises interest rates in the near future. Moreover, these policymakers might
argue that a chronic failure to get inflation moving up risks eroding the credibility of the
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 31 of 54

--- Page 35 ---

FOMC’s commitment to achieving 2 percent inflation and to treating deviations from this
objective on a symmetric basis.
Most respondents in the Desk’s latest surveys expect the Committee to continue
to emphasize the gradual nature of its normalization approach and to convey a bias
toward raising rates later this year. Respondents also did not report an expectation that
the March statement would emphasize downside risks to the economic outlook to the
extent suggested by Alternative A. Therefore, the issuance of a postmeeting statement
like Alternative A would likely surprise financial market participants. Investors would
likely push further into the future the expected date of the next rate increase, the expected
path for the federal fund rate would likely flatten further, and longer-term yields would
decline. If the statement is primarily seen as more accommodative, equity prices and
inflation compensation might rise, and the dollar would depreciate. But if investors
interpret the statement as reflecting an unexpectedly downbeat assessment of global
economic conditions and greater-than-anticipated concerns over the downside risks to the
outlook, equity prices and inflation compensation could fall.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE C
With the unemployment rate, now at 4.9 percent, equal to the median of
participants’ estimates of its longer-run value in the December SEP, some policymakers
might conclude that the economy is at or close to maximum sustainable employment.
They might also assess that incoming indicators of real activity and the labor market
continue to display sufficient strength, despite the recent bout of financial turbulence, to
continue to foster improvement in the labor market and promote the expected progress to
the Committee’s inflation objective over the medium term. In particular, they may see
claims that the risks to the economic outlook are significantly skewed to the downside as
unjustified and instead view the risks as balanced. These policymakers may judge that
conditions remain favorable for solid consumption growth and further improvement in
the housing sector even with a modest further increase in the target range because
household balance sheets have improved, gains in disposable income have been healthy,
gasoline prices are low, consumer confidence is high, and job prospects are good.
Regarding the Committee’s inflation objective, policymakers may note that
various measures of the trend in inflation have moved closer to 2 percent, with the
12-month change in core PCE inflation and the Dallas Fed’s trimmed mean PCE inflation
edging up to 1.7 percent and 1.9 percent, respectively, in January. Moreover, participants
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 32 of 54

--- Page 36 ---

may have only limited concerns about low readings on longer-term inflation
compensation because they judge that these indicators are depressed by movements in
liquidity and risk premiums that are unrelated to longer-run inflation outcomes.
Similarly, they may attribute the softening in the median Michigan Survey respondent’s
expectation of average inflation over the coming 5 or 10 years to the transitory influences
of earlier declines in gasoline prices rather than to a reduction in expected inflation over
the longer run. Therefore, policymakers may have confidence that headline inflation will
be close to the 2 percent objective once the transitory effects of earlier declines in energy
and import prices fade, and that the projected further tightening of the labor market will
suffice to return headline inflation to the Committee’s longer-run objective.
These policymakers might further argue that leaving rates unchanged in the face
of rapid job growth and a closed unemployment rate gap would likely foster expectations
of a prolonged, unconditionally shallow path for the federal funds rate, creating incipient
excess demand. Leaving the stance of monetary policy unchanged thus runs the risk that
inflation will persistently overshoot 2 percent, eliciting an upward drift in inflation
expectations, possibly along the lines of the alternative scenario “Faster Growth with
Higher Inflation” in the “Risks and Uncertainty” section of Tealbook A. In addition,
such an expected path could induce further “reach for yield” or excessive risk-taking
behavior in financial markets. Some policymakers might also be concerned that the
public might misinterpret a statement like Alternative B as an indication that the FOMC
is placing excessive weight on the downside economic risks that might accompany
market volatility and reduced asset valuations, and too little weight on a solid central
outlook for the economy, labor markets, and inflation.
For all of the above reasons, these policymakers may judge that it is appropriate
to announce a 25 basis point increase in the target range for the federal funds rate to ½ to
¾ percent, as in Alternative C. Policymakers may note that, even with this increase, the
real federal funds rate would still lie well below the Tealbook-consistent estimate of the
equilibrium real federal funds rate reported in the “Monetary Policy Strategies” section of
Tealbook B. An increase in the target range would also be consistent with the level of the
federal funds rate prescribed by the optimal control policy reported there.
According to the Desk’s latest surveys, the average perceived probability of a
tightening at this meeting is about 5 percent, and so a decision to increase the target range
would be very surprising. If market participants infer that, all else equal, the Committee
intends to pursue a much less accommodative stance of policy going forward than they
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 33 of 54

--- Page 37 ---

had expected, then medium- and longer-term real interest rates would rise, equity prices
and inflation compensation would likely decline, and the dollar would appreciate.
However, if investors see a statement like Alternative C as reflecting an upbeat
assessment for the strength of the U.S. expansion, then equity prices and inflation
compensation might fall less than otherwise, or even rise.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 34 of 54

--- Page 38 ---

IMPLEMENTATION NOTE
If the Committee decides to maintain the current target range for the federal funds
rate, as in Alternative A or Alternative B, an implementation note that indicates no
change in the Federal Reserve’s administered rates—the interest rates on required and
excess reserves, the offering rate on overnight reverse repurchase agreements, and the
discount rate—would be issued. If the Committee instead decides to raise the target
range for the federal funds rate, as in Alternative C, an implementation note that
communicates the changes the Federal Reserve decided to make to these three policy
tools would be issued.
Regardless of which policy alternative the Committee adopts, the Committee may
decide to authorize the Desk to conduct term reverse repurchase agreement operations
(RRP) over the March quarter-end.1 If the Committee authorizes term RRPs, the
directive would include a sentence to that effect.
On the following pages, struck-out text indicates language deleted from the
January directive and implementation note; bold red underlined text indicates added
language; blue underlined text indicates text that links to websites.
1 See the memo titled “Term RRPs over the March 2016 Quarter-End” by Josh Frost, Deborah
Leonard, and Suraj Prasanna that was distributed to the Committee on March 9, 2016.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 35 of 54

--- Page 39 ---

Implementation Note for March 2016 Alternative A and Alternative B
Release Date: January 27 March 16, 2016
Decisions Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation
The Federal Reserve has made the following decisions to implement the monetary policy
stance announced by the Federal Open Market Committee in its statement on January 27
March 16, 2016:
 The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System left unchanged the
interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances at 0.50 percent.
 As part of its policy decision, the Federal Open Market Committee voted to
authorize and direct the Open Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Open
Market Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
"Effective January 28 March 17, 2016, the Federal Open Market
Committee directs the Desk to undertake open market operations as
necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1/4 to 1/2
percent, including overnight reverse repurchase operations (and reverse
repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when
necessary to accommodate weekend, holiday, or similar trading
conventions) at an offering rate of 0.25 percent, in amounts limited only
by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open
Market Account that are available for such operations and by a per-
counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. [ In addition, the Committee
directs the Desk to undertake term reverse repurchase operations
involving Treasury securities during the period of March 28 to March
31, 2016, to mature no later than April 4, 2016, subject to a maximum
bid rate of 0.26 percent and an overall size limit of $250 billion
outstanding at any one time. ]
The Committee directs the Desk to continue rolling over maturing
Treasury securities at auction and to continue reinvesting principal
payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in
agency mortgage-backed securities. The Committee also directs the Desk
to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to
facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve's agency mortgage-backed
securities transactions."
More information regarding open market operations may be found on the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York's website.
 The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System took no action to change
the discount rate (the primary credit rate), which remains at 1.00 percent.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 36 of 54

--- Page 40 ---

This information will be updated as appropriate to reflect decisions of the Federal Open
Market Committee or the Board of Governors regarding details of the Federal Reserve's
operational tools and approach used to implement monetary policy.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 37 of 54

--- Page 41 ---

Implementation Note for March 2016 Alternative C
Release Date: January 27 March 16, 2016
Decisions Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation
The Federal Reserve has made the following decisions to implement the monetary policy
stance announced by the Federal Open Market Committee in its statement on January 27
March 16, 2016:
 The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System left unchanged the
interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances at 0.50 percent voted
[ unanimously ] to raise the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve
balances to 0.75 percent, effective March 17, 2016.
 As part of its policy decision, the Federal Open Market Committee voted to
authorize and direct the Open Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Open
Market Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive:
"Effective January 28 March 17, 2016, the Federal Open Market
Committee directs the Desk to undertake open market operations as
necessary to maintain the federal funds rate in a target range of 1/4 to 1/2
to 3/4 percent, including overnight reverse repurchase operations (and
reverse repurchase operations with maturities of more than one day when
necessary to accommodate weekend, holiday, or similar trading
conventions) at an offering rate of 0.25 0.50 percent, in amounts limited
only by the value of Treasury securities held outright in the System Open
Market Account that are available for such operations and by a per-
counterparty limit of $30 billion per day. [ In addition, the Committee
directs the Desk to undertake term reverse repurchase operations
involving Treasury securities during the period of March 28 to March
31, 2016, to mature no later than April 4, 2016, subject to a maximum
bid rate of 0.51 percent and an overall size limit of $250 billion
outstanding at any one time. ]
The Committee directs the Desk to continue rolling over maturing
Treasury securities at auction and to continue reinvesting principal
payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in
agency mortgage-backed securities. The Committee also directs the Desk
to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to
facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve's agency mortgage-backed
securities transactions."
More information regarding open market operations may be found on the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York's website.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 38 of 54

--- Page 42 ---

 In a related action, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System took
no action to change the discount rate (the primary credit rate), which remains at
1.00 voted [ unanimously ] to approve a 1/4 percentage point increase in the
discount rate (the primary credit rate) to 1.25 percent, effective March 17,
2016. In taking this action, the Board approved requests submitted by the
Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of … .
This information will be updated as appropriate to reflect decisions of the Federal Open
Market Committee or the Board of Governors regarding details of the Federal Reserve's
operational tools and approach used to implement monetary policy.
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 39 of 54

--- Page 43 ---

(This page is intentionally blank.)
sevitanretlA
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 40 of 54

--- Page 44 ---

Projections
BALANCE SHEET AND INCOME
The staff has prepared projections of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and key
elements of the associated income statement under two scenarios for the path of monetary
policy. The first set of projections (labeled “March Tealbook baseline” in the
accompanying exhibits) reflects the policy assumptions incorporated in the staff’s
baseline forecast presented in Tealbook A. The second set (labeled “Lower federal funds
rate”) incorporates the lower path for the federal funds rate assumed in the DEDO box in
Tealbook A “An Alternative Path for the Federal Funds Rate” as well as a delayed
cessation of reinvestments relative to the staff’s baseline forecast.1
The paths of interest rates and macroeconomic variables as well as the date of
cessation of reinvestments differ across the two scenarios. In the March Tealbook
baseline scenario, the federal funds rate follows the inertial Taylor (1999) rule and rises
roughly 1 percentage point per year until the end of 2018. In the lower federal funds rate
scenario, the policy rate remains on hold through the end of 2016 and thereafter follows
the prescriptions of the inertial Taylor rule. The baseline scenario also assumes that
reinvestments of maturing Treasury securities and agency debt as well as principal
received on agency MBS will cease at the end of 2016, when the federal funds rate is
projected to be at about 1½ percent. Under the lower federal funds rate scenario,
reinvestments are also assumed to cease when the policy rate reaches 1½ percent, but this
occurs in the third quarter of 2017, three quarters later than in the baseline projection.
In both scenarios, we assume that, once reinvestments cease, the SOMA portfolio
shrinks through full redemptions of maturing Treasury and agency debt securities as well
as paydowns of principal from agency MBS. Regarding the Federal Reserve’s use of its
policy normalization tools, we also assume in both scenarios that the level of overnight
reverse repurchase agreements (ON RRPs) runs at $100 billion through the end of 2018
1 The DEDO box assumes no change in the date of cessation of reinvestments from the staff’s
baseline forecast.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 41 of 54

--- Page 45 ---

before declining to zero by the end of 2019, and that term deposits and term RRPs are not
used.2 Below, we highlight some key features of the two scenarios.
 Balance sheet. Under the baseline scenario, the size of the portfolio is
normalized in the third quarter of 2021, one quarter earlier than projected in the
January Tealbook, reflecting a lower path of the 10-year Treasury yield and a
faster pace of agency MBS prepayments than in our previous forecast (see the
solid black lines in the exhibit “Total Assets and Selected Balance Sheet Items”
and the table that follows).3 At that time, total assets are projected to stand at
$2.35 trillion, with about $2.2 trillion in total SOMA securities holdings. Total
assets and SOMA Treasury holdings increase thereafter, keeping pace with the
growth in both Federal Reserve notes in circulation and Federal Reserve Bank
capital.
Under the lower federal funds rate scenario, the normalization of the size of the
portfolio occurs in the first quarter of 2022, nearly two quarters later than in the
baseline scenario, primarily reflecting the longer reinvestment period, a
development that results in about $340 billion of additional reinvestments (see the
dotted red lines in the exhibit and the second table).
 Federal Reserve earnings remittances. After record remittances to the Treasury
in 2015 that included payments of nearly $100 billion in net income, remittances
under the baseline scenario are projected to decline to about $65 billion this year
2 Use of term RRPs or term deposits would result in a shift in the composition of Federal Reserve
liabilities—a decline in reserve balances and an equal increase in term RRPs or term deposits—but would
not produce a change in the overall size of the balance sheet. We also assume that RRPs associated with
foreign official and international accounts remain near their January 29, 2016, level of $235 billion
throughout the projection period.
3 The size of the balance sheet is assumed to be normalized when the securities portfolio reverts to
the level consistent with its longer-run trend, which is determined largely by currency in circulation and a
projected steady-state level of reserve balances. The projected timing of the normalization of the size of
the balance sheet depends importantly on the level of reserve balances deemed necessary to conduct
monetary policy; currently, we assume that level of reserve balances to be $100 billion. However, ongoing
regulatory and structural changes could result in a higher underlying demand for reserve balances. In turn,
a higher steady-state level for reserve balances would, all else equal, imply an earlier normalization of the
size of the balance sheet. For instance, with a $500 billion steady-state level of reserve balances, the
balance sheet would likely normalize at the end of 2020. Alternatively, a lower assumed steady-state level
of reserve balances, such as $10 billion, would induce a delay in the projected normalization of the balance
sheet until the first quarter of 2022.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 42 of 54

--- Page 46 ---

March Tealbook baseline Lower federal funds rate
January Tealbook
Total Assets
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Reserve Balances
Billions of dollars
5500
Monthly
5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Billions of dollars
3500
Monthly
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
SOMA Treasury Holdings
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
SOMA Agency MBS Holdings
Billions of dollars
3000
Monthly
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
0102 2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Total Assets and Selected Balance Sheet Items
Billions of dollars
2400
Monthly
2200
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 43 of 54

--- Page 47 ---

Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections - March Tealbook baseline
(Billions of dollars)
Jan31,2016 2017 2019 2021 2023 2025
Totalassets 4,483 4,063 2,957 2,368 2,520 2,691
Selectedassets
Loansandothercreditextensions* 2 0 0 0 0 0
Securitiesheldoutright 4,237 3,862 2,787 2,220 2,383 2,563
U.S.Treasurysecurities 2,461 2,263 1,479 1,144 1,475 1,787
Agencydebtsecurities 31 4 2 2 2 2
Agencymortgage-backedsecurities 1,744 1,595 1,307 1,074 906 774
Unamortizedpremiums 188 151 118 94 81 72
Unamortizeddiscounts -16 -14 -11 -8 -7 -6
Totalotherassets 54 55 55 55 55 55
Totalliabilities 4,444 4,021 2,912 2,319 2,466 2,632
Selectedliabilities
FederalReservenotesincirculation 1,367 1,536 1,694 1,824 1,971 2,137
Reverserepurchaseagreements 350 335 235 235 235 235
DepositswithFederalReserveBanks 2,720 2,145 978 255 255 255
Reservebalancesheldbydepositoryinstitutions 2,329 1,990 823 100 100 100
U.S.Treasury,GeneralAccount 370 150 150 150 150 150
Otherdeposits 20 5 5 5 5 5
EarningsremittancesduetotheU.S.Treasury 2 0 0 0 0 0
Totalcapital** 40 42 45 49 54 59
Source:FederalReserveH.4.1statisticalreleasesandstaffcalculations.
Note:Componentsmaynotsumtototalsduetorounding.
*Loansandothercreditextensionsincludesprimary,secondary,andseasonalcredit;centralbankliquidityswaps;andnetportfolioholdingsofMaidenLaneLLC.
**Totalcapitalincludescapitalpaid-inandcapitalsurplusaccounts.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 44 of 54

--- Page 48 ---

Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections - Lower federal funds rate
(Billions of dollars)
Jan31,2016 2017 2019 2021 2023 2025
Totalassets 4,483 4,365 3,197 2,444 2,517 2,688
Selectedassets
Loansandothercreditextensions* 2 0 0 0 0 0
Securitiesheldoutright 4,237 4,164 3,027 2,296 2,382 2,561
U.S.Treasurysecurities 2,461 2,413 1,589 1,115 1,390 1,720
Agencydebtsecurities 31 4 2 2 2 2
Agencymortgage-backedsecurities 1,744 1,747 1,436 1,179 989 839
Unamortizedpremiums 188 153 119 95 81 71
Unamortizeddiscounts -16 -15 -12 -9 -8 -7
Totalotherassets 54 55 55 55 55 55
Totalliabilities 4,444 4,323 3,152 2,395 2,463 2,629
Selectedliabilities
FederalReservenotesincirculation 1,367 1,536 1,693 1,821 1,968 2,134
Reverserepurchaseagreements 350 335 235 235 235 235
DepositswithFederalReserveBanks 2,720 2,447 1,219 334 255 255
Reservebalancesheldbydepositoryinstitutions 2,329 2,292 1,064 179 100 100
U.S.Treasury,GeneralAccount 370 150 150 150 150 150
Otherdeposits 20 5 5 5 5 5
EarningsremittancesduetotheU.S.Treasury 2 0 0 0 0 0
Totalcapital** 40 42 45 49 54 59
Source:FederalReserveH.4.1statisticalreleasesandstaffcalculations.
Note:Componentsmaynotsumtototalsduetorounding.
*Loansandothercreditextensionsincludesprimary,secondary,andseasonalcredit;centralbankliquidityswaps;andnetportfolioholdingsofMaidenLaneLLC.
**Totalcapitalincludescapitalpaid-inandcapitalsurplusaccounts.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 45 of 54

--- Page 49 ---

(see the solid black lines in the “Income Projections” exhibit).4 The large step-
down in 2016 primarily reflects lower interest income from MBS holdings.
Annual remittances continue to decline in subsequent years, reaching a low of
roughly $32 billion in 2019, with no deferred asset being recorded.5 Under this
scenario, the Federal Reserve’s cumulative remittances from 2009 through 2025
total about $1.1 trillion.
Under the lower federal funds rate scenario, cumulative remittances are projected
to be about $20 billion higher than in the baseline projection, primarily reflecting
lower interest expense through 2018 (see the dotted red lines). In particular,
because during the earlier portion of the projection the path for the federal funds
rate as well as those for the rates paid on reserve balances and ON RRPs lie below
those that prevail in the baseline scenario, interest expense rises less in the lower-
rate scenario.
 Unrealized gains or losses. The staff estimates that the SOMA portfolio was in a
net unrealized gain position of about $215 billion at the end of February.6 Going
forward, the net unrealized gain or loss position of the portfolio will depend
importantly on the path of longer-term interest rates. Under the baseline scenario,
because of the assumed rise in longer-term interest rates over the next several
years, the portfolio is projected to shift to a position of unrealized loss within the
next two quarters, and to record a peak unrealized loss of about $240 billion in
mid-2019, about $10 billion lower than the peak loss estimated in the January
Tealbook. At that time, of the $240 billion loss, almost $100 billion is
attributable to losses on holdings of Treasury securities and $140 billion to losses
on holdings of agency MBS. After peaking, the unrealized loss position then
contracts through 2025, as the value of securities previously acquired under the
large-scale asset purchase programs returns to par as these securities approach
4 We assume that the interest rate paid on excess reserve balances will average about 15 basis
points above the effective federal funds rate and the ON RRP rate will average about 10 basis points below
the effective federal funds rate.
5 In the event that a Federal Reserve Bank’s earnings fall short of the amount necessary to cover
its operating costs and pay dividends, a deferred asset for interest on Federal Reserve notes would be
recorded.
6 The Federal Reserve reports the level and the change in the quarter-end net unrealized gain/loss
position of the SOMA portfolio to the public in the “Federal Reserve Banks Combined Quarterly Financial
Reports,” available on the Board’s website at
http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_fedfinancials.htm#quarterly.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 46 of 54

--- Page 50 ---

March Tealbook baseline Lower federal funds rate
January Tealbook
Interest Income
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Interest Expense
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
Realized Capital Gains
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Earnings Remittances to Treasury
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
−20
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Billions of dollars
140
Annual
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
−20
Deferred Asset
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Memo: Unrealized Gains/Losses
Billions of dollars
120
End of year 110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2102 4102 6102 8102 0202 2202 4202
Income Projections
Billions of dollars
400
End of year
300
200
100
0
−100
−200
−300
−400
−500
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 47 of 54

--- Page 51 ---

maturity, and new securities are added to the portfolio at prevailing market yields.
Under the lower federal funds rate scenario, the projected unrealized gain or loss
position of the SOMA portfolio does not materially differ from the corresponding
baseline projection, largely reflecting similar paths for longer-term interest rates
in the two scenarios.
 Term premium effects. As shown in the table “Projections for the 10-Year
Treasury Term Premium Effect,” under the baseline scenario, the Federal
Reserve’s elevated stock of longer-term securities is estimated to hold down the
term premium embedded in the 10-year Treasury yield by 107 basis points in the
current quarter. Over the next couple of years, the estimated term premium effect
diminishes at a pace of about 4 basis points per quarter, reflecting in part the
gradual projected shrinking of the portfolio. The projection for the term premium
effect is slightly less negative than in the January Tealbook, reflecting the lower
path of the 10-year Treasury rate and the resulting faster MBS prepayments.
Under the lower federal funds rate scenario, the estimated term premium effect is
just a few basis points more negative than in the baseline projection, a result of
the later end to reinvestments.7
 SOMA Characteristics. Regarding the size of the portfolio, under the baseline
scenario, approximately $220 billion in SOMA Treasury holdings will mature this
year, and a total of $1.4 trillion will mature between 2016 and 2020 (see the upper
panel of the exhibit “Projections for the Characteristics of SOMA Holdings”).8
The amounts of Treasury securities maturing each month vary considerably, while
projected MBS paydowns are much less variable. However, realized MBS
7 Because the DEDO box assumes a date for the cessation of reinvestments that is consistent with
the staff’s baseline forecast, its simulations for longer-term interest rates do not incorporate the term
premium effects projected here under the lower federal funds rate scenario that stem from the extension of
the reinvestment period. This small additional widening of the term premium arising from the later end of
reinvestments would not have a material impact on the macroeconomic effects reported in the DEDO box.
8 While following its current reinvestment policy, the Desk replaces maturing Treasury security
holdings with newly issued debt at Treasury auctions. Consistent with longstanding practice, these
rollovers are carried out at Treasury auctions by placing bids for the SOMA in a par amount equal to the
value of holdings maturing on the issue date of a newly issued security. Moreover, across the various
maturities, these bids are placed proportionately to the issue amounts of the new securities. The Desk’s
bids at Treasury auctions are placed as noncompetitive tenders and are treated as add-ons to announced
auction sizes.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 48 of 54

--- Page 52 ---

Projectionsforthe10-YearTreasuryTermPremiumEffect
(BasisPoints)
Date March Tealbook Lower federal January
baseline funds rate Tealbook
QuarterlyAverages
2016:Q1 -107 -113 -111
Q2 -103 -109 -106
Q3 -98 -105 -102
Q4 -94 -101 -97
2017:Q4 -77 -84 -81
2018:Q4 -64 -70 -67
2019:Q4 -54 -57 -56
2020:Q4 -45 -48 -47
2021:Q4 -38 -39 -39
2022:Q4 -32 -33 -33
2023:Q4 -26 -27 -27
2024:Q4 -20 -21 -21
2025:Q4 -15 -15 -15
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 49 of 54

--- Page 53 ---

Projections for the Characteristics of SOMA Holdings
Projected Receipts of Principal on SOMA Securities
Billions of Dollars
Projected MBS paydowns
Treasury maturities
80
60
40
20
0
2017 2018 2019 2020
SSOOMMAA WWeeiigghhtteedd−−AAvveerraaggee TTrreeaassuurryy DDuurraattiioonn
MMoonntthhllyy YYeeaarrss
1100
March Tealbook baseline Reinvestment Ends Normalization Achieved
Lower federal funds rate
baseline lower FF baseline lower FF
99
88
77
66
55
44
33
22
22000088 22001100 22001122 22001144 22001166 22001188 22002200 22002222 22002244
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 50 of 54

--- Page 54 ---

paydowns will reflect the evolution over time of interest rates and other factors
and could thus be significantly more volatile than projected.9
The weighted-average duration of the SOMA Treasury portfolio is currently about
6½ years (see the lower panel of the exhibit). Under the baseline scenario, it is
projected to be about three months shorter at the end of this year.10 Duration is
projected to decline through 2017, reflecting the end of reinvestments as well as
the aging of the portfolio, and subsequently to rise through 2021, when the size of
the balance sheet is normalized.11 Under the lower federal funds rate scenario,
duration peaks at about the same level as in the baseline scenario, but nearly two
quarters later, reflecting the delayed normalization of the size of the balance sheet.
After reaching its peak when the size of the balance sheet is normalized, duration
is projected to resume its decline in both scenarios as the Desk starts purchasing
Treasury securities to keep pace with currency growth. In particular, the duration
contour in this latter portion of the projection is based on the key assumption that
the Federal Reserve will buy only Treasury bills until those holdings are equal to
approximately 30 percent of the Treasury portfolio, similar to the pre-crisis
composition of the portfolio (currently there are no Treasury bill holdings).
Thereafter, purchases of Treasury securities are assumed to be spread across the
maturity spectrum.12
9 Since the January Tealbook, the Board’s balance sheet and income projections use a staff MBS
prepayment model. This model was previously employed earlier in the context of the “Confidence Interval
Projections of the Balance Sheet” boxes in the September and December Tealbooks.
10 The July 2015 Tealbook B box “History and Projections for the Characteristics of SOMA
Treasury Holdings” provides more information on the duration of the SOMA Treasury portfolio.
11 The duration of the SOMA Treasury portfolio initially declines once reinvestments cease, as
Treasury securities in the portfolio approach maturity. Once the pace of roll-offs accelerates starting in
2018 and longer tenor securities account for a larger share in the portfolio, duration increases until the
balance sheet is normalized.
12 We assume zero purchases of agency MBS after reinvestments cease.
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 51 of 54

--- Page 55 ---

(This page is intentionally blank.)
snoitcejorP
Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Page 52 of 54

--- Page 56 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
Abbreviations
ABS asset-backed securities
BEA Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce
BHC bank holding company
CDS credit default swaps
CFTC Commodity Futures Trading Commission
C&I commercial and industrial
CLO collateralized loan obligation
CMBS commercial mortgage-backed securities
CPI consumer price index
CRE commercial real estate
Desk Open Market Desk
DSGE dynamic stochastic general equilibrium
ECB European Central Bank
EDO Estimated, dynamic, optimization-based model
ELB effective lower bound
EME emerging market economy
FDIC Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
FOMC Federal Open Market Committee; also, the Committee
GCF general collateral finance
GDI gross domestic income
GDP gross domestic product
GSIBs globally systemically important banking organizations
HQLA high-quality liquid assets
ISM Institute for Supply Management
LIBOR London interbank offered rate
MBS mortgage-backed securities
MMFs money market funds
Page 53 of 54

--- Page 57 ---

Authorized for Public Release
Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) March 10, 2016
NBER National Bureau of Economic Research
NI nominal income
NIPA national income and product accounts
OIS overnight index swap
ON RRP overnight reverse repurchase agreement
PCE personal consumption expenditures
repo repurchase agreement
RMBS residential mortgage-backed securities
RRP reverse repurchase agreement
SCOOS Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms
SEP Summary of Economic Projections
SFA Supplemental Financing Account
SLOOS Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices
SOMA System Open Market Account
TBA to be announced (for example, TBA market)
TGA U.S. Treasury’s General Account
TIPS Treasury inflation-protected securities
TPE Term premium effects
Page 54 of 54

# Tables

## Page_14_Table_1


| 2015   | 2016   | 2017   | 2018   |
|--------|--------|--------|--------|
| H2     |        |        |        |


## Page_15_Table_1


| 2016   |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|--------|----|----|----|----|----|----|
| Q1     | Q2 | Q3 | Q4 | Q1 | Q2 | Q3 |