# 20110427_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:36:50*
*Pages: 21, Tables: 2*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
April 26–27, 2011
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit- Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office
tee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve of the Secretary, Board of Governors
System was held in the offices of the Board of Gover-
nors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 26, 2011, Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Bank-
at 10:30 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, April 27, ing Supervision and Regulation, Board of
2011, at 8:30 a.m. Governors
PRESENT: Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability
Ben Bernanke, Chairman Policy and Research, Board of Governors
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman
Elizabeth Duke Robert deV. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of
Charles L. Evans the Secretary, Board of Governors
Richard W. Fisher
Narayana Kocherlakota William Nelson, Deputy Director, Division of
Charles I. Plosser Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Sarah Bloom Raskin
Daniel K. Tarullo Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Janet L. Yellen Board Members, Board of Governors
Christine Cumming, Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Charles S. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Of-
Lockhart, Sandra Pianalto, and John C. Wil- fice of the Staff Director, Board of Governors
liams, Alternate Members of the Federal Open
Market Committee Lawrence Slifman and William Wascher, Senior
Associate Directors, Division of Research and
James Bullard, Thomas M. Hoenig, and Eric Ro- Statistics, Board of Governors
sengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, Andrew T. Levin, Senior Adviser, Office of Board
respectively Members, Board of Governors
William B. English, Secretary and Economist Joyce K. Zickler, Visiting Senior Adviser, Division
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Michael G. Palumbo, Associate Director, Division
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary of Research and Statistics, Board of Gover-
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel nors; Trevor A. Reeve,¹ Associate Director,
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Division of International Finance, Board of
Nathan Sheets, Economist Governors
David J. Stockton, Economist
Fabio M. Natalucci, Assistant Director, Division of
James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Steven B. Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Kamin, Loretta J. Mester, David Reifschneider,
Harvey Rosenblum, David W. Wilcox, and David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of
Kei-Mu Yi, Associate Economists Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Ac- _______________________
count ¹ Attended Tuesday’s session only.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Economist, Division of Agreement of 1994. The arrangement with the Bank of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Canada is in the amount of $2 billion equivalent, and
the arrangement with the Banco de México is in the
James M. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Re- amount of $3 billion equivalent. The vote to renew the
serve Bank of Minneapolis System’s participation in these swap arrangements was
taken at this meeting because of a provision in the ar-
Jamie J. McAndrews and Mark S. Sniderman, Ex- rangements that requires each party to provide six
ecutive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks months’ prior notice of an intention to terminate its
of New York and Cleveland, respectively participation.
The staff next gave a presentation on strategies for
David Altig, Alan D. Barkema, Richard P. Dzina,
normalizing the stance and conduct of monetary policy
David Marshall, Christopher J. Waller, and
over time as the economy strengthens. Normalizing
John A. Weinberg, Senior Vice Presidents,
the stance of policy would entail the withdrawal of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Kansas City,
current extraordinary degree of accommodation at the
New York, Chicago, St. Louis, and Richmond,
appropriate time, while normalizing the conduct of policy
respectively
would involve draining the large volume of reserve bal-
ances in the banking system and shrinking the overall
John Fernald and Giovanni Olivei, Vice Presidents,
size of the balance sheet, as well as returning the
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco and
SOMA to its historical composition of essentially only
Boston, respectively
Treasury securities. The presentation noted a few key
issues that the Committee would need to address in
deciding on its approach to normalization. The first
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
key issue was the extent to which the Committee would
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
want to tighten policy, at the appropriate time, by in-
The Manager of the System Open Market Account
creasing short-term interest rates, by decreasing its
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and
holdings of longer-term securities, or both. Because
foreign financial markets during the period since the
the two policies would restrain economic activity by
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) met on
tightening financial conditions, they could be combined
March 15, 2011. He also reported on System open
in various ways to achieve similar outcomes. For ex-
market operations, including the continuing reinvest-
ample, in principle, the Committee could accomplish
ment into longer-term Treasury securities of principal
essentially the same degree of monetary tightening by
payments received on the SOMA’s holdings of agency
selling assets sooner and faster but raising the target for
debt and agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities
the federal funds rate later and more slowly, or by sell-
(MBS) as well as the ongoing purchases of additional
ing assets later and more slowly but increasing the fed-
Treasury securities first authorized in November 2010.
eral funds rate target sooner and faster. The SOMA
Since November, purchases by the Open Market Desk
portfolio could be reduced by selling securities outright,
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York had in-
by ceasing the reinvestment of principal payments on
creased the SOMA’s holdings by $422 billion. The
its securities holdings, or both. A second key issue was
Manager reported on the U.S. authorities’ participation
the extent to which the Committee might choose to
in the coordinated foreign exchange intervention an-
vary the pace of any asset sales it undertakes in re-
nounced by the Group of Seven (G-7) finance minis-
sponse to economic and financial conditions. If it
ters and central bank governors on March 17, 2011. By
chose to make the pace of sales quite responsive to
unanimous votes, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
conditions, the FOMC would be able to actively use
domestic and foreign exchange market transactions
two policy instruments—asset sales and the federal
over the intermeeting period.
funds rate target—to pursue its economic objectives,
By unanimous vote, the Committee agreed to extend which could increase the scope and flexibility for ad-
the reciprocal currency (swap) arrangements with the justing financial conditions. In contrast, sales at a pace
Bank of Canada and the Banco de México for an addi- that varied less with changes in economic and financial
tional year beginning in mid-December 2011; these conditions and was preannounced and largely prede-
arrangements are associated with the Federal Reserve’s termined would leave the federal funds rate target as
participation in the North American Framework the Committee’s primary active policy instrument,

--- Page 3 ---

______________________________M_i_n_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ o__f _A_p_r_il_ 2_6_-_2_7,_ 2_0_1_1_________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
which could result in policy that is more straightfor- regarding forward policy guidance would need to ac-
ward for the Committee to calibrate and to communi- company the normalization process.
cate. Finally, the staff presentation noted that the
Participants expressed a range of views on some as-
Committee would need to decide if and when to use
pects of a normalization strategy. Most participants
the tools that it has developed to temporarily reduce
indicated that once asset sales became appropriate,
reserve balances—reverse repurchase agreements and
such sales should be put on a largely predetermined
term deposits—in order to tighten the correspondence
and preannounced path; however, many of those par-
between any changes in the interest rate the Federal
ticipants noted that the pace of sales could nonetheless
Reserve pays on excess reserves and the changes in the
be adjusted in response to material changes in the eco-
federal funds rate.
nomic outlook. Several other participants preferred
Meeting participants agreed on several principles that instead that the pace of sales be a key policy tool and
would guide the Committee’s strategy for normalizing be varied actively in response to changes in the out-
monetary policy. First, with regard to the normaliza- look. A majority of participants preferred that sales of
tion of the stance of monetary policy, the pace and se- agency securities come after the first increase in the
quencing of the policy steps would be driven by the FOMC’s target for short-term interest rates, and many
Committee’s monetary policy objectives for maximum of those participants also expressed a preference that
employment and price stability. Participants noted that the sales proceed relatively gradually, returning the
the Committee’s decision to discuss the appropriate SOMA’s composition to all Treasury securities over
strategy for normalizing the stance of policy at the cur- perhaps five years. Participants noted that, for any giv-
rent meeting did not mean that the move toward such en degree of policy tightening, more-gradual sales that
normalization would necessarily begin soon. Second, commenced later in the normalization process would
to normalize the conduct of monetary policy, it was allow for an earlier increase of the federal funds rate
agreed that the size of the SOMA’s securities portfolio target from its effective lower bound than would be the
would be reduced over the intermediate term to a level case if asset sales commenced earlier and at a more rap-
consistent with the implementation of monetary policy id pace. As a result, the Committee would later have
through the management of the federal funds rate ra- the option of easing policy with an interest rate cut if
ther than through variation in the size or composition economic conditions then warranted. An earlier in-
of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. Third, over the crease in the federal funds rate was also mentioned as
intermediate term, the exit strategy would involve re- helpful to limit the potential for the very low level of
turning the SOMA to holding essentially only Treasury that rate to encourage financial imbalances. A few par-
securities in order to minimize the extent to which the ticipants expressed a preference that sales begin before
Federal Reserve portfolio might affect the allocation of any increase in the federal funds rate target, and a few
credit across sectors of the economy. Such a shift was other participants indicated that sales and increases in
seen as requiring sales of agency securities at some the federal funds rate target should commence at the
point. And fourth, asset sales would be implemented same time. The participants who favored earlier sales
within a framework that had been communicated to the also generally indicated a preference for relatively rapid
public in advance, and at a pace that potentially could sales, with some suggesting that agency securities in the
be adjusted in response to changes in economic or fi- SOMA be reduced to zero over as little as one or two
nancial conditions. years. Such an approach was viewed as allowing for a
faster return to a normal policy environment, potential-
In addition, nearly all participants indicated that the
ly reducing any upside risks to inflation stemming from
first step toward normalization should be ceasing to
outsized reserve balances, and more quickly eliminating
reinvest payments of principal on agency securities and,
any effects of SOMA holdings of agency securities on
simultaneously or soon after, ceasing to reinvest prin-
the allocation of credit.
cipal payments on Treasury securities. Most partici-
pants viewed halting reinvestments as a way to begin to Most participants saw changes in the target for the fed-
gradually reduce the size of the balance sheet. It was eral funds rate as the preferred active tool for tighten-
noted, however, that ending reinvestments would con- ing monetary policy when appropriate. A number of
stitute a modest step toward policy tightening, implying participants noted that it would be advisable to begin
that that decision should be made in the context of the using the temporary reserves-draining tools in advance
economic outlook and the Committee’s policy objec- of an increase in the Committee’s federal funds rate
tives. In addition, changes in the statement language target, in part because doing so would put the Federal

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Reserve in a better position to assess the effectiveness The unemployment rate edged down further to
of the draining tools and judge the size of draining op- 8.8 percent in March, while the labor force participa-
erations that might be required to support changes in tion rate was unchanged. However, both long-duration
the interest on excess reserves (IOER) rate in imple- unemployment and the share of workers employed part
menting a desired increase in short-term rates. A num- time for economic reasons were still very high.
ber of participants also noted that they would be pre-
Industrial production in the manufacturing sector ex-
pared to sell securities sooner if the temporary reserves-
panded at a robust pace in February and March. The
draining operations and the end of the reinvestment of
manufacturing capacity utilization rate moved up fur-
principal payments were not sufficient to support a
ther, though it continued to be a good bit lower than its
fairly tight link between increases in the IOER rate and
longer-run average. Most forward-looking indicators
increases in short-term market interest rates.
of industrial activity, such as the new orders indexes in
In the discussion of normalization, some participants the national and regional manufacturing surveys, re-
also noted their preferences about the longer-run mained at levels consistent with solid gains in produc-
framework for monetary policy implementation. Most tion in the near term. However, motor vehicle assem-
of these participants indicated that they preferred that blies were expected to step down in the second quarter
monetary policy eventually operate through a corridor- from their level in March, reflecting emerging shortages
type system in which the federal funds rate trades in the of specialized components imported from Japan.
middle of a range, with the IOER rate as the floor and
The rise in consumer spending appeared to have
the discount rate as the ceiling of the range, as opposed
slowed to a moderate rate in the first quarter from the
to a floor-type system in which a relatively high level of
stronger pace posted in the fourth quarter of last year.
reserve balances keeps the federal funds rate near the
Total real personal consumption expenditures picked
IOER rate. A couple of participants noted that any
up in February after being about unchanged in January.
normalization strategy would likely involve an elevated
Nominal retail sales, excluding purchases at motor ve-
balance sheet with the federal funds rate target near the
hicles and parts outlets, posted a sizable gain in March,
IOER rate—as in floor-type systems—for some time,
but sales of new light motor vehicles declined some-
and therefore the Committee would accumulate expe-
what. Real disposable income edged down in February
rience during the process of normalizing policy that
following an increase in January that reflected the tem-
would allow it to make a more informed choice regard-
porary reduction in payroll taxes. In addition, consum-
ing the longer-term framework at a later date.
er sentiment declined noticeably in March and re-
The Committee agreed that more discussion of these mained relatively downbeat in early April.
issues was needed, and no decisions regarding the
Activity in the housing market remained very weak, as
Committee’s strategy for normalizing policy were made
the large overhang of foreclosed and distressed proper-
at this meeting.
ties continued to restrain new construction. Starts and
Staff Review of the Economic Situation permits of new single-family homes inched down, on
The information reviewed at the April 26–27 meeting net, in February and March, and they have been essen-
indicated, on balance, that economic activity expanded tially flat since around the middle of last year. Demand
at a moderate pace in recent months, and labor market for housing also continued to be depressed. Sales of
conditions continued to improve gradually. Headline new and existing homes moved lower, on net, in Feb-
consumer price inflation was boosted by large increases ruary and March, while measures of home prices slid
in food and energy prices, but measures of underlying further in February.
inflation were still subdued and longer-run inflation
Real business investment in equipment and software
expectations remained stable.
(E&S) appeared to have increased more robustly in the
Private nonfarm payroll employment increased again in first quarter than in the fourth quarter of last year.
March, and the gains in hiring for the first quarter as a Nominal shipments of nondefense capital goods rose
whole were somewhat above the pace seen in the in February and March, and businesses’ purchases of
fourth quarter. A number of indicators of job open- new vehicles trended higher. New orders of nonde-
ings and hiring plans improved in February and March. fense capital goods continued to run ahead of ship-
Although initial claims for unemployment insurance ments in February and March, and this expanding
were flat, on net, from early March through the middle backlog of unfilled orders pointed to further increases
of April, they remained lower than earlier in the year. in shipments in subsequent months. In addition, sur-

--- Page 5 ---

______________________________M_i_n_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ o__f _A_p_r_il_ 2_6_-_2_7,_ 2_0_1_1_________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
vey measures of business conditions and sentiment in April—reversing their uptick in March—and stayed
recent months were consistent with continued robust within the range that has prevailed over the past several
gains in E&S spending. In contrast, business outlays years.
for nonresidential construction remained extremely
Available measures of labor compensation suggested
weak in February, restrained by high vacancy rates, low
that wage increases continued to be restrained by the
prices for office and commercial properties, and tight
presence of a large margin of slack in the labor market.
credit conditions for commercial real estate lending.
Average hourly earnings for all employees were flat in
Real nonfarm inventory investment appeared to have March, and their average rate of increase over the pre-
moved up to a moderate pace in the first quarter after ceding 12 months remained low.
slowing sharply in the preceding quarter. Motor ve-
The pace of recovery abroad appeared to have
hicle inventories were drawn down more slowly in the
strengthened earlier this year, but the disaster in Japan
first quarter than in the fourth quarter, while data
raised uncertainties about foreign activity in the near
through February suggested that the pace of stock-
term. In the euro area, production expanded at a solid
building outside of motor vehicles had picked up a bit.
pace, though indicators of consumer spending
Book-value inventory-to-sales ratios in February were
weakened. While measures of economic activity in
in line with their pre-recession norms, and survey data
Germany posted strong gains, economic conditions in
in March provided little evidence that businesses per-
Greece and Portugal deteriorated further. The damage
ceived that their inventories were too high.
caused by the earthquake and tsunami in Japan ap-
The available data on government spending indicated peared to be sharply curtailing Japanese economic ac-
that real federal purchases fell in the first quarter, led by tivity and posed concerns about disruptions to supply
a reduction in defense outlays. Real expenditures by chains and production in other economies. Emerging
state and local governments also appeared to have de- market economies (EMEs) continued to expand rapid-
clined, as outlays for construction projects decreased ly. Rising prices of oil and other commodities boosted
further in February to a level well below that in the inflation in foreign economies. However, core inflation
fourth quarter, and state and local employment contin- remained subdued in most of the advanced foreign
ued to contract in March. economies, and inflation in the EMEs seemed to have
declined as food price inflation slowed.
The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed slightly in
February after widening sharply in January. Following Staff Review of the Financial Situation
a solid increase in January, exports fell back some in The decisions by the FOMC at its March meeting to
February, with declines widespread across categories. continue its asset purchase program and to maintain
Imports also declined in February after posting large the 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds
gains in January. On average, the trade deficit in Janu- rate were in line with market expectations; nonetheless,
ary and February was wider than in the fourth quarter. the accompanying statement prompted a modest rise in
nominal yields, as market participants reportedly per-
Overall U.S. consumer price inflation moved up further
ceived a somewhat more optimistic tone in the Com-
in February and March, as increases in the prices of
mittee’s economic outlook, as well as heightened con-
energy and food commodities continued to be passed
cern about inflation risks. Over the intermeeting pe-
through to the retail level. More recently, survey data
riod, yields on nominal Treasury securities changed
through the middle of April pointed to additional in-
little, on net, amid swings in investors’ assessments of
creases in retail gasoline prices, while increases in the
global risks. Short-term funding rates, including the
prices of food commodities appeared to have mod-
effective federal funds rate, shifted down several basis
erated somewhat. Excluding food and energy, core
points in early April following a change in the Federal
consumer price inflation remained relatively subdued.
Deposit Insurance Corporation’s deposit insurance
Although core consumer price inflation over the first
assessment system. On net, the expected path of the
three months of the year stepped up somewhat, the
federal funds rate over the next two years was little
12-month change in the core consumer price index
changed over the intermeeting period.
through March was essentially the same as it was a year
earlier. Near-term inflation expectations from the Measures of inflation compensation over the next
Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of 5 years based on nominal and inflation-protected
Consumers remained elevated in early April. But Treasury securities increased slightly, on net, over the
longer-term inflation expectations moved down in early intermeeting period, partly reflecting the ongoing rise in

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
commodity prices. Staff models suggested that the subprime and prime mortgages were nearly unchanged
modest increase in inflation compensation 5 to 10 years but remained at elevated levels. However, the rate of
ahead was mostly attributable to increases in liquidity new delinquencies on prime mortgages declined fur-
and inflation-risk premiums rather than higher ex- ther.
pected inflation.
Conditions in consumer credit markets continued to
Over the intermeeting period, yields on corporate improve gradually. Total consumer credit growth
bonds were generally little changed, on net, and spreads picked up in February, as a gain in nonrevolving credit
of investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds more than offset a further contraction in revolving cre-
relative to comparable-maturity Treasury securities nar- dit. Delinquency and charge-off rates for credit card
rowed slightly. Average secondary-market prices for debt moved down in recent months and approached
syndicated leveraged loans moved up further. Howev- pre-crisis levels. Issuance of consumer asset-backed
er, conditions in the municipal bond market remained securities remained steady in the first quarter of the
somewhat strained. year.
Broad U.S. stock price indexes rose, on net, over the Bank credit was about unchanged in March after de-
intermeeting period, as initial reports of better-than- clining, on average, in January and February. Core
expected first-quarter earnings lifted stock prices in late loans—the sum of C&I, real estate, and consumer
April. Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index loans—continued to contract, while holdings of securi-
was moderately lower, on net, ending the intermeeting ties increased moderately. The Senior Loan Officer
period at the low end of its recent range. Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices conducted
in April indicated that, on net, bank lending standards
Net debt financing by nonfinancial corporations re-
and terms had eased somewhat further during the first
mained robust in March. Net issuance of investment-
quarter of the year and demand for C&I loans, com-
and speculative-grade bonds by nonfinancial corpora-
mercial mortgages, and auto loans had increased, while
tions continued to be strong, and outstanding amounts
demand for residential mortgages continued to decline.
of commercial and industrial (C&I) loans and nonfi-
nancial commercial paper increased noticeably. Gross M2 expanded at a moderate pace in March. Liquid
public equity issuance by nonfinancial firms was robust deposits, the largest component of M2, advanced at a
in March, and indicators of the credit quality of nonfi- solid pace likely reflecting very low opportunity costs
nancial firms improved further. of holding such deposits. Currency advanced signifi-
cantly, supported by robust foreign demand for U.S.
Commercial mortgage markets showed some signs of
bank notes.
stabilization. Delinquency rates for commercial real
estate loans appeared to have leveled off in recent Foreign sovereign bond yields generally were little
months. Issuance of commercial mortgage-backed changed and equity prices rose, on net, over the inter-
securities picked up in the first quarter, although com- meeting period, although equity prices in Japan re-
mercial real estate loans at banks continued to run off. mained below their pre-earthquake levels despite the
In commercial real estate markets, property sales re- record amounts of liquidity injected by the Bank of
mained tepid, and prices stayed at depressed levels. Japan and the expansion of its asset purchase program.
The European Central Bank raised its main policy rate
Rates on conforming fixed-rate residential mortgages
25 basis points to 1¼ percent during the intermeeting
rose modestly during the intermeeting period, and their
period, and markets appeared to have priced in addi-
spreads relative to 10-year Treasury yields narrowed
tional rate increases over the rest of the year. The Bank
slightly. Mortgage refinancing activity remained near its
of England and the Bank of Canada left their policy
lowest level in more than two years. The Treasury De-
rates unchanged, but quotes from futures markets con-
partment’s announcement in late March that it would
tinued to suggest that both central banks would raise
begin selling its holdings of agency MBS at a gradual
rates later this year. China’s monetary authority further
pace had little lasting effect on MBS spreads. The Fed-
increased banks’ lending rates and deposit rates and
eral Reserve began competitive sales of the non-agency
continued to tighten reserve requirements; monetary
residential MBS held by Maiden Lane II LLC; initial
policy in a number of other EMEs was also tightened
sales met with strong demand, but market prices of
over the intermeeting period.
non-agency residential MBS were reportedly little
changed overall. The rates of serious delinquencies for

--- Page 7 ---

______________________________M_i_n_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ o__f _A_p_r_il_ 2_6_-_2_7,_ 2_0_1_1_________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
The broad nominal index of the U.S. dollar declined Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
more than 2 percent over the intermeeting period, Economic Outlook
though the dollar appreciated, on net, against the Japa- In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, all meeting
nese yen. The yen strengthened to an all-time high participants—the five members of the Board of Gov-
against the dollar after the earthquake in Japan, but this ernors and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve
move was more than reversed when the G-7 countries Banks—provided projections of output growth, the
intervened to sell yen. unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from
2011 through 2013 and over the longer run. Longer-
In early April, the Portuguese government requested
run projections represent each participant’s assessment
financial support from the European Union and the
of the rate to which each variable would be expected to
International Monetary Fund, but market participants
converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy
reportedly remained concerned about whether the Por-
and in the absence of further shocks. Participants’
tuguese government would reach agreement on an as-
forecasts are described in the Summary of Economic
sociated fiscal consolidation plan. Later in the inter-
Projections, which is attached as an addendum to these
meeting period, yields on Greece’s and other peripheral
minutes.
European countries’ sovereign debt jumped, reflecting
heightened market focus on a possible restructuring of In discussing intermeeting developments and their im-
Greek sovereign debt. plications for the economic outlook, participants
agreed that the information received since their pre-
Staff Economic Outlook
vious meeting was broadly consistent with continuation
With the recent data on spending somewhat weaker, on
of a moderate economic recovery, despite an unex-
balance, than the staff had expected at the time of the
pected slowing in the pace of economic growth in the
March FOMC meeting, the staff revised down its pro-
first quarter. While construction activity remained
jection for the rate of increase in real gross domestic
anemic, measures of consumer spending and business
product (GDP) over the first half of 2011. The effects
investment continued to expand and labor market con-
from the disaster in Japan were also anticipated to tem-
ditions continued to improve gradually. Participants
porarily hold down real GDP growth in the near term.
viewed the weakness in first-quarter economic growth
Over the medium term, the staff’s outlook for the pace
as likely to be largely transitory, influenced by unusually
of economic growth was broadly similar to its previous
severe weather, increases in energy and other commod-
forecast: As in the March projection, the staff expected
ity prices, and lower-than-expected defense spending.
real GDP to increase at a moderate rate through 2012,
As a result, they saw economic growth picking up later
with the ongoing recovery in activity receiving contin-
this year.
ued support from accommodative monetary policy,
increasing credit availability, and further improvements Participants’ forecasts for economic growth for 2012
in household and business confidence. The average and 2013 were largely unchanged from their January
pace of GDP growth was expected to be sufficient to projections and continued to indicate expectations that
gradually reduce the unemployment rate over the pro- the recovery will strengthen somewhat over time.
jection period, though the jobless rate was anticipated Nonetheless, the pickup in the pace of the economic
to remain elevated at the end of 2012. expansion was expected to be limited, reflecting the
effects of high energy prices, modest changes in hous-
Recent increases in consumer food and energy prices,
ing wealth, subdued real income gains, and fiscal con-
together with the small uptick in core consumer price
traction at the federal, state, and local levels. Partici-
inflation, led the staff to raise its near-term projection
pants continued to project the unemployment rate to
for consumer price inflation. However, inflation was
decline gradually over the forecast period but to remain
expected to recede over the medium term, as food and
elevated compared with their assessments of its longer-
energy prices were anticipated to decelerate. As in pre-
run level. Participants revised up their projections for
vious forecasts, the staff expected core consumer price
total inflation in 2011, reflecting recent increases in
inflation to remain subdued over the projection period,
energy and other commodity prices, but they generally
reflecting stable longer-term inflation expectations and
anticipated that the recent increase in inflation would
persistent slack in labor and product markets.
be transitory as commodity prices stabilize and inflation
expectations remain anchored. However, they all
agreed on the importance of closely monitoring devel-
opments regarding inflation and inflation expectations.

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Participants’ judgment that the recovery was continuing hausted potential productivity gains, but others indi-
at a moderate pace reflected both the incoming eco- cated that some firms may be putting hiring plans on
nomic indicators and information received from busi- hold until they are more certain of the future trend in
ness contacts. Growth in consumer spending remained materials and other input costs. Signs of rising wage
moderate despite the effects of higher gasoline and pressures were reportedly limited to a few skilled job
food prices, which appeared to have largely offset the categories for which workers are in short supply, while,
increase in disposable income from the payroll tax cut. in general, increases in wages have been subdued. Par-
Participants noted that these higher prices had weighed ticipants discussed whether the significant drop in the
on consumer sentiment about near-term economic unemployment rate might be overstating the degree of
conditions but that underlying fundamentals for con- improvement in labor markets because many of the
tinued moderate growth in spending remained in place. unemployed have dropped out of the labor force or
These underlying factors included continued improve- have accepted jobs that are less desirable than their
ment in household balance sheets, easing credit condi- former jobs.
tions, and strengthening labor markets.
Financial market conditions continued to improve over
Activity in the industrial sector also expanded further. the intermeeting period. Equity prices had risen, on
Industrial production posted solid gains, and, while the balance, since the previous meeting, reflecting an im-
most recent readings from some of the regional manu- proved outlook for earnings, and were up more sub-
facturing surveys showed small declines, in some cases stantially since the start of the year. Bankers again re-
these were from near-record highs. Manufacturers re- ported improvements in credit quality, with the volume
mained upbeat, although automakers were reporting of nonperforming assets declining at larger banks and
some difficulties in obtaining parts normally produced leveling off at smaller banks. In general, loan demand
in Japan, which might weigh on motor vehicle produc- remained weak. However, bank lending to medium-
tion in the current quarter. Investment in equipment sized and larger companies increased, and lending to
and software was fairly robust. In contrast, the housing small businesses picked up slightly. Banks reported an
sector remained distressed, with house prices flat to easing of lending terms on C&I loans, usually prompt-
down and a large overhang of vacant properties re- ed by increased competition in the face of still-weak
straining new construction, although reports indicated loan demand. Consumer credit conditions also eased
that sales volumes and traffic were higher in a few somewhat from the tight conditions seen during the
areas. Activity in the commercial real estate sector con- recession. However, demand for consumer credit oth-
tinued to be weak. er than auto loans reportedly changed little. A few par-
ticipants expressed concern that the easing of credit
Several participants indicated that, in contrast to the
conditions was creating incentives for increased lev-
somewhat weaker recent economic data, their business
erage and risk-taking in some areas, such as leveraged
contacts were more positive about the economy’s
syndicated loans and loans to finance land acquisition,
prospects, which supported the participants’ view that
and that this trend, if it became widespread and exces-
the recent weakness was likely to prove temporary.
sive, could pose a risk to financial stability.
They acknowledged, however, that sentiment can
change quickly; indeed, one participant noted that his Participants discussed the recent rise in inflation, which
contacts had recently turned more pessimistic, and sev- had been driven largely by significant increases in ener-
eral participants indicated that their business contacts gy and, to a somewhat lesser extent, other commodity
expressed concern about the effects of higher com- prices. These commodity price increases, in turn, re-
modity prices on their own costs and on the purchasing flected robust global demand and geopolitical devel-
power of households. opments that had reduced supply. One participant
suggested that excess liquidity might be leading to
Participants judged that overall conditions in labor
speculation in commodity markets, possibly putting
markets had continued to improve, albeit gradually.
upward pressure on prices. Many participants reported
The unemployment rate had decreased further and pay-
that an increasing number of business contacts ex-
roll employment had risen again in March. Some par-
pressed concerns about rising cost pressures and were
ticipants reported that more of their business contacts
intending, or already attempting, to pass on at least a
have plans to increase their payrolls later this year. A
portion of these higher costs to their customers in or-
few participants noted that firms may be poised to ac-
der to protect profit margins. This development was
celerate their pace of hiring because they have ex-
also reflected in the rising indexes of prices paid and

--- Page 9 ---

______________________________M_i_n_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ o__f _A_p_r_il_ 2_6_-_2_7,_ 2_0_1_1_________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
received in several regional manufacturing surveys. justments at all levels of government in the United
Some participants noted that higher commodity prices States, financial disruptions that would be associated
were negatively affecting both business and consumer with a failure to increase the federal debt limit, and the
sentiment. Core inflation and other indicators of un- possibility that the economic weakness in the first quar-
derlying inflation over the medium term had increased ter was signaling less underlying momentum going for-
modestly in recent months, but their levels remained ward. However, participants also noted that the rapid
subdued. decline in the unemployment rate over the past several
months suggested the possibility of stronger-than-
Participants generally anticipated that the higher level
anticipated economic growth over coming quarters.
of overall inflation would be transitory. This outlook
was based partly on a projected leveling-off of com- In their discussion of monetary policy, some partici-
modity prices and the belief that longer-run inflation pants expressed the view that in the context of in-
expectations would remain stable. Some participants creased inflation risks and roughly balanced risks to
noted that pressures on labor costs continued to be economic growth, the Committee would need to be
muted; if such circumstances continued, a large, persis- prepared to begin taking steps toward less-
tent rise in inflation would be unusual. Measures of accommodative policy. A few of these participants
near-term inflation expectations had risen along with thought that economic conditions might warrant action
the recent rise in overall inflation. While some indica- to raise the federal funds rate target or to sell assets in
tors of longer-term expectations had increased, others the SOMA portfolio later this year, but noted that even
were little changed or down, on net, since March. with such steps, monetary policy would remain ac-
Many participants had become more concerned about commodative for some time to come. However, some
the upside risks to the inflation outlook, including the participants indicated that underlying inflation re-
possibilities that oil prices might continue to rise, that mained subdued; that longer-term inflation expecta-
there might be greater pass-through of higher com- tions were likely to remain anchored, partly because
modity costs into broader price measures, and that ele- modest changes in labor costs would constrain inflation
vated overall inflation caused by higher energy and oth- trends; and that given the downside risks to economic
er commodity prices could lead to a rise in longer-term growth, an early exit could unnecessarily damp the on-
inflation expectations. Participants agreed that moni- going economic recovery.
toring inflation trends and inflation expectations closely
Committee Policy Action
was important in determining whether action would be
Committee members agreed that no changes to the
needed to prevent a more lasting pickup in the rate of
Committee’s asset purchase program or to its target
general price inflation, which would be costly to re-
range for the federal funds rate were warranted at this
verse. Maintaining well-anchored inflation expectations
meeting. The information received over the intermeet-
would depend on the credibility of the Committee’s
ing period indicated that the economic recovery was
commitment to deliver on the price stability part of its
proceeding at a moderate pace, albeit somewhat slower
mandate. A few participants suggested that clearer
than had been anticipated earlier in the year. Overall
communication about the Committee’s inflation out-
conditions in the labor market were gradually improv-
look, such as explaining the measures it uses to gauge
ing, and the unemployment rate continued to decline,
medium-term trends in general price inflation and an-
although it remained elevated relative to levels that the
nouncing an explicit numerical inflation objective,
Committee judged to be consistent, over the longer
would be helpful in this regard.
run, with its statutory mandate of maximum employ-
While rising energy prices posed an upside risk to the ment and price stability. Significant increases in energy
inflation forecast, they also posed a downside risk to and other commodity prices had boosted overall infla-
economic growth. Although most participants contin- tion, but members expected this increase to be transito-
ued to see the risks to their outlooks for economic ry and to unwind when commodity price increases
growth as being broadly balanced, a number now abated. Notwithstanding recent modest increases, indi-
judged those risks to be tilted to the downside. These cators of medium-term inflation remained subdued and
downside risks included a larger-than-expected drag on somewhat below the levels seen as consistent with the
household and business spending from higher energy dual mandate as indicated by the Committee’s longer-
prices, continued fiscal strains in Europe, larger-than- run inflation projections. Near-term inflation expecta-
anticipated effects from supply disruptions in the af- tions had increased with energy prices and overall infla-
termath of the disaster in Japan, continuing fiscal ad- tion. Recent movements in measures of longer-term

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
inflation expectations were discussed. While some vide additional context for the Committee’s policy de-
measures of longer-term inflation expectations had ris- cisions.
en, others were little changed or down, on net, since
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
March, and members agreed that longer-term inflation
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
expectations had remained stable. Given this economic
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
outlook, the Committee agreed to continue to expand
ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance
its holdings of longer-term Treasury securities as an-
with the following domestic policy directive:
nounced in November in order to promote a stronger
pace of economic recovery and to help ensure that in- “The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
flation, over time, is at levels consistent with the Com- monetary and financial conditions that will fos-
mittee’s mandate. Specifically, the Committee main- ter price stability and promote sustainable
tained its existing policy of reinvesting principal pay- growth in output. To further its long-run ob-
ments from its securities holdings and affirmed that it jectives, the Committee seeks conditions in re-
will complete purchases of $600 billion of longer-term serve markets consistent with federal funds
Treasury securities by the end of the current quarter. A trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The
few members remained uncertain about the benefits of Committee directs the Desk to execute pur-
the asset purchase program but, with the program near- chases of longer-term Treasury securities in
ly completed, judged that making changes to the pro- order to increase the total face value of domes-
gram at this time was not appropriate. The Committee tic securities held in the System Open Market
continued to anticipate that economic conditions, in- Account to approximately $2.6 trillion by the
cluding low rates of resource utilization, subdued infla- end of June 2011. The Committee also directs
tion trends, and stable inflation expectations, were like- the Desk to reinvest principal payments from
ly to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal agency debt and agency mortgage-backed se-
funds rate for an extended period. That said, a few curities in longer-term Treasury securities. The
members viewed the increase in inflation risks as sug- System Open Market Account Manager and
gesting that economic conditions might well evolve in a the Secretary will keep the Committee in-
way that would warrant the Committee taking steps formed of ongoing developments regarding
toward less-accommodative policy sooner than current- the System’s balance sheet that could affect the
ly anticipated. attainment over time of the Committee’s ob-
jectives of maximum employment and price
Members agreed that the Committee will regularly re-
stability.”
view the size and composition of its securities holdings
in light of incoming information and that they are pre- The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
pared to adjust those holdings as needed to best foster low to be released at 12:30 p.m.:
maximum employment and price stability. Some
“Information received since the Federal Open
members pointed out that there would need to be a
Market Committee met in March indicates that
significant change in the economic outlook, or the risks
the economic recovery is proceeding at a mod-
to that outlook, before another program of asset pur-
erate pace and overall conditions in the labor
chases would be warranted; in their view, absent such
market are improving gradually. Household
changes, the benefits of additional purchases would be
spending and business investment in equip-
unlikely to outweigh the costs.
ment and software continue to expand. How-
In the statement to be released following the meeting, ever, investment in nonresidential structures is
members decided to indicate that the economic recov- still weak, and the housing sector continues to
ery was proceeding at a moderate pace and that overall be depressed. Commodity prices have risen
conditions in the labor market were gradually improv- significantly since last summer, and concerns
ing. The Committee also decided to summarize its cur- about global supplies of crude oil have contri-
rent thinking about inflation pressures and to empha- buted to a further increase in oil prices since
size that it will closely monitor the evolution of infla- the Committee met in March. Inflation has
tion and inflation expectations. Members anticipated picked up in recent months, but longer-term
that the Chairman, who would deliver his first post- inflation expectations have remained stable
meeting press briefing later that afternoon, would pro- and measures of underlying inflation are still
subdued.

--- Page 11 ---

______________________________M_i_n_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ o__f _A_p_r_il_ 2_6_-_2_7,_ 2_0_1_1________________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the tions, including low rates of resource utiliza-
Committee seeks to foster maximum employ- tion, subdued inflation trends, and stable infla-
ment and price stability. The unemployment tion expectations, are likely to warrant excep-
rate remains elevated, and measures of under- tionally low levels for the federal funds rate for
lying inflation continue to be somewhat low, an extended period.
relative to levels that the Committee judges to
The Committee will continue to monitor the
be consistent, over the longer run, with its dual
economic outlook and financial developments
mandate. Increases in the prices of energy and
and will employ its policy tools as necessary to
other commodities have pushed up inflation in
support the economic recovery and to help en-
recent months. The Committee expects these
sure that inflation, over time, is at levels con-
effects to be transitory, but it will pay close at-
sistent with its mandate.”
tention to the evolution of inflation and infla-
tion expectations. The Committee continues Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C.
to anticipate a gradual return to higher levels of Dudley, Elizabeth Duke, Charles L. Evans, Richard W.
resource utilization in a context of price stabili- Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, Charles I. Plosser,
ty. Sarah Bloom Raskin, Daniel K. Tarullo, and Janet L.
Yellen.
To promote a stronger pace of economic re-
covery and to help ensure that inflation, over Voting against this action: None.
time, is at levels consistent with its mandate,
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
the Committee decided today to continue ex-
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, June 21–22,
panding its holdings of securities as announced
2011. The meeting adjourned at 10:15 a.m. on April
in November. In particular, the Committee is
27, 2011.
maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting
principal payments from its securities holdings Notation Vote
and will complete purchases of $600 billion of By notation vote completed on April 4, 2011, the
longer-term Treasury securities by the end of Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
the current quarter. The Committee will regu- FOMC meeting held on March 15, 2011.
larly review the size and composition of its se-
curities holdings in light of incoming informa-
tion and is prepared to adjust those holdings as
needed to best foster maximum employment
_____________________________
and price stability.
William B. English
The Committee will maintain the target range Secretary
for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and
continues to anticipate that economic condi

--- Page 12 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the April 26–27, 2011, Federal in real GDP, the unemployment rate is projected to
Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, the mem- gradually trend lower over this projection period.
bers of the Board of Governors and the presidents of However, participants anticipated that, at the end of
the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom participate in 2013, the unemployment rate would still be well above
the deliberations of the FOMC, submitted projections their estimates of the longer-run unemployment rate.
for growth of real output, the unemployment rate, and Most participants expected that overall inflation would
inflation for the years 2011 to 2013 and over the longer move up this year, but they projected this increase to
run. The projections were based on information avail- be temporary, with overall inflation moving back in line
able through the end of the meeting and on each par- with core inflation in 2012 and 2013 and remaining at
ticipant’s assumptions about factors likely to affect or below rates they see as consistent, over the longer
economic outcomes, including his or her assessment of run, with the Committee’s dual mandate of maximum
appropriate monetary policy. “Appropriate monetary employment and price stability. Participants generally
policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each saw core inflation gradually edging higher over the next
participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for two years from its current relatively low level.
economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or
On balance, as indicated in table 1, participants antic-
her interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objec-
ipated somewhat lower GDP growth and slightly high-
tives of maximum employment and stable prices.
er inflation over the forecast period than they projected
Longer-run projections represent each participant’s
in January. Participants marked down their forecasts
assessment of the rate to which each variable would be
for real GDP growth this year, revised them down by
expected to converge over time under appropriate
less for 2012 and 2013, and did not alter their expecta-
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks.
tions for economic growth in the longer run. Most
As depicted in figure 1, FOMC participants expected participants also lowered their forecasts for the average
the economic recovery to continue at a moderate pace, unemployment rate at the end of this year, but they
with growth of real gross domestic product (GDP) continued to see the unemployment rate moving down
picking up modestly this year (relative to 2010) and slowly in 2012 and 2013 to levels that were little
strengthening further in 2012 and a bit more in 2013. changed from the previous projections. Participants
With the pace of economic growth exceeding their raised their forecasts for overall inflation this year;
estimates of the longer-run sustainable rate of increases however, most expected that the increase would be
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Governors and Reserve Bank presidents, April 2011
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2011 2012 2013 Longer run 2011 2012 2013 Longer run
Change in real GDP. . . . . . 3.1 to 3.3 3.5 to 4.2 3.5 to 4.3 2.5 to 2.8 2.9 to 3.7 2.9 to 4.4 3.0 to 5.0 2.4 to 3.0
January projection. . . . 3.4 to 3.9 3.5 to 4.4 3.7 to 4.6 2.5 to 2.8 3.2 to 4.2 3.4 to 4.5 3.0 to 5.0 2.4 to 3.0
Unemployment rate. . . . . . 8.4 to 8.7 7.6 to 7.9 6.8 to 7.2 5.2 to 5.6 8.1 to 8.9 7.1 to 8.4 6.0 to 8.4 5.0 to 6.0
January projection. . . . 8.8 to 9.0 7.6 to 8.1 6.8 to 7.2 5.0 to 6.0 8.4 to 9.0 7.2 to 8.4 6.0 to 7.9 5.0 to 6.2
PCE inflation. . . . . . . . . . . 2.1 to 2.8 1.2 to 2.0 1.4 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 2.0 to 3.6 1.0 to 2.8 1.2 to 2.5 1.5 to 2.0
January projection. . . . 1.3 to 1.7 1.0 to 1.9 1.2 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 1.0 to 2.0 0.7 to 2.2 0.6 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0
Core PCE inflation3. . . . . . 1.3 to 1.6 1.3 to 1.8 1.4 to 2.0 1.1 to 2.0 1.1 to 2.0 1.2 to 2.0
January projection. . . . 1.0 to 1.3 1.0 to 1.5 1.2 to 2.0 0.7 to 1.8 0.6 to 2.0 0.6 to 2.0
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and in inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of
the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expendi-
tures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in
the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projec-
tions represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the
absence of further shocks to the economy. The January projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on
January 25-26, 2011.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year consists of all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

--- Page 13 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2011–13 and over the longer run
Percent
Change in real GDP 5
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections 4
3
2
1
+
Actual _0
1
2
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual.

--- Page 14 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__co_n__o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g _o_f_ A__p_ri_l _2_6-_2_7_, _2_0_1_1______________P_a_g_e_ _3
transitory and made only minor changes to their fore- expansion over the next two years. Most participants
casts for the rate of inflation in 2012 and 2013 or for anticipated that the recovery in the housing market
the longer run. Most participants anticipated that five would remain slow, restrained by the overhang of va-
or six years would likely be required for the economy to cant properties and depressed home values; most also
converge fully to its longer-run path characterized by expected increasing fiscal drag at the federal, state, and
rates of output growth, unemployment, and inflation local levels. In addition, some participants noted the
consistent with their interpretation of the Federal Re- negative impact on household purchasing power of the
serve’s dual objectives. elevated levels of energy and food prices. In the ab-
sence of further shocks, participants generally expected
A sizable majority of participants continued to judge
that, over time, real GDP growth would eventually set-
the level of uncertainty associated with their projections
tle down at an annual rate of 2.5 to 2.8 percent, a pace
for real economic activity and inflation as unusually
that appeared to be sustainable in view of expected
high relative to historical norms. About one-half of the
long-run trends in labor supply and labor productivity.
participants viewed the risks to output growth as ba-
lanced, but a number now judged those risks to be Reflecting the decline in the unemployment rate in re-
tilted to the downside. Meanwhile, a majority of partic- cent months, participants lowered their forecasts for
ipants viewed the risks to overall inflation as weighted the average unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of
to the upside. this year, with the central tendency of their projections
at 8.4 to 8.7 percent, down from 8.8 to 9.0 percent in
The Outlook
January. Participants’ projections for the jobless rate at
Participants marked down their forecasts for real GDP
the end of 2012 and 2013 were little changed from their
growth in 2011, with the central tendency of their pro-
previous forecasts. Consistent with their expectations
jections moving down to 3.1 to 3.3 percent from
of a moderate economic recovery, most participants
3.4 to 3.9 percent in January. Participants stated that
projected that the unemployment rate would be
the change reflected importantly the somewhat slower-
6.8 to 7.2 percent even in late 2013—still well above
than-expected pace of expansion in the first quarter.
the 5.2 to 5.6 percent central tendency of their esti-
Participants generally thought that much of the unex-
mates of the unemployment rate that would prevail
pected weakness in the first quarter would prove tem-
over the longer run in the absence of further shocks.
porary, but they viewed a number of recent develop-
The central tendency for the participants’ projections
ments as potential restraints on the pace of economic
of the unemployment rate in the longer run was some-
recovery in the near term. Those developments in-
what narrower than the 5 to 6 percent interval reported
cluded the effects of the rise in energy prices on real
in January.
income and consumer sentiment, indications that the
recovery in the housing market was further off, and Participants noted that the prices of oil and other
constraints on state and local government budgets. commodities had risen significantly since the time of
their January projections, largely reflecting geopolitical
Looking further ahead, participants’ revisions to their
developments and robust global demand. Those in-
forecasts for economic growth were modest, and they
creases had led to a sharp rise in consumer energy pric-
continued to see the economic recovery strengthening
es and, to a lesser extent, food prices, which had
over the forecast period, with the central tendency of
boosted overall inflation. As a result, participants
their projections for growth in real GDP stepping up to
raised their forecasts for total personal consumption
3.5 to 4.2 percent in 2012 and remaining near those
expenditures (PCE) inflation in 2011, with the central
rates in 2013. Participants cited the effects of contin-
tendency of their estimates significantly higher. With
ued monetary policy accommodation, further im-
the outlook for oil and other commodity prices uncer-
provements in banking and financial market conditions,
tain, the dispersion of the projections was noticeably
rising consumer confidence as labor market conditions
wider than in January. Most participants expected that
strengthen gradually, improved household balance
overall inflation would run 2.1 to 2.8 percent this year,
sheets, stabilizing commodity prices, continued expan-
compared with 1.3 to 1.7 percent in their January pro-
sion in business investment in equipment and software,
jections. However, many participants anticipated that
and gains in U.S. exports as being among the likely
the pass-through of higher commodity prices into core
contributors to a sustained pickup in the pace of ex-
inflation would be contained by downward pressures
pansion. However, participants also saw a number of
on inflation from large margins of slack in resource
factors that would likely continue to hinder the pace of
utilization and consequent subdued labor costs. Partic-

--- Page 15 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
ipants indicated that well-anchored inflation expecta- Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
tions, combined with the appropriate stance of mone- Percentage points
Variable 2011 2012 2013
tary policy, should help keep inflation in check. As a
result, participants anticipated that the increase in total
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . ±1.0 ±1.6 ±1.8
PCE inflation would be temporary, with the central Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . ±0.5 ±1.2 ±1.8
tendency of their estimates moving down to
Total consumer prices2 . . . . . ±0.8 ±1.0 ±1.0
1.2 to 2.0 percent in 2012 and 1.4 to 2.0 percent in
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root
2013—at or below the 1.7 to 2.0 percent central ten- mean squared error of projections for 1991 through 2010 that were
dency for their estimates of the longer-run, mandate- released in the spring by various private and government forecasters. As
described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions,
consistent rate of inflation. Nonetheless, the central
there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real
tendencies of participants’ projections for core PCE GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by
inflation for this year and next year shifted up a bit to the average size of projection errors made in the past. Further informa-
tion is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the
1.3 to 1.6 percent in 2011 and 1.3 to 1.8 percent in
Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting
2012. The central tendency of the core PCE inflation Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washing-
ton: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).
projections in 2013 was 1.4 to 2.0 percent, little
1. For definitions, refer to general note in table 1.
changed from the January SEP. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
that has been most widely used in government and private economic
Uncertainty and Risks forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous
A sizable majority of participants continued to judge year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.
pants’ forecasts of the unemployment rate remained
that the levels of uncertainty associated with their pro-
broadly balanced and continued to reflect in large part
jections for economic activity and inflation were greater
the risks attending participants’ views of the likely
than the average levels that had prevailed over the past
strength of the expansion in real activity.
20 years.1 They pointed to a number of factors contri-
buting to their assessments of the uncertainty that they Whereas most participants’ assessments of the risks
attached to their projections, including structural dislo- associated with their overall inflation projections over
cations in the labor market, the outlook for fiscal poli- the period from 2011 to 2013 were broadly balanced in
cy, the future path of energy and other commodity January, a majority of participants now judged the risks
prices, the global economic outlook, and the effects of as weighted to the upside. Although participants gen-
unconventional monetary policy. erally indicated that the amount of pass-through of
higher oil and other commodity prices into core infla-
About one-half of the participants continued to view
tion had so far remained limited and that inflation ex-
the risks to their outlooks for economic growth as ba-
pectations continued to be stable, some participants
lanced, but a number of participants now judged that
noted the risk that the extent of pass-through might
those risks had become tilted to the downside. The
increase and that the resulting rise in inflation could
most frequently mentioned downside risks to GDP
unmoor longer-term inflation expectations. A few par-
growth included the possibility of further increases in
ticipants noted the possibility that the current highly
energy and other commodity prices, a tighter-than-
accommodative stance of monetary policy could be
anticipated stance of fiscal policy in the United States,
maintained for too long, leading to higher inflation ex-
an even weaker-than-expected housing sector adversely
pectations and actual inflation.
affecting consumer spending and the health of financial
institutions, and possible spillovers from the fiscal Diversity of Views
strains in Europe. A few participants saw the risks to Figures 2.A and 2.B provide further details on the di-
growth as tilted to the upside; it was noted that the cy- versity of participants’ views regarding the likely out-
clical rebound in economic activity might prove strong- comes for real GDP growth and the unemployment
er than anticipated. The risks surrounding partici- rate in 2011, 2012, 2013, and over the longer run. The
dispersion in these projections generally continued to
1 Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for the reflect differences in participants’ assessments of many
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con- factors, including the likely evolution of conditions in
sumer price inflation over the period from 1991 to 2010. At credit and financial markets, the current degree of un-
the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty”
derlying momentum in economic activity, the timing
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the
and the degree to which the labor market will recover
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess
from the dislocations associated with the deep reces-
the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projec-
sion, the outlook for economic and financial develop-
tions.

--- Page 16 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__co_n__o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g _o_f_ A__p_ri_l _2_6-_2_7_, _2_0_1_1______________P_a_g_e_ _5
ments abroad, and appropriate future monetary policy the fundamental determinants of inflation, including
and its effects on economic activity. Regarding partici- estimates of the degree of resource slack and the extent
pants’ projections for real GDP growth, the distribu- to which such slack influences inflation outcomes and
tion for this year shifted noticeably lower and was sig- expectations, as well as estimates of how the stance of
nificantly more tightly concentrated than the distribu- monetary policy may influence inflation expectations.
tion in January, with more than one-half of participants Regarding overall PCE inflation, the distribution of
expecting the change in real GDP in 2011 to be in the participants’ projections for 2011 shifted noticeably
3.2 to 3.3 percent interval. By contrast, the distribu- higher relative to the distribution in January, reflecting
tions for real GDP growth in 2012 and 2013 were little the recent increases in energy and other commodity
changed. Regarding participants’ projections for the prices, but the dispersion in forecasts was little
unemployment rate, the distribution for this year changed. The distributions for 2012 and 2013 were
shifted down relative to the distribution in January, generally little changed and remained fairly wide. Re-
with about one-half of participants anticipating the un- garding core PCE inflation, the distribution of partici-
employment rate in the final quarter of 2011 to be 8.4 pants’ projections for 2011 shifted noticeably to the
to 8.5 percent; this shift likely reflects the recent im- right, but it remained about as wide as in January. The
provements in labor market conditions. The distribu- distributions of core inflation for 2012 and 2013 also
tions of the unemployment rate for 2012 and 2013 shifted somewhat higher but were otherwise little
were little changed. The distribution of participants’ changed. Although the distributions of participants’
estimates of the longer-run unemployment rate was inflation forecasts for 2011 through 2013 continued to
somewhat more tightly concentrated than in January, be relatively wide, the distribution of projections of the
while that for their estimates of longer-run GDP longer-run rate of overall PCE inflation remained
growth was about unchanged. tightly concentrated. The narrow range illustrates the
broad similarity in participants’ assessments of the ap-
Corresponding information about the diversity of par-
proximate level of inflation that is consistent with the
ticipants’ views regarding the inflation outlook is pro-
Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum em-
vided in figures 2.C and 2.D. In general, the dispersion
ployment and price stability.
in the participants’ inflation forecasts for the next few
years represented differences in judgments regarding

--- Page 17 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2011–13 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2011 16
April projections
January projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2012
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2013
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 18 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__co_n__o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g _o_f_ A__p_ri_l _2_6-_2_7_, _2_0_1_1______________P_a_g_e_ _7
Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2011–13 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2011 16
April projections
January projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2012
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2013
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 19 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2011–13 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2011 16
April projections
January projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5- 2.7- 2.9- 3.1- 3.3- 3.5-
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2012
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5- 2.7- 2.9- 3.1- 3.3- 3.5-
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2013
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5- 2.7- 2.9- 3.1- 3.3- 3.5-
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5- 2.7- 2.9- 3.1- 3.3- 3.5-
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 20 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__co_n__o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g _o_f_ A__p_ri_l _2_6-_2_7_, _2_0_1_1______________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure 2.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inflation, 2011–13
Number of participants
2011 16
April projections
January projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9-
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0
Percent range
Number of participants
2012
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9-
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0
Percent range
Number of participants
2013
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9-
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 21 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by ilar to that experienced in the past and the risks
the members of the Board of Governors and around the projections are broadly balanced,
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a
inform discussions of monetary policy among probability of about 70 percent that actual
policymakers and can aid public understand- GDP would expand within a range of 2.0 to 4.0
ing of the basis for policy actions. Consider- percent in the current year, 1.4 to 4.6 percent in
able uncertainty attends these projections, the second year, and 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the
however. The economic and statistical models third year. The corresponding 70 percent con-
and relationships used to help produce eco- fidence intervals for overall inflation would be
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de- 1.2 to 2.8 percent in the current year, and 1.0 to
scriptions of the real world. And the future 3.0 percent in the second and third years.
path of the economy can be affected by myr- Because current conditions may differ
iad unforeseen developments and events. from those that prevailed, on average, over his-
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, tory, participants provide judgments as to
participants consider not only what appears to whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
be the most likely economic outcome as em- jections of each variable is greater than, smaller
bodied in their projections, but also the range than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in
their occurring, and the potential costs to the table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
economy should they occur. to whether the risks to their projections are
Table 2 summarizes the average historical weighted to the upside, are weighted to the
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports participants judge whether each variable is
and those prepared by the Federal Reserve more likely to be above or below their projec-
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the tions of the most likely outcome. These judg-
Federal Open Market Committee. The pro- ments about the uncertainty and the risks at-
jection error ranges shown in the table il- tending each participant’s projections are dis-
lustrate the considerable uncertainty associated tinct from the diversity of participants’ views
with economic forecasts. For example, sup- about the most likely outcomes. Forecast un-
pose a participant projects that real gross do- certainty is concerned with the risks associated
mestic product (GDP) and total consumer with a particular projection rather than with
prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, re- divergences across a number of different pro-
spectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the jections.
uncertainty attending those projections is sim-

# Tables

## Page_11_Table_1


| Voting against this action: None.                    |
|------------------------------------------------------|
| It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee |
| would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, June 21–22,      |
| 2011. The meeting adjourned at 10:15 a.m. on April   |
| 27, 2011.                                            |


## Page_12_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |      |      |            |      |      |      |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|------------|------|------|------|
| 2011                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 2012 | 2013 | Longer run | 2011 | 2012 | 2013 |
| 3.1 to 3.3 3.5 to 4.2 3.5 to 4.3 2.5 to 2.8
3.4 to 3.9 3.5 to 4.4 3.7 to 4.6 2.5 to 2.8
8.4 to 8.7 7.6 to 7.9 6.8 to 7.2 5.2 to 5.6
8.8 to 9.0 7.6 to 8.1 6.8 to 7.2 5.0 to 6.0
2.1 to 2.8 1.2 to 2.0 1.4 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0
1.3 to 1.7 1.0 to 1.9 1.2 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0
1.3 to 1.6 1.3 to 1.8 1.4 to 2.0
1.0 to 1.3 1.0 to 1.5 1.2 to 2.0 |      |      |            |      |      |      |