# 20111102_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:36:56*
*Pages: 22, Tables: 4*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
November 1–2, 2011
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit- Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Bank-
tee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve ing Supervision and Regulation, Board of
System was held in the offices of the Board of Gover- Governors
nors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, November 1,
2011, at 10:30 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, No- Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability
vember 2, 2011, at 8:30 a.m. Policy and Research, Board of Governors
PRESENT: Robert deV. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of
Ben Bernanke, Chairman the Secretary, Board of Governors
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman
Elizabeth Duke William Nelson, Deputy Director, Division of
Charles L. Evans Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Richard W. Fisher
Narayana Kocherlakota Andrew T. Levin, Special Adviser to the Board,
Charles I. Plosser Office of Board Members, Board of Gover-
Sarah Bloom Raskin nors
Daniel K. Tarullo
Janet L. Yellen Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
Christine Cumming, Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P.
Lockhart, Sandra Pianalto, and John C. Wil- Charles S. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Of-
liams, Alternate Members of the Federal Open fice of the Staff Director, Board of Governors
Market Committee
Michael P. Leahy, Senior Associate Director, Divi-
James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosen- sion of International Finance, Board of Gov-
gren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks ernors; William Wascher, Senior Associate Di-
of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respec- rector, Division of Research and Statistics,
tively Board of Governors
William B. English, Secretary and Economist Ellen E. Meade, Senior Adviser, Division of Mone-
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary tary Affairs, Board of Governors
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Daniel M. Covitz and Michael T. Kiley,¹ Associate
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Directors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Board of Governors
David W. Wilcox, Economist
Christopher J. Erceg,¹ Deputy Associate Director,
James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Steven B. Division of International Finance, Board of
Kamin, Loretta J. Mester, Simon Potter, David Governors; Fabio M. Natalucci, Deputy Asso-
Reifschneider, Harvey Rosenblum, Lawrence ciate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Slifman, Daniel G. Sullivan, and Kei-Mu Yi, Board of Governors
Associate Economists
Brian J. Gross,¹ Special Assistant to the Board, Of-
Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Ac- fice of Board Members, Board of Governors
count
__________________
Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office ¹ Attended the portion of the meeting relating to mone-
of the Secretary, Board of Governors tary policy strategies and communication.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
David Lopez-Salido,¹ Assistant Director, Division Holdings Ltd. and its finance subsidiary, MF Global
of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Finance USA Inc., and with the termination of MF
Global Inc. as a primary dealer. The Manager reported
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of on System open market operations, including the ongo-
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors ing reinvestment into agency-guaranteed mortgage-
backed securities (MBS) of principal payments received
Mark A. Carlson, Senior Economist, Division of on SOMA holdings of agency debt and agency-
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors guaranteed MBS as well as the operations related to the
maturity extension program authorized at the Septem-
Penelope A. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Of- ber 20–21 FOMC meeting. By unanimous vote, the
fice of the Secretary, Board of Governors Committee ratified the Desk’s domestic transactions
over the intermeeting period. There were no interven-
Sarah G. Green, First Vice President, Federal Re- tion operations in foreign currencies for the System’s
serve Bank of Richmond account over the intermeeting period.
Monetary Policy Strategies and Communication
Glenn D. Rudebusch, Executive Vice President,
The staff gave a presentation on alternative monetary
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
policy strategies, and meeting participants discussed
those alternatives as well as potential approaches for
David Altig, Geoffrey Tootell, and Christopher J.
enhancing the clarity of their public communications.
Waller, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
No decision was made at this meeting to change the
Banks of Atlanta, Boston, and St. Louis, re-
Committee’s policy strategy or communications. It was
spectively
noted that many central banks around the world pursue
an explicit inflation objective, maintain flexibility to
Todd E. Clark, Edward S. Knotek II, and Nathan-
stabilize economic activity, and seek to communicate
iel Wuerffel, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
their forecasts and policy plans as clearly as possible.
Banks of Cleveland, Kansas City, and New
Many participants pointed to the merits of specifying
York, respectively
an explicit longer-run inflation goal, but it was noted
that such a step could be misperceived as placing great-
Deborah L. Leonard, Assistant Vice President,
er weight on price stability than on maximum employ-
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
ment; consequently, some suggested that a numerical
inflation goal would need to be set forth within a con-
Robert L. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Re-
text that clearly underscored the Committee’s commit-
serve Bank of Richmond
ment to fostering both parts of its dual mandate. More
__________________
broadly, a majority of participants agreed that it could
¹ Attended the portion of the meeting relating to mone-
be beneficial to formulate and publish a statement that
tary policy strategies and communication.
would elucidate the Committee’s policy approach, and
participants generally expressed interest in providing
additional information to the public about the likely
By unanimous vote, the Committee selected David W.
future path of the target federal funds rate. The
Wilcox to serve as Economist, and Lawrence Slifman
Chairman asked the subcommittee on communications
to serve as Associate Economist, effective Novem-
to give consideration to a possible statement of the
ber 1, 2011, until the selection of their successors at the
Committee’s longer-run goals and policy strategy, and
first regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee in
he also encouraged the subcommittee to explore poten-
2012.
tial approaches for incorporating information about
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed- participants’ assessments of appropriate monetary poli-
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet cy into the Summary of Economic Projections.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account
Committee participants shared their views regarding
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and
the potential merits and pitfalls of making conditional
foreign markets during the period since the Federal
commitments regarding the future course of monetary
Open Market Committee (FOMC) met on Septem-
policy. As noted in the staff briefing, economic theory
ber 20–21, 2011. He also discussed the developments
and model simulations suggested that a policy strategy
in connection with the bankruptcy filing of MF Global

--- Page 3 ---

____________________________M__in__ut_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ N__o_v_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_–_2_, _2_0_1_1_______________________P_a_g_e_ _3
involving such commitments could foster better mac- ing maximum sustainable employment; it was noted,
roeconomic outcomes than a discretionary approach of however, that price-level targeting where the central
reoptimizing policy at every meeting, so long as the bank maintained flexibility to stabilize economic activi-
public understood the central bank’s strategy and be- ty over the short term could generate economic out-
lieved that policymakers would follow through on comes that would be more consistent with the dual
those commitments. Some participants noted that mandate. More broadly, a number of participants ex-
conditional commitments might be particularly helpful pressed concern that switching to a new policy frame-
in providing additional accommodation and mitigating work could heighten uncertainty about future monetary
downside risks when the policy rate is close to its effec- policy, risk unmooring longer-term inflation expecta-
tive lower bound, because a central bank can commit tions, or fail to address risks to financial stability. Sev-
to a shallower interest rate trajectory than investors eral participants observed that the efficacy of nominal
would expect if policymakers followed a purely discre- GDP targeting depended crucially on some strong as-
tionary approach. However, many pointed out that the sumptions, including the premise that the Committee
implementation of such a strategy could pose substan- could make a credible commitment to maintaining such
tial communication challenges and that the benefits a strategy over a long time horizon and that policymak-
would be diminished if the strategy was not fully credi- ers would continue adhering to that strategy even in the
ble. Indeed, one participant suggested that additional face of a significant increase in inflation. In addition,
purchases of longer-term securities would be a clearer some participants noted that such an approach would
and more effective way to provide additional monetary involve substantial operational hurdles, including the
accommodation when the federal funds rate was near difficulty of specifying an appropriate target level. In
its lower bound. light of the significant challenges associated with the
adoption of such frameworks, participants agreed that
Given the potential pitfalls of pursuing commitment
it would not be advisable to make such a change under
strategies extending far out into the future, many par-
present circumstances.
ticipants thought that the Committee should consider
policies intended to accrue some of the gains from Staff Review of the Economic Situation
conditional commitments and to perform well in a The information reviewed at the November 1–2 meet-
wide range of alternative scenarios. In this vein, a ing indicated that the pace of economic activity streng-
number of participants expressed support for the pos- thened somewhat in the third quarter, reflecting in part
sibility of clarifying the conditionality of the Commit- a reversal of the temporary factors that weighed on
tee’s forward guidance about the trajectory of the fed- economic growth in the first half of the year. Howev-
eral funds rate through setting numerical thresholds for er, labor market conditions continued to be weak.
unemployment and inflation that would warrant excep- Overall consumer price inflation was more moderate
tionally low levels for the policy rate. However, several than earlier in the year, as prices of energy and some
participants noted that such thresholds could be con- commodities declined from their recent peaks. Infla-
fusing in the absence of a clear expression of the tion for other goods and services also appeared to have
Committee’s longer-term goals. Moreover, others sug- moderated, and measures of longer-run inflation expec-
gested that such an approach could be problematic in tations remained stable.
light of significant uncertainties about the longer-run
Private nonfarm employment rose modestly in Sep-
normal rate of unemployment. One participant
tember, boosted in part by the return of communica-
pointed to those uncertainties as instead supporting the
tions workers who were on strike in August. Nonethe-
use of thresholds as a way of managing potential infla-
less, the pace of private-sector job gains in the third
tion risks associated with additional accommodation.
quarter as a whole was less than it was in the first half
The Committee also considered policy strategies that of the year. Meanwhile, employment in the state and
would involve the use of an intermediate target such as local government sector continued to trend lower. The
nominal gross domestic product (GDP) or the price unemployment rate held at 9.1 percent in September,
level. The staff presented model simulations that sug- and both long-duration unemployment and the share
gested that nominal GDP targeting could, in principle, of workers employed part time for economic reasons
be helpful in promoting a stronger economic recovery were still high. Initial claims for unemployment insur-
in a context of longer-run price stability. Other simula- ance have edged down since the middle of September
tions suggested that the single-minded pursuit of a but have remained at a level consistent with only mod-
price-level target would not be very effective in foster-

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
est employment growth, and most indicators of busi- struction loans. In the third quarter, businesses in-
nesses’ hiring plans have showed no improvement. creased their inventories at a much slower pace than in
the second quarter, and inventory-to-sales ratios in
Industrial production rose modestly in September, and
most industries appeared to be in a comfortable range.
the manufacturing capacity utilization rate edged up.
Output in the motor vehicle–related sectors continued Real federal purchases increased in the third quarter, as
to step up following the disruptions associated with the defense expenditures continued to rise from unusually
earthquake in Japan earlier in the year, but the pace of low levels early in the year, more than offsetting a de-
factory production outside of those sectors was slug- crease in nondefense spending. At the state and local
gish. Motor vehicle assemblies were scheduled to rise level, real purchases declined in the third quarter at a
further in the fourth quarter, but broader indicators of noticeably slower rate than in the first half of the year
near-term manufacturing activity, such as the diffusion as the pace of reductions in payrolls eased and con-
indexes of new orders from the national and regional struction spending rose slightly.
manufacturing surveys, remained at levels consistent
The U.S. international trade deficit was virtually the
with only modest increases in production in the coming
same in August as it was in July, as both exports and
months.
imports moved down only by small amounts. The de-
Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose crease in exports reflected lower sales of automotive
briskly in September but posted a more moderate gain products and capital goods, which more than offset
for the third quarter as a whole. Motor vehicle pur- increases in exports of industrial supplies and consumer
chases increased significantly in September to a level goods. The dip in imports was the result of lower pur-
well above that in the spring (when availability of some chases of capital goods, automotive products, and con-
models was limited by supply chain disruptions), and sumer goods, which outweighed an increase in petro-
sales of new light motor vehicles stepped up further in leum imports. The advance release of the third-quarter
October. However, real disposable income declined in data for the national income and product accounts
the third quarter, as increases in consumer prices more showed real exports of goods and services expanding
than offset small gains in nominal income. Moreover, faster than real imports. As a result, net exports were
consumer sentiment continued to be downbeat in Oc- estimated to have made a small positive contribution to
tober. real GDP growth in the third quarter, a contribution of
about the same size as in the second quarter.
Housing market activity remained very weak, held
down by the large overhang of foreclosed and dis- Overall U.S. consumer price inflation, as measured by
tressed properties along with limited demand in an en- the PCE price index, was more moderate in the third
vironment of uncertainty about future home prices and quarter than in the first half of the year. Consumer
tight underwriting standards for mortgage loans. Al- prices for food and energy increased last quarter at a
though starts and permits for new single-family homes slower pace than earlier in the year, and consumer pric-
edged up in September, they stayed near the depressed es excluding food and energy rose a bit less than in the
levels seen since the middle of last year. Sales of new preceding quarter. Near-term inflation expectations
and existing homes continued to be soft in recent from the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan
months, and home prices trended lower. Surveys of Consumers in October continued to be well
below the elevated level seen in the spring, and longer-
Real business purchases of equipment and software
term inflation expectations in the survey remained sta-
expanded appreciably in the third quarter. Moreover,
ble.
new orders for nondefense capital goods continued to
run ahead of shipments in August and September; the Measures of labor compensation showed that wage
buildup of unfilled orders pointed toward further in- increases continued to be subdued. The employment
creases in spending for business equipment in subse- cost index increased at a modest rate over the year end-
quent months. Nevertheless, survey measures of busi- ing in the third quarter, and compensation per hour in
ness conditions and sentiment in October suggested the nonfarm business sector appeared to have decal-
that firms remained cautious. Real business expendi- erated somewhat last quarter. Similarly, the 12-month
tures for nonresidential construction also rose appreci- change in average hourly earnings for all employees
ably in the third quarter, but spending was still at a rela- remained subdued in September.
tively low level and continued to be held back by ele-
vated vacancy rates and tight credit conditions for con-

--- Page 5 ---

____________________________M__in__ut_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ N__o_v_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_–_2_, _2_0_1_1_______________________P_a_g_e_ _5
Foreign economic activity appeared to have largely re- measures of longer-term inflation compensation were
covered from the effects of the Japanese disaster in about unchanged.
March, as production in Japan rebounded and supply
Credit default swap (CDS) spreads and equity prices of
disruptions waned. However, recent data pointed to
large U.S. banking organizations were again volatile
considerable weakness in the euro-area economy.
over the period. Investor sentiment toward these fi-
Elsewhere, indicators were somewhat more upbeat,
nancial institutions was strongly influenced by changes
with employment in Canada continuing to rise through
in investors’ assessments of the risks associated with
September, while GDP growth in China over the year
the European fiscal and banking problems and the ex-
ending in the third quarter was a little less than in the
posure of various financial institutions to Europe.
first half of the year but still quite robust. Foreign in-
Third-quarter U.S. bank earnings reports generally met
flation remained contained, although the reversal of
investors’ expectations. On net, equity prices for U.S.
earlier increases in energy prices appeared to be passing
banking firms were not much changed over the period
through to consumer price inflation relatively slowly in
since the last FOMC meeting, while their CDS spreads
some countries.
were a bit higher. European bank CDS spreads re-
Staff Review of the Financial Situation mained elevated, and these institutions continued to
Financial markets were quite volatile over the period face somewhat strained conditions in short-term bank
since the September FOMC meeting. Investor senti- funding markets.
ment was strongly influenced by prospects for Europe,
Although equity markets were volatile, broad U.S. equi-
as market participants remained highly attuned to de-
ty price indexes ended the intermeeting period little
velopments regarding possible steps to contain the fis-
changed. Earnings reports for nonfinancial firms gen-
cal and banking problems there. Economic data releas-
erally came in somewhat better than investors expected
es that were, on balance, somewhat better than market
and about in line with second-quarter levels. Gross
participants expected provided some support to finan-
public equity issuance by nonfinancial firms continued
cial markets.
to be very weak in September and October, with a large
Longer-term Treasury yields declined appreciably fol- number of firms shelving planned initial public offer-
lowing the release of the September FOMC statement. ings amid the volatility in equity markets.
Investors reportedly viewed the Committee’s assess-
Yields on investment- and speculative-grade corporate
ment of the economic outlook as more downbeat than
bonds edged lower, on net, over the period, leaving
anticipated. In addition, the announcement that the
their spreads to Treasury securities slightly narrower.
Federal Reserve would lengthen the average maturity of
Credit flows for nonfinancial firms were mixed in Sep-
its portfolio by purchasing longer-term Treasury securi-
tember and October. The pace of bond financing by
ties and selling an equivalent amount of shorter-term
investment-grade nonfinancial corporations slowed
Treasury securities reportedly contributed to the de-
some in October from its robust September pace, while
cline in longer-term yields on the day. Yields on cur-
bond issuance by speculative-grade firms was limited.
rent-coupon agency MBS also moved lower on the an-
Nonfinancial commercial paper outstanding posted
nouncement that the Federal Reserve would begin to
solid growth in October. In the leveraged loan market,
reinvest principal payments on agency securities in
issuance financed by institutional investors slowed sig-
agency MBS. Over the following weeks, movements in
nificantly in the third quarter.
yields were driven by shifts in investors’ assessments of
the ongoing efforts to address the European fiscal and Financing conditions for commercial real estate (CRE)
banking situation and by somewhat stronger-than- markets appeared to have deteriorated in some re-
expected U.S. economic data. On balance since the spects. Issuance of commercial mortgage-backed se-
September FOMC meeting, Treasury yields on shorter- curities (CMBS) slowed further in the third quarter
dated securities and the expected path of the federal amid widening CMBS spreads, and only a small num-
funds rate implied by money market futures quotes ber of deals were in the pipeline for the rest of the year.
were not much changed. Yields on Treasury securities Prices of most types of commercial properties re-
with maturities beyond 10 years moved down. Meas- mained depressed, and aggregate vacancy and delin-
ures of near-term inflation compensation derived from quency rates for commercial properties were close to
nominal and inflation-protected Treasury securities their recent highs.
rose slightly over the intermeeting period, while similar

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Interest rates on residential mortgages changed little, financial developments and equity market volatility,
on net, over the intermeeting period but remained at persisted and supported elevated levels of M2 deposits
historically low levels. The recent low rates appeared but did not trigger additional sizable inflows. The
to have only a modest effect on the pace of mortgage monetary base also grew moderately as its major com-
refinancing, as tight underwriting standards and low ponents—reserve balances and currency—increased
home equity continued to limit the access of many over the period.
households to the mortgage market. However, in Oc-
Foreign financial markets remained volatile over the
tober, the Federal Housing Finance Agency announced
intermeeting period, and funding pressures for many
changes to the Home Affordable Refinance Program to
European financial institutions continued. After falling
expand eligibility and take-up among borrowers with
sharply in August and early September, foreign equity
mortgages backed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
prices rose, with stocks in the euro area outperforming
Indicators of home prices remained weak, reflecting a
those in most other economies. For most of the pe-
large inventory of unsold properties and modest de-
riod, market participants seemed heartened by Euro-
mand for homes. The pace at which performing prime
pean leaders’ efforts to address the fiscal and financial
mortgages became newly delinquent rose over the
challenges present in the euro area, although the news
summer but remained below last year’s levels.
late in the period on a possible Greek referendum sent
Consumer credit decreased in August. Growth in non- stock prices down sharply. Benchmark sovereign yields
revolving credit, which had been volatile due to a shift increased over the period, but spreads of yields on
in the timing of student loan originations, stepped 10-year sovereign bonds of the most vulnerable euro-
down from the pace seen earlier in the year but re- area countries over yields on German bunds were little
mained solid in recent months. Issuance of consumer changed on net. Some reversal of safe-haven flows in
credit asset-backed securities continued at a moderate October reportedly led the dollar to give back most of
pace through mid-October. Delinquency rates for sev- the gains it registered in late September, leaving the
eral categories of consumer loans remained low, a ref- broad nominal foreign exchange value of the dollar
lection in part of tighter underwriting standards that little changed, on balance, relative to its level at the
shifted the composition of borrowers toward those time of the September FOMC meeting. At the end of
with stronger credit histories. October, Japanese officials intervened in foreign ex-
change markets through sales of yen.
Core commercial bank loans expanded slightly in the
third quarter. Commercial and industrial (C&I) loans The first round of the three-month U.S. dollar auctions
accelerated following the already strong increases seen that major foreign central banks announced on Sep-
over the first half of the year. That growth was con- tember 15 was held in October; demand was quite lim-
centrated among large domestic banks and non- ited, and only the European Central Bank (ECB) drew
European foreign institutions. Consumer loans on on its swap line with the Federal Reserve. Korea and
banks’ books advanced modestly in the third quarter, Japan announced that they would increase the size and
ending a two-year string of quarterly declines. Closed- scope of their bilateral currency swap arrangements,
end residential mortgage loans held by banks also in- expanding the size of their existing won–yen swap ar-
creased amid the modest pickup in refinancing activity, rangement and establishing a $30 billion facility in
while CRE loans contracted. The October Senior Loan which dollars could be swapped for either won or yen.
Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices
A number of central banks announced additional
showed less net easing of lending standards by domes-
measures to stimulate economic activity. The Bank of
tic banks than in the past few surveys. In particular,
England and Bank of Japan each announced expan-
domestic banks reported little change in their standards
sions of their respective asset purchase programs, and
on C&I loans over the third quarter, on net, compared
the ECB announced that it would conduct two refi-
with more widespread reports of easing in the previous
nancing operations with maturities of slightly more
several quarters. Demand for loans reportedly was lit-
than a year and launched a new covered bond purchase
tle changed, on balance, over the third quarter.
program. The central banks of Brazil, Indonesia, and
M2 grew at a modest pace in September and October, Israel lowered their policy rates, citing a potential slow-
well below the rapid rate seen in July and August. down in global growth.
Some of the factors that contributed to M2 growth
over the summer, such as concerns about European

--- Page 7 ---

____________________________M__in__ut_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ N__o_v_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_–_2_, _2_0_1_1_______________________P_a_g_e_ _7
Staff Economic Outlook jections for growth since their previous forecasts in
With the recent data on spending, particularly for con- June, they continued to anticipate that economic
sumer expenditures and business outlays for capital growth would pick up and the unemployment rate
goods and nonresidential construction, stronger than would decline gradually through 2014. They also con-
the staff anticipated at the time of the September tinued to project that inflation would settle at or below
FOMC meeting, the staff’s near-term projection for the levels consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate.
rate of increase in real GDP was revised up. However, Participants’ forecasts are described in more detail in
other important near-term indicators of economic ac- the Summary of Economic Projections, which is at-
tivity remained downbeat: Measures of consumer sen- tached as an addendum to these minutes.
timent were still very low, business surveys pointed to
In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
continued caution by firms, conditions in the labor
look, meeting participants regarded the information
market remained weak, and gains in manufacturing
received during the intermeeting period as indicating
production outside of the motor vehicle–related sectors
that economic growth had strengthened somewhat in
were sluggish. Moreover, many of the factors that have
the third quarter, reflecting in part a reversal of tempo-
been restraining the recovery, such as the large over-
rary factors that had weighed on the economic recovery
hang of vacant houses, tight credit conditions, and ele-
in the first half of the year. Participants noted that
vated risk premiums, remained in place. Consequently,
global supply chain disruptions associated with the nat-
the staff’s outlook for economic activity over the me-
ural disaster in Japan had diminished, and that the pric-
dium term was similar to the projection prepared for
es of energy and some commodities had come down
the September FOMC meeting. The staff continued to
from their recent peaks, easing strains on household
project that real GDP would accelerate gradually in
budgets and likely contributing to a somewhat stronger
2012 and 2013, supported by accommodative monetary
pace of consumer spending in recent months. More
policy, further improvements in credit conditions, and
broadly, final demand from consumers and businesses
a pickup in consumer and business sentiment from
was stronger than had been expected at the time of the
their current low levels. Over the forecast period, the
September FOMC meeting. Nonetheless, most partic-
increase in real GDP was projected to be sufficient to
ipants anticipated that the pace of economic growth
reduce the slack in product and labor markets only
would remain moderate over coming quarters. While
slowly, and the unemployment rate was expected to
they believed that the economic recovery would con-
remain elevated at the end of 2013.
tinue to be supported by accommodative monetary
The staff’s forecast for inflation was essentially un- policy, ongoing improvements in households’ and
changed from the projection prepared for the Septem- businesses’ financial positions, and pent-up demand for
ber FOMC meeting. The upward pressure on consum- goods and services, a number of factors were seen as
er prices from the rise in commodity and import prices likely to continue to restrain the pace of economic
early in the year was anticipated to ease further in the growth. Those included persistent weakness in the
current quarter. With longer-run inflation expectations labor and housing markets, still-tight credit conditions
stable and significant slack anticipated to persist in la- for many households and small businesses, low con-
bor and product markets, the staff continued to expect sumer and business confidence, fiscal consolidation at
prices to rise at a subdued pace in 2012 and 2013. all levels of government, and elevated volatility in fi-
nancial markets. Moreover, the recovery was still sub-
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
ject to significant downside risks, including strains in
Economic Outlook
global financial markets. With longer-term inflation
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, all partici-
expectations remaining stable, the effects of earlier in-
pants—the five members of the Board of Governors
creases in the prices of energy and other commodities
and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks—
continuing to wane, and low levels of resource utiliza-
provided projections of output growth, the unemploy-
tion restraining increases in prices and wages, most par-
ment rate, and inflation for each year from 2011
ticipants anticipated that inflation would settle, over
through 2014 and over the longer run. Longer-run
coming quarters, at or below levels they judged to be
projections represent each participant’s assessment of
most consistent with their dual mandate.
the rate to which each variable would be expected to
converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy In the household sector, incoming data on retail sales
and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. were somewhat stronger than expected, and partici-
Although participants had revised downward their pro- pants reported scattered optimism among their con-

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
tacts regarding the prospects for holiday spending. lical factors, with one pointing to the lack of wage pres-
Some participants thought that the effects of balance sures as evidence. As a result, they expected that un-
sheet deleveraging might be running their course or employment would fall back as the economy recovered.
that such effects could be less powerful than had been Some participants again warned that the exceptionally
thought. Others noted that the recent pickup in con- high level of long-term unemployment could ultimately
sumer spending outpaced growth in after-tax incomes lead to permanent negative effects on the skills and
and was accompanied by a decline in the saving rate, employment prospects of the unemployed.
raising doubts about its sustainability unless income
Meeting participants observed that financial markets
growth picked up. In addition, households appeared to
continued to be particularly volatile during the inter-
remain pessimistic about the prospects for their future
meeting period as investors responded to incoming
income, the job market was still weak, consumer confi-
economic data and to news regarding fiscal and finan-
dence was historically very low, and credit conditions
cial developments in Europe. Liquidity in many mar-
for many households were still tight. The housing sec-
kets worsened, in part because financial institutions
tor continued to be depressed, and some meeting par-
more reliant on short-term funding markets reportedly
ticipants indicated that the elevated supply of available
pulled back from risk-taking and became somewhat less
homes and the overhang of foreclosures, together with
willing to make markets. Participants noted the an-
limited access to mortgage credit, were continuing to
nouncement by European policymakers of a new pack-
put downward pressure on house prices and housing
age of measures to address Greece’s fiscal situation as
construction. A few participants noted that recent
well as the vulnerabilities of European banks and sov-
government initiatives aimed at helping high-loan-to-
ereigns. However, participants indicated that many
value borrowers refinance could be useful steps toward
details of the new plan had not yet been worked out
stabilizing the housing market.
and that a number of important issues remained unre-
Business contacts in many parts of the country were solved. Participants took note of the possible adverse
reported to be cautious and uncertain about the eco- effects on U.S. financial markets and the broader U.S.
nomic and political outlook and so remained reluctant economy if European sovereign debt and banking
to hire or expand capacity. However, production in the problems intensified. Participants observed, however,
manufacturing, agriculture, and energy sectors contin- that the capital and liquidity positions of U.S. banks
ued to increase, and the auto sector was rebounding had strengthened in recent quarters and that the credit
from earlier supply chain disruptions. In addition, quality of loans to businesses and households had im-
businesses in a number of regions reported ongoing proved further. Contacts in the banking sector re-
capital investment to increase productivity. Input cost ported that U.S. banks continued to be willing to ex-
pressures were said to have abated somewhat, while tend loans to creditworthy borrowers, but loan demand
labor costs remained subdued. Overall, credit costs remained weak and competition for such borrowers
were low, and profits and balance sheets at nonfinancial was putting pressure on net interest margins. It was
corporations were healthy, with many firms continuing noted that very low interest rates were negatively affect-
to hold very high levels of cash. ing pension funds and the profitability of the life insur-
ance industry. Participants also discussed the events
Despite some signs of improvement of late, the availa-
surrounding the bankruptcy filing of MF Global Hold-
ble indicators pointed to continued weakness in overall
ings Ltd. and saw the financial stability implications of
labor market conditions, and the unemployment rate
this development as limited to date.
remained elevated. Some participants suggested that
the persistently high level of unemployment reflected Participants generally agreed that measures of total in-
the impact of structural factors, including mismatches flation appeared to have moderated since earlier in the
between the skills of the unemployed and the skills year as prices of energy and some commodities de-
demanded in sectors in which jobs were currently avail- clined from their peaks. Measures of core inflation also
able. Consistent with this view, some business contacts seemed to have declined in recent months, and longer-
reportedly were concerned about the low quality of term inflation expectations remained well anchored.
many job applicants, while other contacts noted that Nonetheless, some participants noted that core infla-
workers with some specialized skills continued to be in tion had not come down as quickly or by as much as
short supply. However, other participants indicated they had expected in light of the reduction in commod-
that such concerns were not new and that much of the ity prices, perhaps suggesting that the level of potential
current elevated level of unemployment reflected cyc- output was lower than had been thought. However,

--- Page 9 ---

____________________________M__in__ut_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ N__o_v_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_–_2_, _2_0_1_1_______________________P_a_g_e_ _9
other participants pointed to the subdued pace of gains well-anchored inflation expectations as factors likely to
in labor costs as a factor damping inflation, and reports contribute to the moderation in inflation over time. A
from contacts suggested that upward pressure on wages number of participants saw the risks to the outlook for
remained limited. inflation as roughly balanced. A few participants felt
that the continuation of the current stance of monetary
Regarding their overall outlook for economic activity,
policy, coupled with the possibility of a rebound in
participants generally agreed that, even with the posi-
energy and commodity prices, posed some upside risks
tive news received over the intermeeting period, the
to inflation. Other participants instead saw inflation
most probable outcome was a moderate pace of eco-
risks as tilted to the downside, in light of their expecta-
nomic growth over the medium run with only a gradual
tions for persistent resource slack. It was noted that
decline in the unemployment rate. While some factors
U.S. inflation had been influenced relatively more by
were seen as likely to support growth going forward—
commodity price fluctuations in recent years; because
such as pent-up demand, improvements in household
commodity prices reflect global economic conditions,
and business balance sheets, and accommodative mon-
U.S. inflation might be less affected by domestic factors
etary policy—participants observed that the pace of
and more linked to the global outlook than in the past.
economic recovery would likely continue to be held
down for some time by persistent headwinds. In par- Committee Policy Action
ticular, they pointed to very low levels of consumer and Members noted that information received over the in-
business confidence, further efforts by households to termeeting period pointed to somewhat stronger eco-
deleverage, cutbacks at all levels of government, ele- nomic growth in the third quarter, partly reflecting a
vated financial market volatility, still-tight credit condi- reversal of temporary factors that had depressed eco-
tions for some households and small businesses, and nomic growth in the first half of the year. However,
the ongoing weakness in the labor and housing mar- overall labor market conditions remained weak. Mem-
kets. While recent incoming data suggested reduced bers generally anticipated that unemployment would
odds that the economy would slide back into recession, decline only gradually from levels significantly above
participants still saw significant downside risks to the those that the Committee would expect to prevail in
outlook for economic growth. Risks included potential the longer run, with inflation likely to settle at levels at
spillovers to U.S. financial markets and institutions, and or below those consistent with the Committee’s dual
so to the broader U.S. economy, if the European debt mandate. Accordingly, in the discussion of monetary
and banking crisis were to worsen significantly. In ad- policy for the period ahead, all Committee members
dition, participants noted the risk of a larger-than- agreed to continue the program of extending the aver-
expected fiscal tightening and the possibility that struc- age maturity of the Federal Reserve’s holdings of secur-
tural problems in the housing market had attenuated ities as announced in September. The Committee de-
the transmission of monetary policy actions to the real cided to maintain its existing policy of reinvesting prin-
economy. It was also noted that the extended period cipal payments from its holdings of agency debt and
of highly accommodative monetary policy could even- agency MBS in agency MBS and of rolling over matur-
tually lead to a buildup of financial imbalances. A few ing Treasury securities at auction. In addition, the
participants, however, mentioned the possibility that Committee agreed to keep the target range for the fed-
economic growth could be more rapid than currently eral funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and to reiterate its ex-
expected, particularly if gains in output and employ- pectation that economic conditions—including low
ment led to a virtuous cycle of improvements in rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for
household balance sheets, increased confidence, and inflation over the medium run—are likely to warrant
easier credit conditions. exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at
least through mid-2013. A few members expressed
With respect to the outlook for inflation, participants
interest in using language specifying a period of time
generally anticipated that inflation would recede further
during which the federal funds rate was expected to
over coming quarters and would settle over the me-
remain exceptionally low, rather than a calendar date,
dium run at levels at or below those judged to be most
arguing that such language might be better to indicate a
consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate. They
constant stance of monetary policy over time. Howev-
pointed to the further dissipation of the effects of earli-
er, members generally preferred to retain the existing
er increases in the prices of energy and some commodi-
forward guidance, at least for now. A few members
ties, the significant slack in resource utilization, the
indicated that they believed the economic outlook
continued subdued growth in labor compensation, and

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
might warrant additional policy accommodation. securities in order to maintain the total face
However, it was noted that any such accommodation value of domestic securities at approximately
would likely be more effective if it were provided in the $2.6 trillion. The Committee directs the
context of a future communications initiative, and most Desk to engage in dollar roll transactions as
of these members agreed that they could support reten- necessary to facilitate settlement of the Fed-
tion of the current policy stance at this meeting. One eral Reserve’s agency MBS transactions. The
member dissented from the policy decision on the System Open Market Account Manager and
grounds that additional monetary policy accommoda- the Secretary will keep the Committee in-
tion was warranted at this time. With the Committee in formed of ongoing developments regarding
the process of reviewing its monetary policy strategies the System’s balance sheet that could affect
and communication, and no additional accommodation the attainment over time of the Committee’s
being provided at this meeting, a few members indi- objectives of maximum employment and
cated that they could support the Committee’s decision price stability.”
even though they had not favored recent policy actions.
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
The Committee reiterated that it will regularly review
low to be released at 12:30 p.m.:
the size and composition of its securities holdings and
that it is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropri- “Information received since the Federal
ate to promote a stronger economic recovery in the Open Market Committee met in September
context of price stability. With respect to the statement indicates that economic growth strengthened
to be released following the meeting, members agreed somewhat in the third quarter, reflecting in
that only relatively small changes were needed to reflect part a reversal of the temporary factors that
the modest improvement in the economic outlook and had weighed on growth earlier in the year.
to note that the Committee would continue to imple- Nonetheless, recent indicators point to con-
ment its policy steps from recent meetings. tinuing weakness in overall labor market
conditions, and the unemployment rate re-
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
mains elevated. Household spending has in-
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
creased at a somewhat faster pace in recent
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
months. Business investment in equipment
ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance
and software has continued to expand, but
with the following domestic policy directive:
investment in nonresidential structures is still
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks weak, and the housing sector remains de-
monetary and financial conditions that will pressed. Inflation appears to have mod-
foster price stability and promote sustainable erated since earlier in the year as prices of
growth in output. To further its long-run energy and some commodities have declined
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions from their peaks. Longer-term inflation ex-
in reserve markets consistent with federal pectations have remained stable.
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
The Committee directs the Desk to continue
Committee seeks to foster maximum em-
the maturity extension program it began in
ployment and price stability. The Committee
September to purchase, by the end of June
continues to expect a moderate pace of eco-
2012, Treasury securities with remaining ma-
nomic growth over coming quarters and
turities of approximately 6 years to 30 years
consequently anticipates that the unemploy-
with a total face value of $400 billion, and to
ment rate will decline only gradually toward
sell Treasury securities with remaining matur-
levels that the Committee judges to be con-
ities of 3 years or less with a total face value
sistent with its dual mandate. Moreover,
of $400 billion. The Committee also directs
there are significant downside risks to the
the Desk to maintain its existing policies of
economic outlook, including strains in global
rolling over maturing Treasury securities into
financial markets. The Committee also antic-
new issues and of reinvesting principal pay-
ipates that inflation will settle, over coming
ments on all agency debt and agency mort-
quarters, at levels at or below those consis-
gage-backed securities in the System Open
tent with the Committee’s dual mandate as
Market Account in agency mortgage-backed

--- Page 11 ---

____________________________M__in__ut_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ N__o_v_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_–_2_, _2_0_1_1______________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
the effects of past energy and other com- Kocherlakota, Charles I. Plosser, Sarah Bloom Raskin,
modity price increases dissipate further. Daniel K. Tarullo, and Janet L. Yellen.
However, the Committee will continue to
Voting against this action: Charles L. Evans.
pay close attention to the evolution of infla-
tion and inflation expectations. Mr. Evans dissented because he saw the high unem-
ployment rate and the outlook for only weak economic
To support a stronger economic recovery
growth as calling for additional policy accommodation
and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
at this meeting. Moreover, the longer the current situa-
is at levels consistent with the dual mandate,
tion of low resource utilization lasted, the more the
the Committee decided today to continue its
economy’s longer-term growth potential could be im-
program to extend the average maturity of its
paired. Furthermore, given current policy, his outlook
holdings of securities as announced in Sep-
was for inflation to come in below levels consistent
tember. The Committee is maintaining its
with the Committee’s dual mandate, bolstering the case
existing policies of reinvesting principal
for additional monetary easing at this time. He also
payments from its holdings of agency debt
believed policies with more-explicit forward guidance
and agency mortgage-backed securities in
about the economic conditions under which exception-
agency mortgage-backed securities and of
ally low levels of the funds rate could be maintained
rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
would improve the prospects for growth and employ-
auction. The Committee will regularly re-
ment and, while possibly admitting somewhat higher
view the size and composition of its securi-
inflation for a time, would still safeguard price stability.
ties holdings and is prepared to adjust those
holdings as appropriate. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
would be held on Tuesday, December 13, 2011. The
The Committee also decided to keep the tar-
meeting adjourned at 10:30 a.m. on November 2, 2011.
get range for the federal funds rate at 0 to
¼ percent and currently anticipates that eco- Notation Vote
nomic conditions—including low rates of re- By notation vote completed on October 11, 2011, the
source utilization and a subdued outlook for Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
inflation over the medium run—are likely to FOMC meeting held on September 20–21, 2011.
warrant exceptionally low levels for the fed-
eral funds rate at least through mid-2013.
The Committee will continue to assess the
economic outlook in light of incoming in-
formation and is prepared to employ its tools
_____________________________
to promote a stronger economic recovery in
William B. English
a context of price stability.”
Secretary
Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C.
Dudley, Elizabeth Duke, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana

--- Page 12 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the November 1–2, 2011, Federal ment rate is projected to decline only gradually over
Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, the mem- this projection period. As a result, participants antic-
bers of the Board of Governors and the presidents of ipated that, at the end of 2014, the unemployment rate
the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom participate in would remain well above their estimates of the unem-
the deliberations of the FOMC, submitted projections ployment rate that they see as consistent, over the
for growth of real output, the unemployment rate, and longer run, with the Committee’s dual mandate of max-
inflation for the years 2011 to 2014 and over the longer imum employment and price stability. Most partici-
run. The projections were based on information avail- pants anticipated that the factors underlying the notice-
able at the time of the meeting and on each partici- able rise in overall inflation in 2011 would be largely
pant’s assumptions about factors likely to affect eco- transitory and that inflation would move lower in 2012;
nomic outcomes, including his or her assessment of thereafter, inflation was expected to remain at levels
appropriate monetary policy. “Appropriate monetary roughly consistent with or below rates that they see as
policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate. Partic-
participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for ipants generally viewed the rate of core inflation as like-
economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or ly to remain at or somewhat below its 2011 level
her interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objec- throughout the projection period.
tives of maximum employment and stable prices.
On balance, as indicated in table 1, participants antic-
Longer-run projections represent each participant’s
ipated somewhat slower economic growth and some-
assessment of the rate to which each variable would be
what higher unemployment relative to their projections
expected to converge over time under appropriate
in June; they raised their projections for inflation in
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks.
2011 but left their projections for inflation from 2012
As depicted in figure 1, FOMC participants expected onward about unchanged since the June meeting. All
the economic recovery to continue at a moderate pace, of the participants made substantial downward revi-
with the growth of real gross domestic product (GDP) sions to their projections for GDP growth in 2011, and
slowing this year compared with its pace in 2010 but most marked down their projections for economic
then picking up gradually through 2014. With expecta- growth in 2012 and 2013; however, participants did not
tions that the pace of economic growth will modestly materially alter their expectations for the normal rate of
exceed participants’ estimates of the longer-run sus- economic growth that would prevail in the longer run.
tainable rate of increase in real GDP, the unemploy- Although participants continue to expect a gradual de-
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, November 2011
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2011 2012 2013 2014 Longer run 2011 2012 2013 2014 Longer run
Change in real GDP . . 1.6 to 1.7 2.5 to 2.9 3.0 to 3.5 3.0 to 3.9 2.4 to 2.7 1.6 to 1.8 2.3 to 3.5 2.7 to 4.0 2.7 to 4.5 2.2 to 3.0
June projection. . . 2.7 to 2.9 3.3 to 3.7 3.5 to 4.2 n.a. 2.5 to 2.8 2.5 to 3.0 2.2 to 4.0 3.0 to 4.5 n.a. 2.4 to 3.0
Unemployment rate. . . 9.0 to 9.1 8.5 to 8.7 7.8 to 8.2 6.8 to 7.7 5.2 to 6.0 8.9 to 9.1 8.1 to 8.9 7.5 to 8.4 6.5 to 8.0 5.0 to 6.0
June projection. . . 8.6 to 8.9 7.8 to 8.2 7.0 to 7.5 n.a. 5.2 to 5.6 8.4 to 9.1 7.5 to 8.7 6.5 to 8.3 n.a. 5.0 to 6.0
PCE inflation. . . . . . . . 2.7 to 2.9 1.4 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 2.5 to 3.3 1.4 to 2.8 1.4 to 2.5 1.5 to 2.4 1.5 to 2.0
June projection. . . 2.3 to 2.5 1.5 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 n.a. 1.7 to 2.0 2.1 to 3.5 1.2 to 2.8 1.3 to 2.5 n.a. 1.5 to 2.0
Core PCE inflation3. . 1.8 to 1.9 1.5 to 2.0 1.4 to 1.9 1.5 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 1.3 to 2.1 1.4 to 2.1 1.4 to 2.2
June projection. . . . 1.5 to 1.8 1.4 to 2.0 1.4 to 2.0 n.a. 1.5 to 2.3 1.2 to 2.5 1.3 to 2.5 n.a.
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for per-
sonal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civi-
lian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary
policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The June projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open
Market Committee on June 21–22, 2011.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

--- Page 13 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2011–14 and over the longer run
Percent
Change in real GDP 4
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections 3
2
1
+
Actual
_0
1
2
3
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual.

--- Page 14 ---

__________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ P__ro_j_ec_t_io_n_s_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _N_o_v_e_m__b_er_ _1_–_2,_ 2_0_1_1_____________P_a_g_e_ _3
cline in the unemployment rate over time, most partici- tral tendency of participants’ projections for output
pants revised up their projections for the path of the growth in 2012 was 2.5 to 2.9 percent, followed by cen-
unemployment rate over the forecast period, and some tral tendencies of 3.0 to 3.5 percent in 2013 and 3.0 to
participants also raised their projections of the longer- 3.9 percent in 2014. Participants anticipated that the
run rate of unemployment compared with June. Partic- economic expansion would be supported by continued
ipants’ projections for overall and core inflation this monetary policy accommodation, reduced commodity
year were slightly higher than in June, but their projec- cost pressures, strengthening household balance sheets,
tions for 2012, 2013, and over the longer run were and improving financial conditions. However, in
broadly similar to those made in June. downgrading the trajectory of their projections com-
pared with those in June, participants cited a number of
As indicated in figure 2, a sizable majority of partici-
forces that were likely to restrain the pace of output
pants continued to attach an unusually high level of
growth over the next few years, including tighter fiscal
uncertainty to their projections for economic growth,
policy at all levels of government, ongoing drag from
the unemployment rate, and inflation relative to histor-
the troubled housing sector, volatility in financial mar-
ical norms. Most participants viewed the risks to out-
kets, and possibly reduced external demand. Many also
put growth as being weighted to the downside and the
pointed to the additional headwinds of still-tight credit
risks to the unemployment rate as being weighted to
conditions for some households and smaller business-
the upside. Most participants saw the risks to overall
es, weak consumer and business sentiment, persistently
and core inflation as broadly balanced.
high unemployment, and slow income growth. In addi-
The Outlook tion, some participants noted that although energy and
Participants marked their forecasts down significantly commodity prices had fallen back, they remain at ele-
for real GDP growth in 2011, with the central tendency vated levels that might weigh on spending for a time.
of their projections forming a narrow band from 1.6 to The central tendency of participants’ projections for
1.7 percent, down from 2.7 to 2.9 percent in June. Par- the longer-run rate of real GDP growth, in the absence
ticipants stated that the downward revision reflected of further shocks, was 2.4 to 2.7 percent, a bit slower
the body of economic data received since June, particu- than projected in June.
larly the comprehensive annual revisions and the esti-
In response to the ongoing weakness in labor market
mate of second-quarter GDP published by the Bureau
conditions and the downward revisions to their as-
of Economic Analysis, which showed that the expan-
sessments of the economic outlook, participants
sion in real GDP in the first half of the year had been
marked up their forecasts for the unemployment rate
considerably slower than the participants had expected
over the forecast period. For the fourth quarter of this
at the time of their June projections. More-recent data
year, the central tendency of participants’ projections
indicated that output growth strengthened during the
rose to 9.0 to 9.1 percent from 8.6 to 8.9 percent re-
third quarter, reflecting in part a reversal of the tempo-
ported in June. Similar upward revisions were made
rary factors that had weighed on real activity earlier in
for 2012 and 2013, with the central tendencies of the
the year, including the damping effect of higher food
unemployment rate projections for those years now at
and energy prices on consumer purchasing power and
8.5 to 8.7 percent and 7.8 to 8.2 percent, respectively.
spending as well as supply chain disruptions associated
The central tendency of their unemployment rate pro-
with the disaster in Japan. However, several partici-
jections for the end of 2014 was 6.8 to 7.7 percent, in-
pants indicated that some of the factors contributing to
dicating expectations for an ongoing, gradual im-
the slowdown in GDP growth earlier in the year, in-
provement in the employment situation, but one that
cluding reduced spending by state and local govern-
continued to leave the unemployment rate well above
ments, were likely to be more persistent. Participants
the 5.2 to 6.0 percent central tendency of participants’
also noted that heightened uncertainty regarding eco-
estimates of the unemployment rate that would prevail
nomic and financial developments, as well as low con-
over the longer run in the absence of further shocks.
fidence among businesses and consumers, continued to
The upper bound of the central tendency of partici-
restrain economic activity.
pants’ longer-run projections was higher than in June,
Looking further ahead, participants continued to expect although the range of participants’ estimates was un-
a moderate pickup in the pace of the economic recov- changed.
ery over the next couple of years, albeit to growth rates
Participants noted that measures of consumer price
somewhat below those previously projected. The cen-
inflation had increased this year relative to both their

--- Page 15 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure 2. Uncertainty and risks in economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth Risks to GDP growth
18 18
November projections November projections
June projections 16 June projections 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation Risks to PCE inflation
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation Risks to core PCE inflation
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
NOTE: For definitions of uncertainty and risks in economic projections, see the box “Forecast Uncertainty.” Definitions of variables are in the general
note to table 1.

--- Page 16 ---

__________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ P__ro_j_ec_t_io_n_s_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _N_o_v_e_m__b_er_ _1_–_2,_ 2_0_1_1_____________P_a_g_e_ _5
levels in 2010 and the projections made in June, reflect-
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
ing in part higher prices of oil and other commodities Percentage points
that had larger effects than previously expected. The Variable 2011 2012 2013 2014
central tendency of their estimates for total personal Change in real GDP1 . . . . . ±0.6 ±1.4 ±1.7 ±1.8
consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation in 2011 rose
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . ±0.2 ±0.9 ±1.5 ±1.8
to 2.7 to 2.9 percent compared with 2.3 to 2.5 percent
Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.5 ±0.9 ±1.0 ±1.0
in June. Most participants anticipated that the influ-
ence of higher commodity prices and supply chain dis- NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the
root mean squared error of projections for 1991 through 2010 that
ruptions from Japan would be temporary and that infla-
were released in the fall by various private and government forecas-
tion pressures in the next several years would be sub- ters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain
assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual out-
dued as commodity prices stabilized, inflation expecta-
comes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in
tions remained well anchored, and large margins of ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the
slack in labor markets kept labor costs in check. As a past. Further information is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip
(2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from
result, the central tendency of participants’ projections
Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion
of total PCE inflation was about 1.5 to 2.0 percent in Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal
2012, 2013, and 2014, similar to their forecasts in June Reserve System, November).
1. For definitions, refer to general note in table 1.
and at or slightly below the 1.7 to 2.0 percent central
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price meas-
tendency of their estimates of the longer-run, mandate- ure that has been most widely used in government and private eco-
nomic forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the
consistent rate of inflation. The central tendency of
previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.
participants’ projections of core PCE inflation in 2011
certainty around their inflation projections than in June.
shifted up to 1.8 to 1.9 percent, compared with 1.5 to
Participants noted that uncertainties about the pace of
1.8 percent in June, as some of this year’s run-up in
economic recovery and the effects of the Federal Re-
commodity prices passed through to core prices.
serve’s extraordinary monetary policy accommodation,
However, the central tendencies of the projections of
as well as the timing of exit from it, were significant
core inflation for the next three years were approx-
sources of uncertainty in the outlook for inflation.
imately 1.5 to 2.0 percent, essentially unchanged from
However, a number of participants highlighted that
their June levels and roughly similar to participants’
inflation currently remains anchored by stable longer-
projections for headline inflation.
term inflation expectations.
Uncertainty and Risks
Although several participants noted that the risks of a
In their assessments of the uncertainty and risks asso-
near-term recession had likely diminished, most partic-
ciated with their projections, a substantial majority of
ipants continued to judge that the balance of risks to
participants continued to judge that the levels of uncer-
economic growth was weighted to the downside (that
tainty associated with their projections for economic
is, they judged that economic growth was more likely to
growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation were
be below their projection of its most likely outcome
greater than the average levels that had prevailed over
than above it). The remaining participants saw the
the past 20 years.1 They pointed to a number of factors
risks as balanced. The most frequently cited downside
that raised their assessments of uncertainty regarding
risks to growth included possible financial market and
output growth and unemployment, including concerns
economic spillovers from an intensification of the fi-
about the ongoing developments in Europe, the severi-
nancial strains in Europe, vulnerabilities related to weak
ty of the recent recession, and the pace at which the
consumer and business confidence, the possible effects
numerous financial and economic headwinds buffeting
on spending of uncertainties about regulatory policy,
the economy will recede. However, slightly fewer par-
and the potential consequences of larger-than-expected
ticipants reported a higher-than-average degree of un-
near-term fiscal consolidation. The risks surrounding
participants’ forecasts of the unemployment rate
1 Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for the shifted higher, with a larger number of participants rel-
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con- ative to June viewing the risks to their projections as
sumer price inflation over the period from 1991 to 2010. At
weighted to the upside, and the remaining participants
the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty”
seeing the risks as broadly balanced.
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess A majority of the participants continued to judge the
the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projec- risks to their projections of overall and core inflation to
tions.

--- Page 17 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
be broadly balanced. Compared with their assessments projections in 2014 exceeded the dispersion of their
in June, a smaller number of participants viewed the longer-run ranges, suggesting greater agreement among
risks to inflation as being weighted to the upside, and policymakers about the economy’s longer-run perfor-
more participants indicated that the risks were weighted mance than the path of convergence toward it. A siza-
to the downside; the changes left the number of partic- ble majority of the participants judged that, in the ab-
ipants who saw a skew in either direction more evenly sence of any additional shocks, the economy would
distributed. Some participants saw a risk that elevated converge fully to its longer-run rates of GDP growth,
resource slack could put more downward pressure on unemployment, and inflation within about five or six
inflation than expected. Nevertheless, some partici- years; a few participants indicated that convergence
pants noted the risk that commodity prices could expe- might take a longer period of time, and one participant
rience renewed volatility or have a longer-lasting influ- believed convergence could occur more rapidly.
ence than expected. A few participants pointed to the
Figures 3.C and 3.D provide corresponding informa-
possibility that the current highly accommodative
tion about the diversity of participants’ outlooks for
stance of monetary policy, if it were maintained for
inflation. The center of mass of the distributions of
longer than is appropriate, could lead to higher infla-
participants’ projections for overall and core PCE infla-
tion expectations and actual inflation; some also
tion in 2011 shifted to the right relative to the ranges of
thought that fiscal imbalances could have a similar ef-
these projections provided in June. The dispersion of
fect.
projections for total PCE inflation in 2012 and 2013
Diversity of Views changed little, although the top end of the range of par-
Figures 3.A and 3.B provide further details on the di- ticipants’ projections was somewhat higher than that of
versity of participants’ views regarding the likely out- their projections for core inflation, suggesting that a
comes for real GDP growth and the unemployment few participants are concerned that elevated price in-
rate over the next few years and over the longer run. creases for food and energy will persist for a time. The
The dispersion in these projections continued to reflect dispersion of projections for core inflation narrowed
differences in participants’ assessments of many fac- somewhat, driven predominantly by a decline in the
tors, including the underlying momentum in economic upper end of the ranges. The ranges of inflation pro-
activity, appropriate future monetary policy and its ef- jections for 2014 were similar to those for 2012 and
fects on economic activity, the effects of the European 2013. In general, the dispersion of participants’ infla-
situation, and the future path of U.S. fiscal policy. tion forecasts for the next few years represented differ-
With much of the data for 2011 now in hand, the dis- ences in judgments regarding the fundamental determi-
persion of participants’ projections of output growth nants of inflation, including the degree of resource
and the unemployment rate this year narrowed substan- slack and the extent to which resource slack influences
tially relative to June. The range of participants’ projec- inflation outcomes and expectations, as well as esti-
tions for these variables in 2012 and 2013 also nar- mates of how the stance of monetary policy may influ-
rowed somewhat; however, the range of projections for ence inflation expectations. By contrast, the unchanged
real GDP growth in each of those years shifted to the and relatively concentrated distribution of participants’
lower end of the range of their June projections, and projections for overall inflation over the longer run
the range of projections for the unemployment rate continued to reflect broad similarity in participants’
shifted to the higher end of the June distribution. The assessments of the approximate level of inflation that is
dispersion associated with participants’ longer-run pro- consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of
jections of output growth and the unemployment rate maximum employment and price stability.
changed very little, although the dispersion of their

--- Page 18 ---

__________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ P__ro_j_ec_t_io_n_s_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _N_o_v_e_m__b_er_ _1_–_2,_ 2_0_1_1_____________P_a_g_e_ _7
Figure 3.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2011–14 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2011 18
November projections 16
June projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.8- 1.0- 1.2- 1.4- 1.6- 1.8- 2.0- 2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4-
0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2012 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.8- 1.0- 1.2- 1.4- 1.6- 1.8- 2.0- 2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4-
0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2013 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.8- 1.0- 1.2- 1.4- 1.6- 1.8- 2.0- 2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4-
0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.8- 1.0- 1.2- 1.4- 1.6- 1.8- 2.0- 2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4-
0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.8- 1.0- 1.2- 1.4- 1.6- 1.8- 2.0- 2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4-
0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 19 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure 3.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2011–14 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2011 18
November projections 16
June projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2012 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2013 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 20 ---

__________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ P__ro_j_ec_t_io_n_s_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _N_o_v_e_m__b_er_ _1_–_2,_ 2_0_1_1_____________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure 3.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2011–14 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2011 18
November projections 16
June projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5- 2.7- 2.9- 3.1- 3.3- 3.5-
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2012 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5- 2.7- 2.9- 3.1- 3.3- 3.5-
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2013 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5- 2.7- 2.9- 3.1- 3.3- 3.5-
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5- 2.7- 2.9- 3.1- 3.3- 3.5-
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5- 2.7- 2.9- 3.1- 3.3- 3.5-
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 21 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure 3.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inflation, 2011–14
Number of participants
2011 18
November projections 16
June projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2012 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2013 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2014 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 22 ---

__________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ P__ro_j_ec_t_io_n_s_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _N_o_v_e_m__b_er_ _1_–_2,_ 2_0_1_1____________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by around the projections are broadly balanced,
the members of the Board of Governors and the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks probability of about 70 percent that actual
inform discussions of monetary policy among GDP would expand within a range of 2.4 to
policymakers and can aid public understand- 3.6 percent in the current year, 1.6 to 4.4 per-
ing of the basis for policy actions. Consider- cent in the second year, 1.3 to 4.7 percent in the
able uncertainty attends these projections, third year, and 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the fourth
however. The economic and statistical models year. The corresponding 70 percent confidence
and relationships used to help produce eco- intervals for overall inflation would be 1.5 to
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de- 2.5 percent in the current year, 1.1 to 2.9 per-
scriptions of the real world, and the future cent in the second year, and 1.0 to 3.0 percent
path of the economy can be affected by myr- in the third and fourth years.
iad unforeseen developments and events. Because current conditions may differ
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, from those that prevailed, on average, over his-
participants consider not only what appears to tory, participants provide judgments as to
be the most likely economic outcome as em- whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
bodied in their projections, but also the range jections of each variable is greater than, smaller
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
their occurring, and the potential costs to the forecast uncertainty in the past, as shown in
economy should they occur. table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
Table 2 summarizes the average historical to whether the risks to their projections are
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including weighted to the upside, are weighted to the
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
and those prepared by the Federal Reserve participants judge whether each variable is
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the more likely to be above or below their projec-
Federal Open Market Committee. The pro- tions of the most likely outcome. These judg-
jection error ranges shown in the table il- ments about the uncertainty and the risks at-
lustrate the considerable uncertainty associated tending each participant’s projections are dis-
with economic forecasts. For example, sup- tinct from the diversity of participants’ views
pose a participant projects that real gross do- about the most likely outcomes. Forecast un-
mestic product (GDP) and total consumer certainty is concerned with the risks associated
prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, re- with a particular projection rather than with
spectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the divergences across a number of different pro-
uncertainty attending those projections is simi- jections.
lar to that experienced in the past and the risks

# Tables

## Page_10_Table_1


| “Information received since the Federal          |
|--------------------------------------------------|
| Open Market Committee met in September           |
| indicates that economic growth strengthened      |
| somewhat in the third quarter, reflecting in     |
| part a reversal of the temporary factors that    |
| had weighed on growth earlier in the year.       |
| Nonetheless, recent indicators point to con-     |
| tinuing weakness in overall labor market         |
| conditions, and the unemployment rate re-        |
| mains elevated. Household spending has in-       |
| creased at a somewhat faster pace in recent      |
| months. Business investment in equipment         |
| and software has continued to expand, but        |
| investment in nonresidential structures is still |
| weak, and the housing sector remains de-         |
| pressed. Inflation appears to have mod-          |
| erated since earlier in the year as prices of    |
| energy and some commodities have declined        |
| from their peaks. Longer-term inflation ex-      |
| pectations have remained stable.                 |
| Consistent with its statutory mandate, the       |
| Committee seeks to foster maximum em-            |
| ployment and price stability. The Committee      |
| continues to expect a moderate pace of eco-      |
| nomic growth over coming quarters and            |
| consequently anticipates that the unemploy-      |
| ment rate will decline only gradually toward     |
| levels that the Committee judges to be con-      |
| sistent with its dual mandate. Moreover,         |
| there are significant downside risks to the      |
| economic outlook, including strains in global    |
| financial markets. The Committee also antic-     |
| ipates that inflation will settle, over coming   |
| quarters, at levels at or below those consis-    |
| tent with the Committee’s dual mandate as        |


## Page_11_Table_1


| the effects of past energy and other com-      |
|------------------------------------------------|
| modity price increases dissipate further.      |
| However, the Committee will continue to        |
| pay close attention to the evolution of infla- |
| tion and inflation expectations.               |
| To support a stronger economic recovery        |
| and to help ensure that inflation, over time,  |
| is at levels consistent with the dual mandate, |
| the Committee decided today to continue its    |
| program to extend the average maturity of its  |
| holdings of securities as announced in Sep-    |
| tember. The Committee is maintaining its       |
| existing policies of reinvesting principal     |
| payments from its holdings of agency debt      |
| and agency mortgage-backed securities in       |
| agency mortgage-backed securities and of       |
| rolling over maturing Treasury securities at   |
| auction. The Committee will regularly re-      |
| view the size and composition of its securi-   |
| ties holdings and is prepared to adjust those  |
| holdings as appropriate.                       |
| The Committee also decided to keep the tar-    |
| get range for the federal funds rate at 0 to   |
| ¼ percent and currently anticipates that eco-  |
| nomic conditions—including low rates of re-    |
| source utilization and a subdued outlook for   |
| inflation over the medium run—are likely to    |
| warrant exceptionally low levels for the fed-  |
| eral funds rate at least through mid-2013.     |
| The Committee will continue to assess the      |
| economic outlook in light of incoming in-      |
| formation and is prepared to employ its tools  |
| to promote a stronger economic recovery in     |
| a context of price stability.”                 |


## Page_11_Table_2


| It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee   |
|--------------------------------------------------------|
| would be held on Tuesday, December 13, 2011. The       |
| meeting adjourned at 10:30 a.m. on November 2, 2011.   |
| Notation Vote                                          |
| By notation vote completed on October 11, 2011, the    |
| Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the      |
| FOMC meeting held on September 20–21, 2011.            |


## Page_12_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |      |      |      |            |      |      |      |      |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|------|------------|------|------|------|------|
| 2011                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 2012 | 2013 | 2014 | Longer run | 2011 | 2012 | 2013 | 2014 |
| 1.6 to 1.7 2.5 to 2.9 3.0 to 3.5 3.0 to 3.9 2.4 to 2.7
2.7 to 2.9 3.3 to 3.7 3.5 to 4.2 n.a. 2.5 to 2.8
9.0 to 9.1 8.5 to 8.7 7.8 to 8.2 6.8 to 7.7 5.2 to 6.0
8.6 to 8.9 7.8 to 8.2 7.0 to 7.5 n.a. 5.2 to 5.6
2.7 to 2.9 1.4 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0
2.3 to 2.5 1.5 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 n.a. 1.7 to 2.0
1.8 to 1.9 1.5 to 2.0 1.4 to 1.9 1.5 to 2.0
1.5 to 1.8 1.4 to 2.0 1.4 to 2.0 n.a. |      |      |      |            |      |      |      |      |