# 20110622_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:36:52*
*Pages: 21, Tables: 3*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
June 21–22, 2011
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit- Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability
tee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Policy and Research, Board of Governors
System was held in the offices of the Board of Gover-
nors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, June 21, 2011, Robert deV. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of
at 10:30 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, June 22, the Secretary, Board of Governors
2011, at 9:00 a.m.
William Nelson, Deputy Director, Division of
PRESENT: Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ben Bernanke, Chairman
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Elizabeth Duke Board Members, Board of Governors
Charles L. Evans
Richard W. Fisher Charles S. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director,
Narayana Kocherlakota Office of the Staff Director, Board of Gover-
Charles I. Plosser nors
Sarah Bloom Raskin
Daniel K. Tarullo Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Director, Divi-
Janet L. Yellen sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors;
Michael Foley, Senior Associate Director, Di-
Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, Sandra Pia- vision of Banking Supervision and Regulation,
nalto, and John C. Williams, Alternate Mem- Board of Governors; Lawrence Slifman and
bers of the Federal Open Market Committee William Wascher, Senior Associate Directors,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
James Bullard, Thomas M. Hoenig, and Eric Ro- Governors
sengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, Andrew T. Levin, Senior Adviser, Office of Board
respectively Members, Board of Governors
William B. English, Secretary and Economist Joyce K. Zickler, Visiting Senior Adviser, Division
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Daniel M. Covitz and Eric M. Engen, Associate
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Directors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Board of Governors; Trevor A. Reeve, Asso-
David J. Stockton, Economist ciate Director, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Steven B.
Kamin, Loretta J. Mester, David Reifschneider, Egon Zakrajšek, Deputy Associate Director, Divi-
Harvey Rosenblum, Daniel G. Sullivan, David sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
W. Wilcox, and Kei-Mu Yi, Associate Econo-
mists Beth Anne Wilson, Assistant Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Ac-
count David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office
of the Secretary, Board of Governors Brahima Coulibaly, Senior Economist, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors;

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Louise Sheiner, Senior Economist, Division of 2010, FOMC meeting. Since November, purchases by
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors the Open Market Desk of the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York had increased the SOMA’s holdings by
Jean-Philippe Laforte,¹ Economist, Division of Re- nearly the full $600 billion authorized.
search and Statistics, Board of Governors
In light of ongoing strains in some foreign financial
markets, the Committee considered a proposal to ex-
Penelope A. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Of-
tend its dollar liquidity swap arrangements with foreign
fice of the Secretary, Board of Governors
central banks past August 1, 2011. Following their dis-
cussion, members unanimously approved the following
Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analyst,
resolution:
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gov-
ernors The Federal Open Market Committee directs
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to
Jeff Fuhrer, Executive Vice President, Federal Re- extend the existing temporary reciprocal cur-
serve Bank of Boston rency arrangements (“swap arrangements”)
for the System Open Market Account with
David Altig, Glenn D. Rudebusch, and Mark E. the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England,
Schweitzer, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal the European Central Bank, the Bank of Ja-
Reserve Banks of Atlanta, San Francisco, and pan, and the Swiss National Bank. The swap
Cleveland, respectively arrangements shall now terminate on Au-
gust 1, 2012, unless further extended by the
Michael Dotsey,¹ William Gavin, Andreas L. Committee.
Hornstein, and Edward S. Knotek II, Vice
Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium Models
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadel-
A staff presentation provided an overview of ongoing
phia, St. Louis, Richmond, and Kansas City,
Federal Reserve research on dynamic stochastic general
respectively
equilibrium (DSGE) models. DSGE models attempt
to capture the dynamics of the overall economy in a
Marco Del Negro,¹ Joshua L. Frost, Deborah L.
way that is consistent both with the historical data and
Leonard, and Jonathan P. McCarthy, Assistant
with optimizing behavior by forward-looking house-
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of New
holds and firms. The presentation began by discussing
York
the general features of DSGE models and considering
their advantages and limitations relative to other ap-
Jeff Campbell,¹ Senior Economist, Federal Reserve
proaches of analyzing macroeconomic dynamics; with
Bank of Chicago
regard to the latter, the presentation noted that while
_______________________
the current generation of DSGE models is still some-
¹ Attended the portion of the meeting relating to
what limited in the range of policy issues these models
dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models.
can address, further advances in modeling should in-
crease the usefulness of DSGE models for forecasting
and policy analysis. The presentation then reviewed
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
some specific features of DSGE models that are cur-
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
rently being studied at the Federal Reserve Board and
The manager of the System Open Market Account
the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Philadelphia,
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and
and Chicago. This review included the four models’
foreign financial markets during the period since the
characterizations of the forces affecting the economy in
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) met on
recent years and the models’ current forecasts for real
April 26–27, 2011. He also reported on System open
economic activity, inflation, and short-term interest
market operations, including the continuing reinvest-
rates. In discussing the staff presentation, meeting par-
ment into longer-term Treasury securities of principal
ticipants expressed the view that DSGE models are a
payments received on the SOMA’s holdings of agency
useful addition to the wide range of analytical ap-
debt and agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securi-
proaches traditionally used at the Federal Reserve, in
ties, as well as the ongoing purchases of additional
part because they provide an internally consistent way
Treasury securities authorized at the November 2–3,

--- Page 3 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_ g_ _o_f _J_u_n_e _2_1_-2_2_,_ 2_0_1_1_________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
of exploring how the behavior of economic agents level or range of the federal funds rate target will
might change in response to systematic adjustments to be the primary means of adjusting the stance of
policy. Some participants also expressed interest in monetary policy. During the normalization
seeing on a regular basis projections of key macroeco- process, adjustments to the interest rate on excess
nomic variables and other products from the DSGE reserves and to the level of reserves in the banking
models developed in the System. Finally, participants system will be used to bring the funds rate toward
encouraged further staff work to improve these models its target.
by, for example, expanding the range of questions they
 Sales of agency securities from the SOMA will like-
can be used to address.
ly commence sometime after the first increase in
Exit Strategy Principles the target for the federal funds rate. The timing
The Committee discussed strategies for normalizing the and pace of sales will be communicated to the pub-
stance and conduct of monetary policy, following up lic in advance; that pace is anticipated to be rela-
on its discussion of this topic at the April meeting. tively gradual and steady, but it could be adjusted
Participants stressed that the Committee’s discussions up or down in response to material changes in the
of this topic were undertaken as part of prudent plan- economic outlook or financial conditions.
ning and did not imply that a move toward such nor-
 Once sales begin, the pace of sales is expected to
malization would necessarily begin sometime soon.
be aimed at eliminating the SOMA’s holdings of
For concreteness, the Committee considered a set of
agency securities over a period of three to five
specific principles that would guide its strategy of nor-
years, thereby minimizing the extent to which the
malizing the stance and conduct of monetary policy.
SOMA portfolio might affect the allocation of
Participants discussed several specific elements of the
credit across sectors of the economy. Sales at this
principles, including how they should characterize the
pace would be expected to normalize the size of
monetary policy framework that the Committee would
the SOMA securities portfolio over a period of two
adopt after the conduct of policy returned to normal
to three years. In particular, the size of the securi-
and whether the principles should encompass the pos-
ties portfolio and the associated quantity of bank
sible timing between the normalization steps. At the
reserves are expected to be reduced to the smallest
conclusion of the discussion, all but one of the partici-
levels that would be consistent with the efficient
pants agreed on the following key elements of the
implementation of monetary policy.
strategy that they expect to follow when it becomes
appropriate to begin normalizing the stance and con-
 The Committee is prepared to make adjustments to
duct of monetary policy:
its exit strategy if necessary in light of economic
 The Committee will determine the timing and pace and financial developments.
of policy normalization to promote its statutory Staff Review of the Economic Situation
mandate of maximum employment and price sta- The information reviewed at the June 21–22 meeting
bility. indicated that the pace of the economic recovery
slowed in recent months and that conditions in the
 To begin the process of policy normalization, the
labor market had softened. Measures of inflation
Committee will likely first cease reinvesting some
picked up this year, reflecting in part higher prices for
or all payments of principal on the securities hold-
some commodities and imported goods. Longer-run
ings in the SOMA.
inflation expectations, however, remained stable.
 At the same time or sometime thereafter, the
The expansion of private nonfarm payroll employment
Committee will modify its forward guidance on the
in May was markedly below the average pace of job
path of the federal funds rate and will initiate tem-
gains in the previous months of this year. Initial claims
porary reserve-draining operations aimed at sup-
for unemployment insurance rose, on net, between the
porting the implementation of increases in the fed-
first half of April and the first half of June. The unem-
eral funds rate when appropriate.
ployment rate moved up in April and then rose further
 When economic conditions warrant, the Commit- to 9.1 percent in May, while the labor force participa-
tee’s next step in the process of policy normaliza- tion rate remained unchanged. Both long-duration un-
tion will be to begin raising its target for the federal employment and the share of workers employed part
funds rate, and from that point on, changing the time for economic reasons continued to be elevated.

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Total industrial production expanded only a bit during ings remained depressed by elevated vacancy rates, low
April and May after rising at a solid pace in the first prices for commercial real estate, and tight credit condi-
quarter. Shortages of specialized components imported tions for construction loans. In contrast, outlays for
from Japan contributed to a decline in the output of drilling and mining structures continued to be lifted by
motor vehicles and parts. Manufacturing production high energy prices.
outside of the motor vehicles sector increased mod-
Real nonfarm inventory investment rose moderately in
erately, on balance, during the past two months. The
the first quarter, but data for April suggested that the
manufacturing capacity utilization rate remained close
pace of inventory accumulation had slowed. Book-
to its first-quarter level, but it was still well below its
value inventory-to-sales ratios in April were similar to
longer-run average. Forward-looking indicators of in-
their pre-recession norms, and survey data also sug-
dustrial activity, such as the new orders diffusion in-
gested that inventory positions generally remained in a
dexes in the national and regional manufacturing sur-
comfortable range.
veys, weakened noticeably during the intermeeting pe-
riod to levels consistent with only tepid gains in factory The available data on government spending indicated
output in coming months. However, motor vehicle that real federal purchases increased in recent months,
assemblies were scheduled to rise notably in the third led by a rebound in outlays for defense in April and
quarter from their levels in recent months, as bottle- May from unusually low levels in the first quarter. In
necks in parts supplies were anticipated to ease. contrast, real expenditures by state and local govern-
ments appeared to have declined further, as outlays for
Growth in consumer spending declined in recent
construction projects fell in March and April, and state
months from the already modest pace in the first quar-
and local employment continued to contract in April
ter. Total real personal consumption expenditures only
and May.
edged up in April. Nominal retail sales, excluding pur-
chases at motor vehicles and parts outlets, increased The U.S. international trade deficit widened slightly in
somewhat in May, but sales of new light motor vehicles March and then narrowed in April to a level below its
declined markedly. Labor income rose moderately, as average in the first quarter. Exports rose strongly in
aggregate hours worked trended up, but total real dis- both months, with increases widespread across major
posable income remained flat in March and April, as categories in March, while the gains in April were con-
increases in consumer prices offset gains in nominal centrated in industrial supplies and capital goods. Im-
income. In addition, consumer sentiment stayed rela- ports grew robustly in March, but they fell slightly in
tively low through early June. April, as the drop in automotive imports from Japan
together with the decline in imports of petroleum
Activity in the housing market remained depressed, as
products more than offset increases in other imported
both weak demand and the sizable inventory of fore-
products.
closed or distressed properties continued to hold back
new construction. Starts and permits of new single- Headline consumer price inflation, which had risen in
family homes were essentially unchanged in April and the first quarter, edged down a bit in April and May, as
May, and they stayed near the very low levels seen since the prices of consumer food and energy decelerated
the middle of last year. Sales of new and existing from the pace seen in previous months. More recently,
homes remained at subdued levels in recent months, survey data through the middle of June pointed to de-
while measures of home prices fell further. clines in retail gasoline prices, and prices of food com-
modities appeared to have decreased somewhat. Ex-
The available indicators suggested that real business
cluding food and energy, core consumer price inflation
investment in equipment and software was rising a bit
picked up in April and May, pushing the 12-month
more slowly in the second quarter than the solid pace
change in the core consumer price index through May
seen in the first quarter. Nominal orders and ship-
above its level of a year earlier. Upward pressures on
ments of nondefense capital goods declined in April.
core consumer prices appeared to reflect the elevated
Business purchases of light motor vehicles edged up in
prices of commodities and other imports, along with
April but dropped in May, while spending for medium
notable increases in motor vehicle prices likely arising
and heavy trucks continued to increase in recent
from the effects of recent supply chain disruptions and
months. Survey measures of business conditions and
the resulting extremely low level of automobile inven-
sentiment weakened during the intermeeting period.
tories. However, near-term inflation expectations from
Business expenditures for office and commercial build-
the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys

--- Page 5 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_ g_ _o_f _J_u_n_e _2_1_-2_2_,_ 2_0_1_1_________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
of Consumers moved down a little in May and early of the incoming economic data was more downbeat
June from the high level seen in April, and longer-term than market participants had apparently anticipated.
inflation expectations remained within the range that Consistent with the weaker-than-expected economic
has generally prevailed over the preceding few years. data and the recent decline in the prices of oil and other
commodities, measures of inflation compensation over
Available measures of labor compensation showed that
the next 5 years and 5 to 10 years ahead based on nom-
labor cost pressures were still subdued, as wage in-
inal and inflation-protected Treasury securities de-
creases continued to be restrained by the large amount
creased considerably over the intermeeting period.
of slack in the labor market. In the first quarter, unit
labor costs only edged up, as the modest rise in hourly Market quotes did not suggest expectations of signifi-
compensation in the nonfarm business sector was cant movements in nominal Treasury yields following
mostly offset by further gains in productivity. More the anticipated completion of the asset purchase pro-
recently, average hourly earnings for all employees rose gram by the Federal Reserve at the end of June. Al-
in April and May, but the average rate of increase over though discussions about the federal debt ceiling at-
the preceding 12 months remained quite low. tracted attention in financial markets, judging from
Treasury yields and other asset prices, investors seemed
Global economic activity appeared to have increased
to anticipate that the debt ceiling would be increased in
more slowly in the second quarter than in the first
time to avoid any significant market disruptions.
quarter. The rate of growth in the emerging market
economies stepped down from its rapid pace in the Yields on corporate bonds stepped down modestly, on
first quarter, although it remained generally solid. The net, over the intermeeting period, but by less than the
Japanese economy contracted sharply following the decline in yields on comparable-maturity Treasury se-
earthquake in March, and the associated supply chain curities, leaving credit risk spreads a little wider. In the
disruptions weighed on the economies of many of Ja- secondary market for syndicated loans, conditions were
pan’s trading partners. The pace of economic growth little changed, with average bid prices for leveraged
in the euro area remained uneven, with Germany and loans holding steady.
France posting moderate gains in economic activity,
Broad U.S. stock price indexes declined, on net, over
while the peripheral European economies continued to
the intermeeting period, apparently in response to the
struggle. Recent declines in the prices of oil and other
downbeat economic data. Stock prices of financial
commodities contributed to some easing of inflationary
firms underperformed the broader market, reflecting
pressures abroad.
the weaker economic outlook, potential credit rating
Staff Review of the Financial Situation downgrades, and heightened concerns about the antic-
Investors appeared to adopt a more cautious attitude ipated capital surcharge for systemically important fi-
toward risk, particularly later in the intermeeting period. nancial institutions. Option-adjusted volatility on the
The shift in investors’ sentiment likely reflected the S&P 500 index rose somewhat on net.
weak tone of incoming economic data in the United
In the June 2011 Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey
States along with concerns about the outlook for global
on Dealer Financing Terms, dealers pointed to a con-
economic growth and about potential spillovers from a
tinued gradual easing over the previous three months in
possible further deterioration of the situation in peri-
credit terms applicable to major classes of counterpar-
pheral Europe.
ties across all types of transactions covered in the sur-
The decisions by the FOMC at its April meeting to vey. Dealers also reported that the demand for funding
continue its asset purchase program and to maintain had increased over the same period for a broad range
the 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds of securities, with the exception of equities. More re-
rate were generally in line with market expectations. cently, however, against a backdrop of disappointing
The accompanying statement and subsequent press economic data, heightened uncertainty about the situa-
briefing by the Chairman prompted a modest decline in tion in Europe, and, possibly, concerns about the U.S.
nominal yields, as market participants reportedly per- federal debt ceiling, market participants reported a gen-
ceived a somewhat less optimistic tone in the Commit- eral pullback from risk-taking and a decline in liquidity
tee’s economic outlook. Over the remainder of the in a range of financial markets.
intermeeting period, the expected path for the federal
Net debt financing by nonfinancial corporations was
funds rate, along with yields on nominal Treasury se-
strong in April and May. Gross issuance of both in-
curities, moved down appreciably further, as the bulk

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
vestment- and speculative-grade bonds by nonfinancial Bank credit was flat, on balance, in April and May.
corporations hit a record high in May before slowing Core loans—the sum of C&I, real estate, and consumer
somewhat in June, and outstanding amounts of com- loans—continued to contract modestly, pulled down by
mercial and industrial (C&I) loans and nonfinancial the ongoing decline in commercial and residential real
commercial paper increased. Gross public equity is- estate loans. In contrast, C&I loans increased at a brisk
suance by nonfinancial firms maintained a solid pace pace in April and May. The most recent Survey of
over the intermeeting period, and most indicators of Terms of Business Lending conducted in May indicated
business credit quality improved further. that banks had eased some lending terms on C&I loans.
The survey responses also suggested that the average
Commercial mortgage markets continued to show ten-
size of loan commitments and their average maturity
tative signs of stabilization. In recent months, delin-
had trended up in recent quarters.
quency rates for commercial real estate loans edged
down from their previous peaks. However, commer- M2 expanded at a robust pace in April and May. Liq-
cial real estate markets remained weak. Property sales uid deposits, the largest component of M2, maintained
were tepid, and prices remained at depressed levels. a solid rate of expansion, likely reflecting the very low
Issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities opportunity costs of holding such deposits. Currency
slowed somewhat in the second quarter. continued to advance, supported by strong demand for
U.S. bank notes from abroad.
Conditions in residential mortgage markets were little
changed overall but remained strained. Rates on con- The broad nominal index of the U.S. dollar fluctuated
forming fixed-rate residential mortgages declined about over the intermeeting period in response to changes in
in line with 10-year Treasury yields over the intermeet- investors’ assessment of the outlook for the U.S. econ-
ing period. Mortgage refinancing activity picked up, on omy and the situation in the peripheral European
net, over the intermeeting period but was still relatively economies. Since the April FOMC meeting, the dollar
subdued. Outstanding residential mortgage debt con- rose modestly, on net, after depreciating over the pre-
tracted further in the first quarter. Rates of serious ceding several months. Headline equity indexes abroad
delinquency for subprime and prime mortgages were and foreign benchmark sovereign yields declined over
little changed at elevated levels. The rate of new delin- the intermeeting period in apparent response to signs
quencies on prime mortgages ticked up in April but of a slowdown in the pace of global economic activity
remained well below the level of a few months ago. In and reduced demand for risky assets. Concerns about
March and April, delinquencies on mortgages backed the possibility of a restructuring of Greek government
by the Federal Housing Administration declined no- debt drove spreads of yields on the sovereign debts of
ticeably. Greece, Ireland, and Portugal to record highs relative
to yields on German bunds.
The Federal Reserve continued its competitive sales of
non-agency residential mortgage-backed securities held In the advanced foreign economies, most central banks
by Maiden Lane II LLC over the intermeeting period. left their policy rates unchanged, and the anticipated
Although the initial offerings of these securities were pace of monetary policy tightening indicated by money
well received, investor demand at the most recent sales market futures quotes was pared back. However, cen-
was not as strong, a development consistent with the tral banks in several emerging market economies con-
declines in the prices of non-agency residential mort- tinued to tighten policy, and the monetary authorities in
gage-backed securities over the intermeeting period. China increased required reserve ratios further.
Conditions in consumer credit markets continued to Staff Economic Outlook
improve. Growth in total consumer credit picked up in With the recent data on spending, income, production,
April, as the gain in nonrevolving credit more than off- and labor market conditions mostly weaker than the
set a further contraction in revolving credit. Delin- staff had anticipated at the time of the April FOMC
quency rates for consumer debt edged down further in meeting, the near-term projection for the rate of in-
recent months, with delinquency rates on some catego- crease in real gross domestic product (GDP) was re-
ries moving back to pre-crisis levels. Issuance of con- vised down. The effects of the disaster in Japan and of
sumer asset-backed securities remained robust over the higher commodity prices on the rate of increase in real
intermeeting period. consumer spending were expected to hold down U.S.
real GDP growth in the near term, but those effects
were anticipated to be transitory. However, the staff

--- Page 7 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_ g_ _o_f _J_u_n_e _2_1_-2_2_,_ 2_0_1_1_________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
also read the incoming economic data as suggesting restraining growth, including the global supply chain
that the underlying pace of the recovery was softer than disruptions in the wake of the Japanese earthquake, the
they had previously anticipated, and they marked down unusually severe weather in some parts of the United
their outlook for economic growth over the medium States, a drop in defense spending, and the effects of
term. Nevertheless, the staff still projected real GDP increases in oil and other commodity prices this year on
to increase at a moderate rate in the second half of household purchasing power and spending. Partici-
2011 and in 2012, with the ongoing recovery in activity pants expected that the expansion would gain strength
receiving continued support from accommodative as the influence of these temporary factors waned.
monetary policy, further increases in credit availability,
Nonetheless, most participants judged that the pace of
and anticipated improvements in household and busi-
the economic recovery was likely to be somewhat slow-
ness confidence. The average pace of real GDP
er over coming quarters than they had projected in
growth was expected to be sufficient to bring the un-
April. This judgment reflected the persistent weakness
employment rate down very slowly over the projection
in the housing market, the ongoing efforts by some
period, and the jobless rate was anticipated to remain
households to reduce debt burdens, the recent sluggish
elevated at the end of 2012.
growth of income and consumption, the fiscal contrac-
Although increases in consumer food and energy prices tion at all levels of government, and the effects of un-
slowed a bit in recent months, the continued step-up in certainty regarding the economic outlook and future
core consumer price inflation led the staff to raise tax and regulatory policies on the willingness of firms
slightly its projection for core inflation over the coming to hire and invest. Moreover, the recovery remained
quarters. However, headline inflation was still expected subject to some downside risks, such as the possibility
to recede over the medium term, as increases in food of a more extended period of weak activity and declin-
and energy prices and in non-oil import prices were ing prices in the housing sector, the chance of a larger-
anticipated to ease further. As in previous forecasts, than-expected near-term fiscal tightening, and potential
the staff continued to project that core consumer price financial and economic spillovers if the situation in pe-
inflation would remain relatively subdued over the pro- ripheral Europe were to deteriorate further. Partici-
jection period, reflecting both stable long-term inflation pants still projected that the unemployment rate would
expectations and persistent slack in labor and product decline gradually toward levels they saw as consistent
markets. with the Committee’s dual mandate, but at a more
gradual pace than they had forecast in April. While
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
higher prices for energy and other commodities had
Economic Outlook
boosted inflation this year, with commodity prices ex-
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, all meeting
pected to change little going forward and longer-term
participants—the five members of the Board of Gov-
inflation expectations stable, most participants antic-
ernors and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve
ipated that inflation would subside to levels at or below
Banks—provided projections of output growth, the
those consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate.
unemployment rate, and inflation for each year from
2011 through 2013 and over the longer run. Longer- Activity in the business sector appeared to have slowed
run projections represent each participant’s assessment somewhat over the intermeeting period. Although the
of the rate to which each variable would be expected to effects of the Japanese disaster on U.S. motor vehicle
converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy production accounted for much of the deceleration in
and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. industrial production since March, the most recent
Participants’ forecasts are described in the Summary of readings from various regional manufacturing surveys
Economic Projections, which is attached as an adden- suggested a slowing in the pace of manufacturing activ-
dum to these minutes. ity more broadly. However, business contacts in some
sectors—most notably energy and high tech—reported
In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
that activity and business sentiment had strengthened
look, meeting participants agreed that the economic
further in recent months. Business investment in
information received during the intermeeting period
equipment and software generally remained robust, but
indicated that the economic recovery was continuing at
growth in new orders for nondefense capital goods—
a moderate pace, though somewhat more slowly than
though volatile from month to month—appeared to
they had anticipated at the time of the April meeting.
have slowed. While FOMC participants expected a
Participants noted several transitory factors that were
rebound in investment in motor vehicles to boost capi-

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
tal outlays in coming months, some also noted that eased too much amid signs that investors in these mar-
indicators of current and planned business investment kets were aggressively taking on more leverage and risk
in equipment and software had weakened somewhat, in order to obtain higher returns. Meeting participants
and surveys showed some deterioration in business also noted that an escalation of the fiscal difficulties in
sentiment. Business contacts in some regions reported Greece and spreading concerns about other peripheral
that they were reducing capital budgets in response to European countries could cause significant financial
the less certain economic outlook, but in other parts of strains in the United States. It was pointed out that
the country, contacts noted that business sentiment some U.S. money market mutual funds have significant
remained on a firm footing, supported in part by strong exposures to financial institutions from core European
export demand. Compared with the relatively robust countries, which, in turn, have substantial exposures to
outlook for the business sector, meeting participants Greek sovereign debt. Participants were also con-
noted that the housing sector, including residential con- cerned about the possible effect on financial markets of
struction and home sales, remained depressed. Despite a failure to raise the statutory federal debt ceiling in a
efforts aimed at mitigation, foreclosures continued to timely manner. While admitting that it was difficult to
add to the already very large inventory of vacant know what the precise effects of such a development
homes, putting downward pressure on home prices and would be, participants emphasized that even a short
housing construction. delay in the payment of principal or interest on the
Treasury Department’s debt obligations would likely
Meeting participants generally noted that the most re-
cause severe market disruptions and could also have a
cent data on employment had been disappointing, and
lasting effect on U.S. borrowing costs.
new claims for unemployment insurance remained ele-
vated. The recent deterioration in labor market condi- Participants noted several factors that had contributed
tions was a particular concern for FOMC participants to the increase in inflation this year. The run-up in
because the prospects for job growth were seen as an energy prices, as well as an increase in prices of other
important source of uncertainty in the economic out- commodities and imported goods, had boosted both
look, particularly in the outlook for consumer spend- headline and core inflation. At same time, extremely
ing. Several participants reported feedback from busi- low motor vehicle inventories resulting from global
ness contacts who were delaying hiring until the eco- supply disruptions in the wake of the Japanese earth-
nomic and regulatory outlook became more certain and quake—by contributing to higher motor vehicle pric-
who indicated that they expected to meet any near-term es—had significantly raised inflation, although partici-
increase in the demand for their products without pants anticipated that these temporary pressures would
boosting employment; these participants noted the risk lessen as motor vehicle inventories were rebuilt. Partic-
that such cautious attitudes toward hiring could slow ipants also observed that crude oil prices fell over the
the pace at which the unemployment rate normalized. intermeeting period and other commodity prices also
Wage gains were generally reported to be subdued, al- moderated, developments that were likely to damp
though wages for a few skilled job categories in which headline inflation at the consumer level going forward.
workers were in short supply were said to be increasing However, a number of participants pointed out that the
relatively more rapidly. recent faster pace of price increases was widespread
across many categories of spending and was evident in
Changes in financial market conditions since the April
inflation measures such as trimmed means or medians,
meeting suggested that investors had become more
which exclude the most extreme price movements in
concerned about risk. Equity markets had seen a broad
each period. The discussion of core inflation and simi-
selloff, and risk spreads for many corporate borrowers
lar indicators reflected the view expressed by some par-
had widened noticeably. Large businesses that have
ticipants that such measures are useful for forecasting
access to capital markets continued to enjoy ready
the path of inflation over the medium run. In addition,
access to credit—including syndicated loans—on rela-
reports from business contacts indicated that some
tively attractive terms; however, credit conditions re-
already had passed on, or were intending to try to pass
mained tight for smaller, bank-dependent firms. Bank-
on, at least a portion of their higher costs to customers
ers again reported gradual improvements in credit qual-
in order to maintain profit margins.
ity and generally weak loan demand. In identifying
possible risks to financial stability, a few participants Most participants expected that much of the rise in
expressed concern that credit conditions in some sec- headline inflation this year would prove transitory and
tors—most notably the agriculture sector—might have that inflation over the medium term would be subdued

--- Page 9 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_ g_ _o_f _J_u_n_e _2_1_-2_2_,_ 2_0_1_1_________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
as long as commodity prices did not continue to rise complete its $600 billion asset purchase program at the
rapidly and longer-term inflation expectations remained end of the month and that no changes to the target
stable. Nevertheless, a number of participants judged range for the federal funds rate were warranted at this
the risks to the outlook for inflation as tilted to the up- meeting. The information received over the intermeet-
side. Moreover, a few participants saw a continuation ing period indicated that the economic recovery was
of the current stance of monetary policy as posing continuing at a moderate pace, though somewhat more
some upside risk to inflation expectations and actual slowly than the Committee had expected, and that the
inflation over time. However, other participants ob- labor market was weaker than anticipated. Inflation
served that measures of longer-term inflation compen- had increased in recent months as a result of higher
sation derived from financial instruments had remained prices for some commodities, as well as supply chain
stable of late, and that survey-based measures of disruptions related to the tragic events in Japan. None-
longer-term inflation expectations also had not changed theless, members saw the pace of the economic expan-
appreciably, on net, in recent months. These partici- sion as picking up over the coming quarters and the
pants noted that labor costs were rising only slowly, unemployment rate resuming its gradual decline toward
and that persistent slack in labor and product markets levels consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate.
would likely limit upward pressures on prices in coming Moreover, with longer-term inflation expectations sta-
quarters. Participants agreed that it would be impor- ble, members expected that inflation would subside to
tant to pay close attention to the evolution of both in- levels at or below those consistent with the Commit-
flation and inflation expectations. A few participants tee’s dual mandate as the effects of past energy and
noted that the adoption by the Committee of an explic- other commodity price increases dissipate. However,
it numerical inflation objective could help keep longer- many members saw the outlook for both employment
term inflation expectations well anchored. Another and inflation as unusually uncertain. Against this back-
participant, however, expressed concern that the adop- drop, members agreed that it was appropriate to main-
tion of such an objective could, in effect, alter the rela- tain the Committee’s current policy stance and accumu-
tive importance of the two components of the Com- late further information regarding the outlook for
mittee’s dual mandate. growth and inflation before deciding on the next policy
step. On the one hand, a few members noted that,
Participants also discussed the medium-term outlook
depending on how economic conditions evolve, the
for monetary policy. Some participants noted that if
Committee might have to consider providing additional
economic growth remained too slow to make satisfac-
monetary policy stimulus, especially if economic
tory progress toward reducing the unemployment rate
growth remained too slow to meaningfully reduce the
and if inflation returned to relatively low levels after the
unemployment rate in the medium run. On the other
effects of recent transitory shocks dissipated, it would
hand, a few members viewed the increase in inflation
be appropriate to provide additional monetary policy
risks as suggesting that economic conditions might well
accommodation. Others, however, saw the recent con-
evolve in a way that would warrant the Committee tak-
figuration of slower growth and higher inflation as sug-
ing steps to begin removing policy accommodation
gesting that there might be less slack in labor and
sooner than currently anticipated.
product markets than had been thought. Several par-
ticipants observed that the necessity of reallocating la- In the statement to be released following the meeting,
bor across sectors as the recovery proceeds, as well as all members agreed that it was appropriate to acknowl-
the loss of skills caused by high levels of long-term un- edge that the recovery had been slower than the Com-
employment and permanent separations, may have mittee had expected at the time of the April meeting
temporarily reduced the economy’s level of potential and to note the factors that were currently weighing on
output. In that case, the withdrawal of monetary ac- economic growth and boosting inflation. The Commit-
commodation may need to begin sooner than currently tee agreed that the statement should briefly describe its
anticipated in financial markets. A few participants current projections for unemployment and inflation
expressed uncertainty about the efficacy of monetary relative to the levels of those variables that members
policy in current circumstances but disagreed on the see as consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate.
implications for future policy. In the discussion of inflation in the statement, mem-
bers decided to reference inflation—meaning overall
Committee Policy Action
inflation—rather than underlying inflation or inflation
In the discussion of monetary policy for the period
trends, in order to be clear that the Committee’s objec-
ahead, members agreed that the Committee should

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
tive is the level of overall inflation in the medium term. disruptions associated with the tragic events
The Committee also decided to reiterate that economic in Japan. Household spending and business
conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low le- investment in equipment and software con-
vels for the federal funds rate for an extended period; tinue to expand. However, investment in
in addition, the Committee noted that it would review nonresidential structures is still weak, and the
regularly the size and composition of its securities hold- housing sector continues to be depressed.
ings, and that it is prepared to adjust those holdings as Inflation has picked up in recent months,
appropriate. mainly reflecting higher prices for some
commodities and imported goods, as well as
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
the recent supply chain disruptions. Howev-
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
er, longer-term inflation expectations have
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
remained stable.
ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance
with the following domestic policy directive: Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
Committee seeks to foster maximum em-
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
ployment and price stability. The unem-
monetary and financial conditions that will
ployment rate remains elevated; however, the
foster price stability and promote sustainable
Committee expects the pace of recovery to
growth in output. To further its long-run
pick up over coming quarters and the unem-
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions
ployment rate to resume its gradual decline
in reserve markets consistent with federal
toward levels that the Committee judges to
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.
be consistent with its dual mandate. Infla-
The Committee directs the Desk to complete
tion has moved up recently, but the Commit-
purchases of $600 billion of longer-term
tee anticipates that inflation will subside to
Treasury securities by the end of this month.
levels at or below those consistent with the
The Committee also directs the Desk to
Committee’s dual mandate as the effects of
maintain its existing policy of reinvesting
past energy and other commodity price in-
principal payments on all domestic securities
creases dissipate. However, the Committee
in the System Open Market Account in
will continue to pay close attention to the
Treasury securities in order to maintain the
evolution of inflation and inflation expecta-
total face value of domestic securities at ap-
tions.
proximately $2.6 trillion. The System Open
Market Account Manager and the Secretary To promote the ongoing economic recovery
will keep the Committee informed of ongo- and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
ing developments regarding the System’s bal- is at levels consistent with its mandate, the
ance sheet that could affect the attainment Committee decided today to keep the target
over time of the Committee’s objectives of range for the federal funds rate at 0 to
maximum employment and price stability.” ¼ percent. The Committee continues to an-
ticipate that economic conditions—including
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
low rates of resource utilization and a sub-
low to be released at 12:30 p.m.:
dued outlook for inflation over the medium
“Information received since the Federal run—are likely to warrant exceptionally low
Open Market Committee met in April indi- levels for the federal funds rate for an ex-
cates that the economic recovery is continu- tended period. The Committee will com-
ing at a moderate pace, though somewhat plete its purchases of $600 billion of longer-
more slowly than the Committee had ex- term Treasury securities by the end of this
pected. Also, recent labor market indicators month and will maintain its existing policy of
have been weaker than anticipated. The reinvesting principal payments from its se-
slower pace of the recovery reflects in part curities holdings. The Committee will regu-
factors that are likely to be temporary, in- larly review the size and composition of its
cluding the damping effect of higher food securities holdings and is prepared to adjust
and energy prices on consumer purchasing those holdings as appropriate.
power and spending as well as supply chain

--- Page 11 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_ g_ _o_f _J_u_n_e _2_1_-2_2_,_ 2_0_1_1________________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
The Committee will monitor the economic fidence in the transparency and integrity of the mone-
outlook and financial developments and will tary policy process. By unanimous vote, the Commit-
act as needed to best foster maximum em- tee approved the policies.2 Participants all supported
ployment and price stability.” the policies, but several of them emphasized that the
policy for staff, in particular, should be applied with
Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C.
judgment and common sense so as to avoid interfering
Dudley, Elizabeth Duke, Charles L. Evans, Richard W.
with legitimate research.
Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, Charles I. Plosser, Sar-
ah Bloom Raskin, Daniel K. Tarullo, and Janet L. Yel- It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
len. would be held on Tuesday, August 9, 2011. The meet-
ing adjourned at 12:10 p.m. on June 22, 2011.
Voting against this action: None.
Notation Vote
External Communications
By notation vote completed on May 17, 2011, the
In follow-up to discussions at the January meeting, the
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
Committee turned to consideration of policies aimed at
FOMC meeting held on April 26–27, 2011.
supporting effective communication with the public
regarding the outlook for the economy and monetary
policy. The subcommittee on communication, chaired
by Governor Yellen and composed of Governor Duke
and Presidents Fisher and Rosengren, proposed poli- _____________________________
cies for Committee participants and for Federal Re- William B. English
serve System staff to follow in their communications Secretary
with the public in order to reinforce the public’s con-
2 The policies are available at http://www.federalreserve.go
v/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_ExtCommunicationPartici
pants.pdf and http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypol
icy/files/FOMC_ExtCommunicationStaff.pdf .

--- Page 12 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the June 21–22, 2011, Federal employment rate is projected to trend gradually lower
Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, the mem- over this projection period. However, participants an-
bers of the Board of Governors and the presidents of ticipated that, at the end of 2013, the unemployment
the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom participate in rate would still be well above their estimates of the un-
the deliberations of the FOMC, submitted projections employment rate that they see as consistent, over the
for growth of real output, the unemployment rate, and longer run, with the Committee’s dual mandate of max-
inflation for the years 2011 to 2013 and over the longer imum employment and price stability. Most partici-
run. The projections were based on information avail- pants marked up their projections of inflation for 2011
able at the time of the meeting and on each partici- in light of the increase in inflation in the first half of the
pant’s assumptions about factors likely to affect eco- year, but they projected this increase to be transitory,
nomic outcomes, including his or her assessment of with overall inflation moving back in line with core
appropriate monetary policy. “Appropriate monetary inflation in 2012 and 2013 and remaining at or a bit
policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each below rates that they see as consistent, over the longer
participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for run, with the Committee’s dual mandate. Participants
economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or generally saw the rate of core inflation as likely to stay
her interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objec- roughly the same over the next two years as this year.
tives of maximum employment and stable prices.
On balance, as indicated in table 1, participants antic-
Longer-run projections represent each participant’s
ipated somewhat lower real GDP growth over the near
assessment of the rate to which each variable would be
term relative to their projections in April but left their
expected to converge over time under appropriate
projections for inflation mostly unchanged since the
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks.
April meeting. Participants made noticeable downward
As depicted in figure 1, FOMC participants expected revisions to their projections for GDP growth this year
the economic recovery to continue at a moderate pace, and next, but they made little change to their projection
with growth of real gross domestic product (GDP) for 2013 and no change to their longer-run projections.
about the same this year as in 2010 and then strength- Meeting participants revised up their projections for
ening over 2012 and 2013. With the pace of economic the unemployment rate over the forecast period, al-
growth modestly exceeding their estimates of the long- though they continue to expect a gradual decline in the
er-run sustainable rate of increase in real GDP, the un- unemployment rate over time. Participants’ projections
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, June 2011
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2011 2012 2013 Longer run 2011 2012 2013 Longer run
Change in real GDP. . . . . . 2.7 to 2.9 3.3 to 3.7 3.5 to 4.2 2.5 to 2.8 2.5 to 3.0 2.2 to 4.0 3.0 to 4.5 2.4 to 3.0
April projection. . . . . . 3.1 to 3.3 3.5 to 4.2 3.5 to 4.3 2.5 to 2.8 2.9 to 3.7 2.9 to 4.4 3.0 to 5.0 2.4 to 3.0
Unemployment rate. . . . . . 8.6 to 8.9 7.8 to 8.2 7.0 to 7.5 5.2 to 5.6 8.4 to 9.1 7.5 to 8.7 6.5 to 8.3 5.0 to 6.0
April projection. . . . . . 8.4 to 8.7 7.6 to 7.9 6.8 to 7.2 5.2 to 5.6 8.1 to 8.9 7.1 to 8.4 6.0 to 8.4 5.0 to 6.0
PCE inflation. . . . . . . . . . . 2.3 to 2.5 1.5 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 2.1 to 3.5 1.2 to 2.8 1.3 to 2.5 1.5 to 2.0
April projection. . . . . . 2.1 to 2.8 1.2 to 2.0 1.4 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 2.0 to 3.6 1.0 to 2.8 1.2 to 2.5 1.5 to 2.0
Core PCE inflation3. . . . . . 1.5 to 1.8 1.4 to 2.0 1.4 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.3 1.2 to 2.5 1.3 to 2.5
April projection. . . . . . 1.3 to 1.6 1.3 to 1.8 1.4 to 2.0 1.1 to 2.0 1.1 to 2.0 1.2 to 2.0
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the pre-
vious year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index
for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the aver-
age civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate
monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under ap-
propriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The April projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Fed-
eral Open Market Committee on April 26–27, 2011.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year consists of all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

--- Page 13 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2011–13 and over the longer run
Percent
Change in real GDP 5
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections 4
3
2
1
+
Actual _0
1
2
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual.

--- Page 14 ---

____________________S_um__m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 2_1_-_2_2_, _2_0_1_1______________P_a_g_e_ _3
for overall inflation this year were somewhat more nar- spending. In addition, some participants noted that
rowly distributed than in April, and their projections although energy and commodity prices were expected
for 2012 and 2013 were similar to the projections made to stabilize, they would do so at elevated levels and
in April. would likely continue to damp spending growth for a
time. Finally, several participants pointed to a likely
A sizable majority of participants continued to judge
drag from tighter fiscal policy at all levels of govern-
the level of uncertainty associated with their projections
ment. In the absence of further shocks, participants
for economic growth and inflation as unusually high
generally expected that, over time, real GDP growth
relative to historical norms. Most participants viewed
would eventually settle down at an annual rate of 2.5 to
the risks to output growth as being weighted to the
2.8 percent in the longer run.
downside, and none saw those risks as weighted to the
upside. Meanwhile, a majority of participants saw the Partly in response to the recent weak indicators of la-
risks to overall inflation as balanced. bor demand and participants’ downwardly revised
views of the economic outlook, participants marked up
The Outlook
their forecasts for the unemployment rate over the en-
Participants marked down their forecasts for real GDP
tire forecast period. For the fourth quarter of this year,
growth in 2011 to reflect the unexpected weakness wit-
the central tendency of their projections rose to 8.6 to
nessed in the first half of the year, with the central ten-
8.9 percent from 8.4 to 8.7 percent in April. Similar
dency of their projections moving down to 2.7 to 2.9
upward revisions were made for 2012 and 2013, with
percent from 3.1 to 3.3 percent in April. Participants
the central tendencies of the projections for those years
attributed the downward revision in their growth out-
at 7.8 to 8.2 percent and 7.0 to 7.5 percent, respectively.
look to the likely effects of elevated commodity prices
Consistent with their expectations of a moderate re-
on real income and consumer sentiment, as well as in-
covery, with growth only modestly above trend, the
dications of renewed weakness in the labor market,
central tendency of the projections of the unemploy-
surprisingly sluggish consumer spending, a continued
ment rate at the end of 2013 was well above the 5.2 to
lack of recovery in the housing market, supply disrup-
5.6 percent central tendency of their estimates of the
tions from the events in Japan, and constraints on gov-
unemployment rate that would prevail over the longer
ernment spending at all levels.
run in the absence of further shocks. The central ten-
Looking further ahead, participants’ forecasts for eco- dency for the participants’ projections of the unem-
nomic growth were also marked down in 2012, as par- ployment rate in the longer run was unchanged from
ticipants saw some of the weakness in economic activi- the interval reported in April.
ty this year as likely to persist. Nevertheless, partici-
Participants noted that measures of consumer price
pants still anticipated a modest acceleration in econom-
inflation had increased this year, reflecting in part high-
ic output next year, and they expected a further modest
er prices of oil and other commodities. However, par-
acceleration in 2013 to growth rates that were largely
ticipants’ forecasts for total personal consumption ex-
unchanged from their previous projection. The central
penditures (PCE) inflation in 2011 were little changed
tendency of their current projections for real GDP
from April, with the central tendency of their estimates
growth in 2012 was 3.3 to 3.7 percent, compared with
narrowing to a range of 2.3 to 2.5 percent, compared
3.5 to 4.2 percent in April, and in 2013 the central ten-
with 2.1 to 2.8 percent in April. Most participants an-
dency of the projections for real GDP growth was 3.5
ticipated that the influence of higher commodity prices
to 4.2 percent. Participants cited the effects of contin-
and supply disruptions from Japan on inflation would
ued monetary policy accommodation, some further
be temporary, and that inflation pressures in the future
easing in credit market conditions, a waning in the drag
would be subdued as commodity prices stabilized, in-
from elevated commodities prices, and an increase in
flation expectations remained well anchored, and large
spending from pent-up demand as factors likely to con-
margins of slack in labor markets kept labor costs in
tribute to a pickup in the pace of the expansion. Partic-
check. As a result, participants anticipated that total
ipants did, however, see a number of factors that would
PCE inflation would step down in 2012 and 2013, with
likely continue to weigh on GDP growth over the next
the central tendency of their projections in those years
two years. Most participants pointed to strains in the
at 1.5 to 2.0 percent. The lower end of these central
household sector, noting impaired balance sheets, con-
tendencies was revised up somewhat from April, sug-
tinued declines in house prices, and persistently high
gesting that fewer participants saw a likelihood of very
unemployment as restraining the growth of consumer
low inflation in those years. The projections for these

--- Page 15 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
two years were at or slightly below the 1.7 to 2.0 per- Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
cent central tendency of participants’ estimates of the Percentage points
Variable 2011 2012 2013
longer-run, mandate-consistent rate of inflation. The
central tendencies of participants’ projections of core
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . . ±0.9 ±1.6 ±1.8
PCE inflation this year shifted up a bit to 1.5 to Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . . ±0.4 ±1.2 ±1.7
1.8 percent, as participants saw some of the run-up in
Total consumer prices2 . . . . . . ±0.8 ±1.0 ±1.0
commodity prices passing through to core prices. For
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root
2012 and 2013, participants saw commodity prices as mean squared error of projections for 1991 through 2010 that were
likely to stabilize near current levels, and the central released in the summer by various private and government forecasters.
As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assump-
tendencies for their forecasts of core inflation were 1.4
tions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for
to 2.0 percent, essentially unchanged from their April real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied
projections. by the average size of projection errors made in the past. Further infor-
mation is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the
Uncertainty and Risks Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting
Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washing-
A substantial majority of participants continued to ton: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).
judge that the levels of uncertainty associated with their 1. For definitions, refer to general note in table 1.
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
projections for economic growth and inflation were
that has been most widely used in government and private economic
greater than the average levels that had prevailed over forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous
the past 20 years.1 They pointed to a number of factors year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.
that contributed to their assessments of the uncertainty cipants now viewed these risks as broadly balanced.
that they attached to their projections, including the On the one hand, participants noted that the effect on
severity of the recent recession, the uncertain effects of headline inflation of the rise in commodity prices earli-
the current stance of monetary policy, uncertainty er this year was likely to subside as those prices stabi-
about the direction of fiscal policy, and structural dislo- lized, but they could not rule out the possibility of
cations in the labor market. those effects being more persistent than anticipated.
On the other hand, with the outlook for the economy
Most participants now judged that the balance of risks
somewhat weaker than previously expected, some par-
to economic growth was weighted to the downside,
ticipants saw a risk that greater resource slack could
and the rest viewed these risks as balanced. The most
produce more downward pressure on inflation than
frequently cited downside risks included a potential for
projected. A few participants noted the possibility that
a large negative effect on consumer spending from
the current highly accommodative stance of monetary
higher food and energy prices, a weaker labor market,
policy, if it were to be maintained longer than is appro-
falling house prices, uncertainty from the debate over
priate, could lead to higher inflation expectations and
the statutory debt limit and its potential implications
actual inflation.
for near-term fiscal policy, and possible negative finan-
cial market spillovers from European sovereign debt Diversity of Views
problems. The risks surrounding participants’ forecasts Figures 2.A and 2.B provide further details on the di-
of the unemployment rate shifted higher, with a slight versity of participants’ views regarding the likely out-
majority of participants now viewing the risks to the comes for real GDP growth and the unemployment
projection as weighted to the upside, and the rest of the rate in 2011, 2012, 2013, and over the longer run. The
participants seeing the risks as broadly balanced. dispersion in these projections continued to reflect dif-
ferences in participants’ assessments of many factors,
Although a majority of participants judged the risks to
including the current degree of underlying momentum
their inflation projections over the period from 2011 to
in economic activity, the outlook for fiscal policy, the
2013 to be weighted to the upside in April, most parti-
timing and degree of the recovery of labor markets fol-
lowing the very deep recession, and appropriate future
1 Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for the monetary policy and its effects on economic activity.
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con- Regarding participants’ projections for real GDP
sumer price inflation over the period from 1991 to 2010. growth, the distribution for this year shifted noticeably
At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty”
lower but remained about as concentrated as the distri-
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in
bution in April. The distribution for 2012 also shifted
the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to
down somewhat and became a bit more concentrated,
assess the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’
while the distribution for 2013 did not change appreci-
projections.

--- Page 16 ---

____________________S_um__m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 2_1_-_2_2_, _2_0_1_1______________P_a_g_e_ _5
ably. Regarding participants’ projections for the unem- tions, as well as estimates of how the stance of mone-
ployment rate, the distribution for this year and for tary policy may influence inflation expectations. Re-
2012 shifted up relative to the corresponding distribu- garding overall PCE inflation, the distributions for
tions in April, and more than one-half of participants 2011, 2012, and 2013 all narrowed somewhat, with the
expected the unemployment rate in 2012 to be in the top of the distributions remaining unchanged but the
8.0 to 8.1 percent interval. These shifts reflect the re- lower end of the distributions moving up somewhat.
cent softening in labor market conditions along with Although participants continued to expect that the
the marking down of expected economic growth this somewhat elevated rate of inflation this year would
year and next. The distribution of the unemployment subside in subsequent years, fewer participants antic-
rate in 2013 also shifted upward somewhat but was ipated very low levels of inflation. The distribution of
narrower than the distribution in April. The distribu- participants’ projections for core inflation for this year
tions of participants’ estimates of the longer-run shifted noticeably higher, reflecting incoming data and
growth rate of real GDP and of the unemployment rate a view that the pass-through of commodity prices to
were both little changed from the April projections. core prices may be greater than previously thought;
however, the distributions for 2012 and 2013 were little
Corresponding information about the diversity of par-
changed. The distribution of participants’ projections
ticipants’ views regarding the inflation outlook is pro-
for overall inflation over the longer run was essentially
vided in figures 2.C and 2.D. In general, the dispersion
unchanged from its fairly narrow distribution in April,
of participants’ inflation forecasts for the next few
reflecting the broad similarity in participants’ assess-
years represented differences in judgments regarding
ments of the approximate level of inflation that is con-
the fundamental determinants of inflation, including
sistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of
the degree of resource slack and the extent to which
maximum employment and price stability.
such slack influences inflation outcomes and expecta-

--- Page 17 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2011–13 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2011 16
June projections
April projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2012
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2013
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 18 ---

____________________S_um__m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 2_1_-_2_2_, _2_0_1_1______________P_a_g_e_ _7
Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2011–13 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2011 16
June projections
April projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2012
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2013
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 19 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2011–13 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2011 16
June projections
April projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5- 2.7- 2.9- 3.1- 3.3- 3.5-
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2012
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5- 2.7- 2.9- 3.1- 3.3- 3.5-
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2013
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5- 2.7- 2.9- 3.1- 3.3- 3.5-
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5- 2.7- 2.9- 3.1- 3.3- 3.5-
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 20 ---

____________________S_um__m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 2_1_-_2_2_, _2_0_1_1______________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure 2.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inflation, 2011–13
Number of participants
2011 16
June projections
April projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2012
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2013
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 21 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by ilar to that experienced in the past and the risks
the members of the Board of Governors and around the projections are broadly balanced,
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a
inform discussions of monetary policy among probability of about 70 percent that actual
policymakers and can aid public understand- GDP would expand within a range of 2.1 to 3.9
ing of the basis for policy actions. Consider- percent in the current year, 1.4 to 4.6 percent in
able uncertainty attends these projections, the second year, and 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the
however. The economic and statistical models third year. The corresponding 70 percent con-
and relationships used to help produce eco- fidence intervals for overall inflation would be
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de- 1.2 to 2.8 percent in the current year, and 1.0 to
scriptions of the real world, and the future 3.0 percent in the second and third years.
path of the economy can be affected by myr- Because current conditions may differ
iad unforeseen developments and events. from those that prevailed, on average, over his-
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, tory, participants provide judgments as to
participants consider not only what appears to whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
be the most likely economic outcome as em- jections of each variable is greater than, smaller
bodied in their projections, but also the range than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of forecast uncertainty in the past, as shown in
their occurring, and the potential costs to the table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
economy should they occur. to whether the risks to their projections are
Table 2 summarizes the average historical weighted to the upside, are weighted to the
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports participants judge whether each variable is
and those prepared by the Federal Reserve more likely to be above or below their projec-
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the tions of the most likely outcome. These judg-
Federal Open Market Committee. The pro- ments about the uncertainty and the risks at-
jection error ranges shown in the table il- tending each participant’s projections are dis-
lustrate the considerable uncertainty associated tinct from the diversity of participants’ views
with economic forecasts. For example, sup- about the most likely outcomes. Forecast un-
pose a participant projects that real gross do- certainty is concerned with the risks associated
mestic product (GDP) and total consumer with a particular projection rather than with
prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, re- divergences across a number of different pro-
spectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the jections.
uncertainty attending those projections is sim-

# Tables

## Page_11_Table_1


| It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee   |
|--------------------------------------------------------|
| would be held on Tuesday, August 9, 2011. The meet-    |
| ing adjourned at 12:10 p.m. on June 22, 2011.          |


## Page_11_Table_2


| Voting against this action: None.   |
|-------------------------------------|
| External Communications             |


## Page_12_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |      |      |            |      |      |      |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|------------|------|------|------|
| 2011                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 2012 | 2013 | Longer run | 2011 | 2012 | 2013 |
| 2.7 to 2.9 3.3 to 3.7 3.5 to 4.2 2.5 to 2.8
3.1 to 3.3 3.5 to 4.2 3.5 to 4.3 2.5 to 2.8
8.6 to 8.9 7.8 to 8.2 7.0 to 7.5 5.2 to 5.6
8.4 to 8.7 7.6 to 7.9 6.8 to 7.2 5.2 to 5.6
2.3 to 2.5 1.5 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0
2.1 to 2.8 1.2 to 2.0 1.4 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0
1.5 to 1.8 1.4 to 2.0 1.4 to 2.0
1.3 to 1.6 1.3 to 1.8 1.4 to 2.0 |      |      |            |      |      |      |