# 20110921_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:36:33*
*Pages: 12, Tables: 2*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
September 20–21, 2011
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit- Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office
tee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve of the Secretary, Board of Governors
System was held in the offices of the Board of Gover-
nors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, September 20, Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Bank-
2011, at 10:30 a.m., and continued on Wednesday, Sep- ing Supervision and Regulation, Board of
tember 21, 2011, at 9:00 a.m. Governors
PRESENT: Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability
Ben Bernanke, Chairman Policy and Research, Board of Governors
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman
Elizabeth Duke Robert deV. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of
Charles L. Evans the Secretary, Board of Governors
Richard W. Fisher
Narayana Kocherlakota William Nelson, Deputy Director, Division of
Charles I. Plosser Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Sarah Bloom Raskin
Daniel K. Tarullo Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Janet L. Yellen Board Members, Board of Governors
Christine Cumming, Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Charles S. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Of-
Lockhart, Sandra Pianalto, and John C. Wil- fice of the Staff Director, Board of Governors
liams, Alternate Members of the Federal Open
Market Committee Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Director, Divi-
sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors;
James Bullard and Eric Rosengren, Presidents of Michael P. Leahy, Senior Associate Director,
the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and Division of International Finance, Board of
Boston, respectively Governors; Lawrence Slifman and William
Wascher, Senior Associate Directors, Division
Esther L. George, First Vice President, Federal Re- of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
serve Bank of Kansas City
Andrew T. Levin, Senior Adviser, Office of Board
William B. English, Secretary and Economist Members, Board of Governors; Stephen A.
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary Meyer and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers,
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gov-
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary ernors
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Daniel M. Covitz and David E. Lebow, Associate
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Directors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Steven B.
Kamin, Loretta J. Mester, Simon Potter, David David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of
Reifschneider, Harvey Rosenblum, and Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
David W. Wilcox, Associate Economists
Penelope A. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Of-
Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Ac- fice of the Secretary, Board of Governors
count
James M. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Re-
serve Bank of Minneapolis

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
shorter-term Treasury securities; these transactions
Jeff Fuhrer, Executive Vice President, Federal Re- would significantly increase the average maturity of the
serve Bank of Boston SOMA portfolio, but the size of the Federal Reserve’s
balance sheet and the level of reserve balances would
David Altig, Alan D. Barkema, Spencer Krane, be largely unaffected in the near term. Under the third
Mark E. Schweitzer, Christopher J. Waller, and option, the Committee would purchase longer-term
John A. Weinberg, Senior Vice Presidents, Treasury securities, increasing the size of its balance
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Kansas City, sheet and the supply of reserve balances. The staff also
Chicago, Cleveland, St. Louis, and Richmond, summarized a set of options for clarifying, for the pub-
respectively lic, the Committee’s longer-run objectives under its
dual mandate as well as the Committee’s forward guid-
Julie Ann Remache, Assistant Vice President, Fed- ance about the likely future stance of monetary policy.
eral Reserve Bank of New York The options focused on ways to elucidate the economic
conditions that could warrant raising the level of short-
Eric T. Swanson, Senior Research Advisor, Federal term interest rates. Finally, the staff presentation
Reserve Bank of San Francisco summarized the potential implications of reducing the
interest rate that the Federal Reserve pays on reserve
Jonathan Heathcote, Senior Economist, Federal balances that depository institutions hold in accounts at
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis the Federal Reserve Banks (the IOR rate).
Meeting participants expressed a range of views on the
potential efficacy of policy tools tied to the size and
composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.
Many judged that these policies could provide addi-
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
tional monetary policy accommodation by lowering
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
longer-term interest rates and easing financial condi-
The Manager of the System Open Market Account
tions at a time when further reductions in the federal
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and
funds rate are infeasible. However, a number saw the
foreign financial markets during the period since the
potential effects on real economic activity as limited or
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) met on Au-
only transitory, particularly in the current environment
gust 9, 2011. He also reported on System open market
of balance sheet deleveraging, credit constraints, and
operations, including the continuing reinvestment into
household and business uncertainty about the econom-
longer-term Treasury securities of principal payments
ic outlook. Participants noted that a SOMA maturity
received on SOMA holdings of agency debt and agen-
extension program would not expand the Federal Re-
cy-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities (MBS). By
serve’s balance sheet or the level of reserve balances,
unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
and that the scale of such a program was necessarily
domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.
limited by the size of the Federal Reserve’s holdings of
Staff Presentation on Policy Tools shorter-term securities so that it could not be repeated
The staff gave a presentation on several tools that to provide further stimulus. A number of participants
could be used, within the Committee’s current policy saw large-scale asset purchases as potentially a more
framework, to provide additional monetary policy ac- potent tool that should be retained as an option in the
commodation to support the economic recovery. The event that further policy action to support a stronger
presentation first reviewed three options for managing economic recovery was warranted. Some judged that
the size and composition of the SOMA portfolio: a large-scale asset purchases and the resulting expansion
reinvestment maturity extension program, a SOMA of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet would be more
portfolio maturity extension program, and a large-scale likely to raise inflation and inflation expectations than
asset purchase program. Under the first of these op- to stimulate economic activity and argued that such
tions, the Federal Reserve would reinvest the principal tools should be reserved for circumstances in which the
payments it receives on its holdings of agency securities risk of deflation was elevated. In commenting on the
exclusively in long-term Treasury securities. Under the implications of a maturity extension program or anoth-
second option, the Committee would purchase long- er large-scale asset purchase program, several partici-
term Treasury securities and sell the same amount of pants noted that the System should avoid holding a

--- Page 3 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ _M_e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 2_0_-_2_1_, _2_01_1_______________________P_a_g_e_ _3
very large proportion of the outstanding stock of long- specified in the Committee’s forward guidance could be
er-term Treasury securities in its portfolio because the mistaken for a statement of its longer-run objectives.
result could be a deterioration in market functioning. Others thought this risk of misinterpretation could be
A number of participants suggested directing some managed through careful communications. A number
purchases or reinvestments into agency MBS; however, of participants suggested that the Committee’s periodic
a couple of participants saw such actions as unlikely to Summary of Economic Projections could be used to
have benefits, or as a form of credit allocation. provide more information about their views on the
longer-run objectives and the likely evolution of mone-
Most participants indicated that they favored taking
tary policy.
steps to increase further the transparency of monetary
policy, including providing more information about the Participants discussed whether to reduce the IOR rate,
Committee’s longer-run policy objectives and about the weighing potential benefits and costs. A number of
factors that influence the Committee’s policy decisions. participants judged that a reduction would result in at
Participants generally agreed that a clear statement of least marginally lower money market rates and could
the Committee’s longer-run policy objectives could be help stimulate bank lending. Several noted that reduc-
helpful; some noted that it would also be useful to clar- ing the IOR rate could help signal the Committee’s
ify the linkage between these longer-run objectives and intention to keep the federal funds rate low. Some par-
the Committee’s approach to setting the stance of ticipants observed that keeping the IOR rate noticeably
monetary policy in the short and medium run. That above the market rate on other safe, short-term in-
said, a number of participants expressed concerns struments could be perceived as subsidizing some
about the conceptual issues associated with establishing banking institutions. However, some others noted that
and communicating explicit longer-run objectives for a recent change in deposit insurance assessments had
the unemployment rate or other measures of labor the effect of significantly reducing the net return that
market conditions, inasmuch as the long-run equili- many banks receive from holding reserve balances.
brium levels of such measures are influenced impor- Moreover, many participants voiced concerns that re-
tantly by nonmonetary factors, are subject to change ducing the IOR rate risked costly disruptions to money
over time, and are estimated with considerable uncer- markets and to the intermediation of credit, and that
tainty. In contrast, participants noted that the long-run the magnitude of such effects would be difficult to
level of inflation is determined primarily by monetary predict in advance. In addition, the federal funds mar-
policy. Accordingly, many felt that if the Committee ket could contract as a result and the effective federal
were to reach a consensus on more explicit statements funds rate could become less reliably linked to other
of its longer-run objectives, it would need to provide an short-term interest rates. Participants generally agreed
in-depth explanation to the public of how those objec- that they needed more information on the likely effects
tives were determined and how they fit into the poli- of a reduction in the IOR rate in order to judge its use-
cymaking framework. Participants generally saw the fulness as a policy tool in the current environment.
Committee’s post-meeting statements as not well suited
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
to communicate fully the Committee’s thinking about
The information reviewed at the September 20–21
its objectives and its policy framework, and agreed that
meeting indicated that economic activity continued to
the Committee would need to use other means to
expand at a slow pace and that labor market conditions
communicate that information or to supplement in-
remained weak. Consumer price inflation appeared to
formation in the statement.
have moderated since earlier in the year, and measures
Most participants also indicated that they saw advan- of long-run inflation expectations remained stable.
tages in being more transparent about the conditionali-
Private nonfarm employment rose only slightly in Au-
ty in the Committee’s forward guidance by providing
gust, and job gains were weak even after adjusting for
more information about the economic conditions to
the effects of a strike by communications workers dur-
which the guidance refers. They judged that such a
ing the month. Meanwhile, employment at state and
step could make the Committee’s forward guidance
local governments declined further, reflecting their
more effective and increase the likelihood that financial
tight budget conditions. The unemployment rate re-
markets would respond to incoming economic infor-
mained at 9.1 percent in August, and both long-
mation in ways that would help monetary policy
duration unemployment and the share of workers em-
achieve its goals. However, several participants saw a
ployed part time for economic reasons were still ele-
risk that any explicit statement of economic conditions

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
vated. Initial claims for unemployment insurance office and commercial buildings moved up in recent
edged up, on net, over the previous few weeks, and months, but outlays were still at a very low level and
many indicators of firms’ hiring plans deteriorated continued to be restrained by high vacancy rates and
somewhat in recent months. tight credit conditions for construction loans. Mean-
while, spending for drilling and mining structures in-
Industrial production expanded solidly but unevenly in
creased further. Businesses seemed to be adding to
July and August, and the manufacturing capacity utiliza-
inventories at a more modest pace in July, as the re-
tion rate moved up. Output increased markedly at
stocking of motor vehicle inventories depleted by the
both motor vehicle manufacturers and their upstream
earlier production disruptions was offset by slowing
suppliers as the supply chain disruptions associated
accumulation in other sectors. In most industries, in-
with the earthquake in Japan eased. In contrast, the
ventories looked to be reasonably well aligned with
pace of factory production softened among industries
sales.
unlikely to have been affected by the supply disrup-
tions. Motor vehicle assemblies were scheduled to rise Real federal government purchases appeared to in-
noticeably in September and then increase further in crease in recent months as defense expenditures con-
the fourth quarter, but broader indicators of near-term tinued to rise from unusually low levels early in the
manufacturing activity, such as the diffusion indexes of year. At the state and local level, real government pur-
new orders from the national and regional manufactur- chases seemed set to decline further as payrolls were
ing surveys, remained at levels consistent with only reduced and construction spending decreased.
meager gains in output in the coming months.
The nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened in
Real consumer spending posted a solid gain in July, in June but narrowed significantly in July. Exports rose
part reflecting a rebound in motor vehicle purchases briskly in July, particularly in industrial supplies and
from their low level in the spring when the availability capital goods, after having decreased in June. Imports
of some models was limited. However, nominal retail moved down in both months, as declines in petroleum
sales, excluding purchases at motor vehicles and parts products—reflecting both lower prices and decreased
outlets, only inched up in August, and sales of new volumes—more than offset large gains in automotive
light motor vehicles ticked down. Real disposable in- products following the easing of supply chain disrup-
come edged lower in July, as gains in nominal income tions in Japan. Trade data for July suggested that net
were offset by the rise in consumer prices. Consumer exports continued to boost U.S. real gross domestic
sentiment deteriorated significantly further in August product (GDP) growth in the third quarter.
and stayed downbeat in early September.
Monthly U.S. consumer price inflation picked up in
Activity in the housing market continued to be de- July and August after slowing in May and June, but re-
pressed by weak demand, uncertainty about future mained a bit lower than earlier in the year. Consumer
home prices, tight credit conditions for mortgages and energy prices stepped up in July and August but only
construction loans, and a substantial inventory of fore- partially retraced their decline over the previous two
closed and distressed properties. Starts and permits for months, and the increases in food prices were some-
new single-family homes in July and August stayed near what below the pace seen early in the year. The con-
the very low levels seen since the middle of last year. sumer price index excluding food and energy rose at
Sales of new and existing homes remained subdued in about the same average monthly rate in July and Au-
recent months, and home prices edged down further. gust as in the second quarter. Near-term inflation ex-
pectations from the Thomson Reuters/University of
Real business spending on equipment and software
Michigan Surveys of Consumers in August and Sep-
appeared to expand further. Nominal shipments of
tember stayed well below the elevated level seen in the
nondefense capital goods increased in July, and busi-
spring, and longer-term inflation expectations remained
ness purchases of new motor vehicles trended higher.
stable.
New orders of nondefense capital goods continued to
run ahead of shipments in July, and the expanding Available measures of labor compensation indicated
backlog of unfilled orders pointed toward further gains that wage increases continued to be restrained by the
in outlays for business equipment in subsequent large margin of slack in the labor market. Average
months. In contrast, survey measures of business con- hourly earnings for all employees posted a small gain,
ditions and sentiment remained at muted levels in Au- on net, over July and August, and their rate of increase
gust and September. Real business expenditures for from 12 months earlier remained subdued.

--- Page 5 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ _M_e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 2_0_-_2_1_, _2_01_1_______________________P_a_g_e_ _5
Foreign economic growth declined in the second quar- Since early August, the equity prices of large U.S. finan-
ter. Growth slowed notably in Europe; economic ac- cial institutions fell and their credit default swap (CDS)
tivity also decelerated in the emerging market econo- spreads widened. More-pronounced declines in equity
mies. Real GDP contracted in Canada due to a large prices and larger increases in CDS spreads occurred for
decline in exports. Output also fell in Japan, reflecting some European financial institutions. Though many
the dislocations caused by the March earthquake. Part large European banks found it increasingly difficult, in
of the downshift in global economic growth appeared recent weeks, to get unsecured dollar funding beyond
to have been driven by temporary supply chain disrup- the very short term, the conditions faced by U.S. finan-
tions caused by Japan’s earthquake. Although the wan- cial institutions in these markets were little changed. In
ing of these disruptions seemed to be supporting a re- secured funding markets, term financing reportedly
bound in foreign GDP growth in the third quarter, re- remained readily available for both domestic and Euro-
cent indicators suggested only sluggish gains in underly- pean financial institutions through repurchase agree-
ing economic activity. With the intensification of fiscal ments backed by Treasury and agency collateral. How-
and financial stress in the euro area, measures of con- ever, some strains emerged late in the intermeeting pe-
sumer and business confidence declined in August, and riod in the market for repurchase agreements backed
indicators of manufacturing activity in the region dete- by lower-quality, nontraditional collateral. In response
riorated. For many emerging market economies, the to dollar funding pressures abroad, the Bank of Eng-
recent slowing in growth of economic activity was most land, the European Central Bank (ECB), and the Swiss
evident in exports, industrial production, and other National Bank announced that they would offer banks
indicators of manufacturing activity. Inflation abroad in their jurisdictions dollar loans for periods of approx-
eased in the second quarter as the effects of earlier in- imately three months as well as continue to offer dollar
creases in food and energy prices began to fade. More loans for one-week periods; the Bank of Japan added to
recently, however, increases in domestic food prices its previously announced program of three-month and
appeared to be pushing up consumer price inflation in seven-day dollar loans.
some economies.
Broad stock price indexes were volatile but increased,
Staff Review of the Financial Situation on net, since the August FOMC meeting, following
Financial markets were volatile over the intermeeting sharp declines in the days just preceding that meeting.
period as investors responded to mostly downbeat Gross public equity issuance by nonfinancial firms
news on economic activity in the United States and weakened substantially in recent weeks, and a large
abroad. Fluctuations in investors’ level of concern number of planned initial public offerings were shelved
about European fiscal and financial prospects also con- amid the heightened market volatility.
tributed to market volatility.
Spreads of yields on investment- and speculative-grade
The expected path of the federal funds rate moved corporate bonds over those on comparable-maturity
down appreciably over the intermeeting period. Invest- Treasury securities rose significantly over the intermeet-
ors initially focused on the firmer forward guidance in ing period, reaching levels last registered in late 2009,
the August FOMC statement indicating that the Com- and average bid prices in the secondary market for syn-
mittee anticipated that economic conditions were likely dicated leveraged loans declined. Credit flows in Au-
to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds gust offered additional evidence that debt markets had
rate at least through mid-2013. Over subsequent become less hospitable to lower-rated nonfinancial
weeks, weak economic data contributed to rising expec- firms. Bond issuance by speculative-grade firms nearly
tations of additional monetary accommodation; those came to a halt, and the volume of new leveraged loans
expectations and increasing concerns about the finan- financed by institutional investors appeared to drop
cial situation in Europe led to an appreciable decline in sharply after having moved down in July. However,
intermediate- and longer-term nominal Treasury yields. net bond issuance by investment-grade companies re-
Partly in reaction to the softer economic outlook, mained robust in August despite wider spreads, and
measures of inflation compensation for the next 5 years nonfinancial commercial paper outstanding increased
as well as 5 to 10 years ahead derived from nominal slightly.
and inflation-protected Treasury securities each fell to
In the September 2011 Senior Credit Officer Opinion
the low end of their ranges for this year.
Survey on Dealer Financing Terms, dealers reported
only small changes in credit terms across major classes

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
of counterparties over the past three months. Respon- M2 surged in July and August, as investors and asset
dents noted that the use of financial leverage by hedge managers sought the relative safety and liquidity of
funds decreased somewhat over the same period. bank deposits and other assets that make up the M2
Dealers also indicated that their clients’ willingness to aggregate. Notably, institutional investors, concerned
bear risk generally had declined somewhat; that was about exposures of money funds to European financial
particularly true of hedge funds. institutions, shifted from prime money funds to bank
deposits, and money fund managers accumulated siza-
Financing conditions for commercial real estate re-
ble bank deposits in anticipation of potentially large
mained weak. Issuance of commercial mortgage-
redemptions by investors. In addition, retail investors
backed securities (CMBS) slowed further in July and
evidently placed redemptions from equity and bond
August, and investors appeared to demand greater
mutual funds into bank deposits and retail money mar-
compensation for risk. Prices of most types of com-
ket funds.
mercial properties remained depressed despite a slight
decline in vacancy rates in the second quarter. Delin- The foreign exchange value of the dollar increased over
quency rates on loans that back existing CMBS hovered the intermeeting period, reflecting a flight to safety that
at an elevated level in August, but delinquency rates on also contributed to lower benchmark sovereign yields
commercial real estate loans held by banks decreased in in Germany, the United Kingdom, and Canada. In
the second quarter. contrast, the yield on two-year Greek sovereign bonds
rose sharply as market participants became increasingly
Residential MBS yields and residential mortgage inter-
concerned that Greece might default on its sovereign
est rates declined, on net, over the intermeeting period
debt. Equity prices in the euro area decreased over the
to historically low levels, but their spreads to yields on
intermeeting period, following sharp declines in early
long-term Treasury securities increased. However, low
August. After falling steeply before the August FOMC
mortgage rates spurred little refinancing activity, in part
meeting, emerging market equity prices were little
because of tight underwriting standards and low levels
changed, on net, over the period.
of home equity for many households. Residential
mortgage debt contracted further in the second quarter, The European Central Bank continued to purchase, in
and the volume of mortgage applications to purchase the secondary market, sovereign debt of euro-area
homes moved down so far in the third quarter. Rates countries. Yields on Italian and Spanish debt, which
of serious mortgage delinquency continued to mod- declined following reported ECB purchases in early
erate but remained high, while the rate at which prime August, drifted higher during the intermeeting period.
mortgages moved into delinquency stepped up, on bal- Prices of money market futures contracts indicated that
ance, in recent months. monetary policy was expected to become more ac-
commodative in both the euro area and the United
Consumer credit increased at a solid pace in July, as a
Kingdom. The Swiss National Bank took several steps
sizable increase in nonrevolving credit—driven by a
to ease monetary policy, including intervening in the
surge in federally funded student loans—more than
foreign exchange market to counter further apprecia-
offset a decrease in revolving credit. Issuance of con-
tion of its currency and eventually announcing that it is
sumer asset-backed securities moved down in August,
prepared to buy unlimited quantities of foreign curren-
but spreads on these securities remained low. Delin-
cy to prevent the Swiss franc from trading in the for-
quency rates for several categories of consumer loans
eign exchange market at a rate below 1.2 Swiss francs
moved down further in recent months, with some
per euro. Citing concerns over the global economic
reaching levels not seen since the 2008–09 recession
outlook, the central bank of Brazil reduced its policy
began.
rate after having raised it several times earlier this year.
Core commercial bank loans—the sum of commercial In contrast, China continued to tighten its monetary
and industrial (C&I), real estate, and consumer loans— policy, extending reserve requirements to a wider range
expanded slightly in July and August. C&I loans grew of bank liabilities as it attempted to rein in off-balance-
strongly, consumer loans showed tepid growth, and sheet lending by its banks.
real estate loans continued to decline. The upturn in
Staff Economic Outlook
lending was concentrated at large domestic and foreign
In the economic forecast prepared for the September
institutions; at smaller banks, core loans declined in July
FOMC meeting, the staff lowered its projection for the
and August at about the same pace as in recent quar-
increase in real GDP in the second half of 2011 and in
ters.

--- Page 7 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ _M_e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 2_0_-_2_1_, _2_01_1_______________________P_a_g_e_ _7
the medium term. The incoming data on household year as prices of energy and some commodities de-
and business spending were about as expected, on bal- clined from their peaks, but inflation had not yet come
ance, but labor market conditions and indicators of down as much as participants had expected earlier this
near-term economic activity, such as consumer and year. Labor costs remained subdued.
business sentiment, were weaker than anticipated. In
Looking ahead, participants continued to expect some
addition, financial conditions deteriorated since the
pickup in the pace of recovery over coming quarters
time of the previous forecast as investors pulled back
but anticipated that the unemployment rate would de-
from riskier assets. Nevertheless, the staff continued to
cline only gradually. They generally judged that risks to
forecast that economic activity would increase more
the growth outlook, including strains in global financial
rapidly in the second half of this year than over the first
markets, were significant and tilted to the downside;
half, as supply chain disruptions in the motor vehicle
moreover, slow growth left the recovery more vulnera-
sector eased. In the medium term, the staff still pro-
ble to negative shocks. With longer-term inflation ex-
jected real GDP to accelerate gradually, supported by
pectations remaining stable and the effects of past in-
accommodative monetary policy, further increases in
creases in energy and commodity prices continuing to
credit availability, and improvements in consumer and
dissipate, most participants saw both core and headline
business confidence from their current low levels. The
inflation as likely to settle, over coming quarters, at or
increase in real GDP was expected to be sufficient to
below the levels they see as most consistent with their
reduce the unemployment rate only slowly over the
dual mandate. Participants continued to see the out-
projection period, and the jobless rate was anticipated
look for growth and inflation as more uncertain than
to remain elevated at the end of 2013.
usual.
The staff’s projection for inflation was little changed
Participants noted modest growth in consumer spend-
from its forecast at the time of the August FOMC
ing on average in recent months, with some rebound in
meeting. The upward pressure on consumer prices
purchases of new motor vehicles as manufacturers
from increases in import and commodity prices earlier
made progress in resolving supply chain disruptions
in the year, along with the temporary boost to motor
and increased the availability of popular models. Sur-
vehicle prices from low inventories, were expected to
veys suggested that households were pessimistic about
recede further in the coming quarters. With stable
their future incomes, and consumer confidence had
long-run inflation expectations and considerable slack
dropped to historically low levels. Low confidence,
in labor and product markets anticipated to persist over
continuing efforts to repair balance sheets, and height-
the forecast period, the staff continued to project that
ened caution in the face of an uncertain economic envi-
inflation would be subdued in 2012 and 2013.
ronment were seen as factors likely to weigh on house-
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the hold spending. Several participants pointed to de-
Economic Outlook pressed home prices and financial constraints, including
In their discussion of the economic situation and out- still-tight credit conditions for many households, as
look, meeting participants agreed that the information also likely to restrain consumer spending for a time.
received during the intermeeting period indicated that However, household debt-service burdens had de-
economic growth remained slow but did not suggest a clined, indicating that there had been further progress
contraction in activity. Temporary factors that had in repairing household balance sheets.
contributed to slower growth during the first half of
Business sentiment had worsened, seemingly in re-
the year had partly reversed, contributing to some re-
sponse to weaker economic prospects and increased
bound in final sales and production, particularly in the
downside risks to the outlook for U.S. and global
manufacturing sector where progress had been made in
growth. Contacts at communications, technology, and
resolving supply chain disruptions. But stresses in
transportation firms indicated that growth had slowed
global financial markets, sluggish growth in households’
in those sectors; surveys also indicated that growth in
real incomes, and heightened uncertainty about eco-
the manufacturing sector had weakened during the
nomic prospects seemed to have contributed to lower
summer. One participant suggested that hurricanes
consumer and business sentiment and to be weighing
and subsequent flooding had contributed to the slow-
on economic growth. Recent indicators pointed to
ing in some parts of the country. In contrast, business
continuing weakness in overall labor market conditions,
contacts reported that commodity-related sectors such
and the unemployment rate remained elevated. Infla-
as energy, agriculture, and mining continued to show
tion appeared to have moderated since earlier in the

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
strong gains; tourism also appeared to be doing well. long-duration unemployment could lead to permanent
Exports remained a bright spot for U.S. manufacturers negative effects on the skills and employment prospects
and commodity producers. Business investment in of those affected and so reduce the economy’s longer-
equipment and software had continued to expand in run productive potential.
recent months, but some contacts expressed concern
Participants noted that financial markets were volatile
that firms would cut capital spending if their sales
over the intermeeting period and that financial condi-
slowed further.
tions were strained at times, as investors reacted to the
The housing sector remained depressed, with construc- incoming economic data and to news about European
tion at very low levels and seen as likely to remain so fiscal and financial developments. Several participants
given the weakness in new home sales and the continu- argued that broader financial conditions had become
ing flow of foreclosed properties into the market. less accommodative over the intermeeting period: Risk
Though mortgage rates were very low, spreads between spreads had widened appreciably, likely reflecting a re-
mortgage rates and yields on Treasury securities were duced willingness of investors to bear risk, a weaker
unusually wide. Moreover, still-tight credit standards outlook for growth in the United States and globally,
meant that many households were unable to qualify for and greater uncertainty about economic prospects. On
loans to buy a home, and the drop in house prices in the positive side, some participants noted that the re-
recent years left others unable to refinance an existing duction in leverage and increase in financial firms’ liq-
higher-rate mortgage. Nonresidential construction uidity cushions since the height of the financial crisis
generally remained weak, apart from investment in ex- likely had attenuated the adverse effects of heightened
tractive industries, and forward-looking indicators of risk aversion. Contacts in the banking sector reported
nonresidential construction had dropped. that U.S. banks remained willing to lend to qualified
customers, but that loan demand was weak. While not-
Meeting participants generally noted that overall labor
ing that conditions in bank funding markets had tight-
market conditions had shown no improvement or had
ened, particularly for European banks, participants ob-
deteriorated in recent months and the unemployment
served that the capital and liquidity positions of U.S.
rate remained elevated. Even after adjusting for the
banks had strengthened in recent quarters and that the
effects of strikes on reported payrolls, the employment
credit quality of both business and household loans had
report for August showed weak job gains. Moreover,
continued to improve. Nonetheless, some large U.S.
both the average workweek and aggregate hours
banks had seen further pressure on their stock prices
worked declined. Contacts reported that slower
and CDS spreads. Participants agreed that, if European
growth, depressed business confidence, and uncertainty
policymakers did not respond effectively, European
about the economic outlook were restraining hiring as
sovereign debt and banking problems could intensify,
well as capital investment; many also cited uncertainty
with potentially serious spillovers to the U.S. economy.
about regulatory and tax policies as contributing to
However, it was noted that the ECB was providing
businesses’ reluctance to spend. Some business con-
ample liquidity to European banks, and that it had sub-
tacts reported that their firms had made contingency
stantial capacity to provide additional liquidity through
plans to reduce output and employment if demand for
its lending facilities if necessary.
their products were to turn down. Participants general-
ly agreed that sluggish job growth and the elevated un- Most participants agreed that inflation appeared to
employment rate reflected both weak demand for have moderated in recent months compared with earli-
goods and services and a mismatch between the charac- er in the year as prices of energy and some commodi-
teristics of the unemployed and the needs of the em- ties declined from their peaks, though the moderation
ployers that currently have jobs available, but they had was not as substantial as many participants had ex-
varying views about the relative importance of these pected. Longer-term inflation expectations had re-
two factors. Many participants judged that weak de- mained stable. Most participants anticipated that, with
mand was of most importance, while a few argued that stable inflation expectations, significant slack in labor
structural and geographic mismatches were key. A few and product markets, slow wage growth, and little evi-
commented that business contacts reported receiving dence of pricing power among firms, inflation was like-
large numbers of applications for relatively low-skilled ly to decline moderately over time. Several suggested
positions but having difficulty finding and hiring candi- that slowing growth in the United States and abroad
dates for some highly skilled positions. Several partici- made a new surge in commodity prices unlikely. How-
pants again noted that the exceptionally high level of ever, some noted that core as well as headline inflation

--- Page 9 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ _M_e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 2_0_-_2_1_, _2_01_1_______________________P_a_g_e_ _9
had moved up, on balance, since last fall. A few sug- Committee Policy Action
gested that the juxtaposition of higher core inflation In the discussion of monetary policy for the period
and somewhat lower unemployment could mean that ahead, most members agreed that the revisions to the
the degree of slack in labor markets and the level of economic outlook warranted some additional monetary
potential output were lower than the Committee had policy accommodation to support a stronger recovery
thought. Some argued that the rise in core inflation and to help ensure that inflation, over time, was at a
from very low levels reflected the accommodative level consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate.
stance of monetary policy and indicated that the large- While they recognized that monetary policy alone could
scale asset purchases the Committee undertook from not completely address the economy’s ills, most mem-
November through June had been a successful re- bers judged that additional accommodation could con-
sponse to the deflation risks of a year ago. Many par- tribute importantly to better outcomes in terms of the
ticipants judged that the risks to the outlook for infla- Committee’s dual mandate of maximum employment
tion were roughly balanced. Some saw medium-run and price stability. Those viewing greater policy ac-
inflation risks as tilted to the downside, in light of per- commodation as appropriate at this meeting generally
sistent resource slack; some others argued that the ac- supported a maturity extension program that would
commodative stance of monetary policy and the up- combine asset purchases and sales to extend the aver-
ward trend in measures of core inflation this year sug- age maturity of securities held in the SOMA without
gested inflation risks were tilted to the upside. Partici- generating a substantial expansion of the Federal Re-
pants generally judged that there was relatively little risk serve’s balance sheet or reserve balances. Specifically,
of deflation. One commented that surveys showed those members supported a program under which the
that forecasters saw a low likelihood of deflation; a Committee would announce its intention to purchase,
second, however, noted that a measure of the probabil- by the end of June 2012, $400 billion of Treasury secur-
ity of deflation calculated from prices of Treasury infla- ities with remaining maturities of 6 years to 30 years
tion-protected securities (TIPS) had declined as the and to sell an equal amount of Treasury securities with
Federal Reserve conducted its second large-scale asset remaining maturities of 3 years or less. They expected
purchase program but more recently had been rising. this program to put downward pressure on longer-term
interest rates and to help make broader financial condi-
Participants saw considerable uncertainty surrounding
tions more accommodative. While the scale of such a
the outlook for a gradual pickup in economic growth.
maturity extension program was necessarily limited by
It was again noted that the cyclical impetus to econom-
the amount of shorter-term securities in the SOMA
ic expansion appeared to be weaker than in past reco-
portfolio, most members judged the action as appro-
veries, but that the reasons for the weakness were un-
priate, given economic conditions and the outlook.
clear, contributing to greater uncertainty about the eco-
Two members said that current conditions and the out-
nomic outlook. Several commented that, with house-
look could justify stronger policy action, but they sup-
holds and businesses seeking to reduce leverage rather
ported undertaking the maturity extension program at
than to borrow and with housing markets in distress,
this meeting as it did not rule out additional steps at
some of the normal mechanisms through which mone-
future meetings. Three members concluded that addi-
tary policy actions are transmitted to the real economy
tional accommodation was not appropriate at this time.
appeared to be attenuated. Many participants saw sig-
The Committee discussed whether to specify the para-
nificant downside risks to economic growth. While
meters of the maturity extension program by stating its
they did not anticipate a downturn in economic activity,
intention to complete the full set of transactions by
several remarked that, with growth slow, the recovery
June 2012 or by stating that it would undertake these
was more vulnerable to adverse shocks. Risks included
transactions at a specified monthly pace. Members saw
the possibility of more pronounced or more protracted
benefits to both approaches: The former would pro-
deleveraging by households, the chance of a larger-
vide the public greater clarity about the likely scale of
than-expected near-term fiscal tightening, and potential
the program and the latter might allow the Committee
spillovers to the United States if the financial situation
greater flexibility to adjust the scale of the program in
in Europe were to worsen appreciably. Participants
response to unexpected economic developments. A
agreed to consider further how best to use their mone-
majority favored the first approach. Members noted,
tary policy and liquidity tools to deal with such shocks
however, that the Committee will continue to regularly
if they were to occur.
review the size and composition of its securities hold-

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
ings and that it is prepared to adjust those holdings as erally continued to expect some pickup in the pace of
appropriate. the economic recovery over coming quarters but antic-
ipated that the unemployment rate would decline only
Most members also supported a change in the Com-
gradually and agreed that there were significant down-
mittee’s reinvestment policy. To help support condi-
side risks to the economic outlook, including strains in
tions in mortgage markets, the Committee decided to
global financial markets. The Committee again antic-
reinvest principal received from its holdings of agency
ipated that inflation would settle, over coming quarters,
debt and agency MBS in agency MBS rather than con-
at levels at or below those consistent with the Commit-
tinuing to reinvest in longer-term Treasury securities as
tee’s mandate as the effects of past energy and com-
had been the Committee’s practice for more than a
modity price increases dissipate further.
year. The effect of this change will be to keep the
SOMA’s holdings of agency securities at an approx- At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
imately constant level; under the previous practice, voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
those holdings were declining on an ongoing basis. of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
This change in reinvestment policy was expected to ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance
help reduce the spread between yields on mortgage- with the following domestic policy directive:
backed securities and those on comparable-maturity
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
Treasury securities seen this year and so contribute to
monetary and financial conditions that will
lower mortgage rates. Members also noted that the
foster price stability and promote sustainable
change in reinvestment policy could help prevent the
growth in output. To further its long-run
shares of outstanding longer-term Treasury securities
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions
held by the Federal Reserve from reaching levels high
in reserve markets consistent with federal
enough to result in a deterioration in Treasury market
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.
functioning. One member who opposed the maturity
The Committee directs the Desk to pur-
extension program also opposed the change in rein-
chase, by the end of June 2012, Treasury se-
vestment policy because he judged that it would not
curities with remaining maturities of approx-
benefit housing markets. At the same time, the Com-
imately 6 years to 30 years with a total face
mittee decided to maintain its existing policy of rolling
value of $400 billion, and to sell Treasury se-
over maturing Treasury securities at auction.
curities with remaining maturities of 3 years
The Committee also decided to keep the target range or less with a total face value of $400 billion.
for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and to reaf- The Committee also directs the Desk to
firm its anticipation that economic conditions— maintain its existing policy of rolling over
including low rates of resource utilization and a sub- maturing Treasury securities into new issues
dued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are and to reinvest principal payments on all
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal agency debt and agency mortgage-backed se-
funds rate at least through mid-2013. A couple of curities in the System Open Market Account
members noted that they would prefer to change the in agency mortgage-backed securities in or-
Committee’s forward guidance to provide greater clari- der to maintain the total face value of do-
ty about the economic conditions that would be likely mestic securities at approximately $2.6 tril-
to warrant maintaining exceptionally low levels of the lion. The Committee directs the Desk to en-
target federal funds rate, but no decision was taken on gage in dollar roll transactions as necessary to
this point. facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s
agency MBS transactions. The System Open
The Committee agreed that it was important to ac-
Market Account Manager and the Secretary
knowledge, in the statement to be released following
will keep the Committee informed of ongo-
the meeting, that economic growth remained slow and
ing developments regarding the System’s bal-
that indicators pointed to continuing weakness in over-
ance sheet that could affect the attainment
all labor market conditions. It also agreed to note that
over time of the Committee’s objectives of
inflation appeared to have moderated since earlier in
maximum employment and price stability.”
the year as prices of energy and some commodities had
declined from their recent peaks, and that longer-term The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
inflation expectations remained stable. Members gen- low to be released at 2:15 p.m.:

--- Page 11 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ _M_e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 2_0_-_2_1_, _2_01_1______________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
“Information received since the Federal term interest rates and help make broader fi-
Open Market Committee met in August in- nancial conditions more accommodative.
dicates that economic growth remains slow. The Committee will regularly review the size
Recent indicators point to continuing weak- and composition of its securities holdings
ness in overall labor market conditions, and and is prepared to adjust those holdings as
the unemployment rate remains elevated. appropriate.
Household spending has been increasing at
To help support conditions in mortgage
only a modest pace in recent months despite
markets, the Committee will now reinvest
some recovery in sales of motor vehicles as
principal payments from its holdings of
supply-chain disruptions eased. Investment
agency debt and agency mortgage-backed se-
in nonresidential structures is still weak, and
curities in agency mortgage-backed securities.
the housing sector remains depressed. How-
In addition, the Committee will maintain its
ever, business investment in equipment and
existing policy of rolling over maturing
software continues to expand. Inflation ap-
Treasury securities at auction.
pears to have moderated since earlier in the
year as prices of energy and some commodi- The Committee also decided to keep the tar-
ties have declined from their peaks. Longer- get range for the federal funds rate at 0 to
term inflation expectations have remained ¼ percent and currently anticipates that eco-
stable. nomic conditions—including low rates of re-
source utilization and a subdued outlook for
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
inflation over the medium run—are likely to
Committee seeks to foster maximum em-
ployment and price stability. The Committee warrant exceptionally low levels for the fed-
continues to expect some pickup in the pace eral funds rate at least through mid-2013.
of recovery over coming quarters but antic-
The Committee discussed the range of policy
ipates that the unemployment rate will de-
tools available to promote a stronger eco-
cline only gradually toward levels that the
nomic recovery in a context of price stability.
Committee judges to be consistent with its
It will continue to assess the economic out-
dual mandate. Moreover, there are signifi-
look in light of incoming information and is
cant downside risks to the economic out-
prepared to employ its tools as appropriate.”
look, including strains in global financial
Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C.
markets. The Committee also anticipates
Dudley, Elizabeth Duke, Charles L. Evans, Sarah
that inflation will settle, over coming quar-
Bloom Raskin, Daniel K. Tarullo, and Janet L. Yellen.
ters, at levels at or below those consistent
with the Committee’s dual mandate as the ef- Voting against this action: Richard W. Fisher, Na-
fects of past energy and other commodity rayana Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser.
price increases dissipate further. However,
Messrs. Fisher, Kocherlakota, and Plosser dissented
the Committee will continue to pay close at-
because they did not support additional policy accom-
tention to the evolution of inflation and in-
modation at this time. Mr. Fisher saw a maturity exten-
flation expectations.
sion program as providing few, if any, benefits in sup-
To support a stronger economic recovery port of job creation or economic growth, while it could
and to help ensure that inflation, over time, potentially constrain or complicate the timely removal
is at levels consistent with the dual mandate, of policy accommodation. In his view, any reduction in
the Committee decided today to extend the long-term Treasury rates resulting from this policy ac-
average maturity of its holdings of securities. tion would likely lead to further hoarding by savers,
The Committee intends to purchase, by the with counterproductive results on business and con-
end of June 2012, $400 billion of Treasury sumer confidence and spending behaviors. He felt that
securities with remaining maturities of policymakers should instead focus their attention on
6 years to 30 years and to sell an equal improving the monetary policy transmission mechan-
amount of Treasury securities with remaining ism, particularly with regard to the activity of commu-
maturities of 3 years or less. This program nity banks, which are vital to small business lending
should put downward pressure on longer- and job creation. Mr. Kocherlakota’s perspective on

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
the policy decision was again shaped by his view that in to longer maturities than was the case in the Commit-
November 2010, the Committee had chosen a level of tee’s previous asset purchase programs. At the same
accommodation that was well calibrated for the condi- time, the Desk would sell, from the SOMA portfolio,
tion of the economy. Since November, inflation, and Treasury securities with remaining maturities of 3
the one-year-ahead forecast for inflation, had risen, months to 3 years. All Treasury purchases and sales
while unemployment, and the one-year-ahead forecast would be conducted using competitive auctions. With
for unemployment, had fallen. He did not believe that respect to the MBS reinvestment program, the Desk
providing more monetary accommodation was the ap- would concentrate purchases in newly issued agency-
propriate response to those changes in the economy, backed MBS and would conduct purchases through a
given the current policy framework. Mr. Plosser felt competitive bidding process.
that a maturity extension program would do little to
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
improve near-term growth or employment, in light of
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, November 1-2,
the ongoing structural adjustments and fiscal challenges
2011. The meeting adjourned at 12:30 p.m. on Sep-
both in the United States and abroad. Moreover, in his
tember 21, 2011.
view, with inflation continuing to run above earlier
forecasts, such a program could risk adding unwanted Secretary’s Note: The following information
inflationary pressures and complicate the eventual exit regarding the June 21–22, 2011 FOMC
from the period of extraordinarily accommodative meeting was inadvertently omitted from pre-
monetary policy. vious minutes. By unanimous vote at that
meeting, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
Following the policy vote, the Manager of the System
domestic transactions since the April 26-27,
Open Market Account summarized how the Desk
2011 meeting, and by notation vote com-
would implement the Committee’s decisions. To im-
pleted on July 11, 2011, the Committee un-
plement the maturity extension program, the Desk
animously approved the minutes of the June
would distribute purchases about evenly across nominal
21–22 FOMC meeting.
Treasury securities with 6 to 8 years to maturity, with 8
to 10 years to maturity, and with 10 to 30 years to ma-
turity; the Desk would also buy a small amount of TIPS
with remaining maturities of 6 to 30 years. This distri-
bution would allocate a much larger share of purchases _____________________________
William B. English
Secretary

# Tables

## Page_11_Table_1


| Voting against this action: Richard W. Fisher, Na-   |
|------------------------------------------------------|
| rayana Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser.         |


## Page_12_Table_1


| It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee   |
|--------------------------------------------------------|
| would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, November 1-2,      |
| 2011. The meeting adjourned at 12:30 p.m. on Sep-      |
| tember 21, 2011.                                       |