# 20110315_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:36:28*
*Pages: 10, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
March 15, 2011
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was
held in the offices of the Board of Governors in Wash- Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
ington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 15, 2011, at 8:30 a.m. Board Members, Board of Governors
PRESENT: Charles S. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Of-
Ben Bernanke, Chairman fice of the Staff Director, Board of Governors
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman
Elizabeth Duke Lawrence Slifman and William Wascher, Senior
Charles L. Evans Associate Directors, Division of Research and
Richard W. Fisher Statistics, Board of Governors
Narayana Kocherlakota
Charles I. Plosser Andrew T. Levin, Senior Adviser, Office of Board
Sarah Bloom Raskin Members, Board of Governors; Stephen A.
Daniel K. Tarullo Meyer, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary
Janet L. Yellen Affairs, Board of Governors
Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, Sandra Pia- Joyce K. Zickler, Visiting Senior Adviser, Division
nalto, and John C. Williams, Alternate Mem- of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
bers of the Federal Open Market Committee
Michael G. Palumbo, Associate Director, Division
James Bullard, Thomas M. Hoenig, and Eric Ro- of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
sengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of
respectively Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
William B. English, Secretary and Economist Andrea L. Kusko, Senior Economist, Division of
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analyst,
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gov-
Nathan Sheets, Economist ernors
David J. Stockton, Economist
Blake Prichard, First Vice President, Federal Re-
James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Steven B. serve Bank of Philadelphia
Kamin, Loretta J. Mester, David Reifschneider,
Harvey Rosenblum, Daniel G. Sullivan, and Jeff Fuhrer and Robert H. Rasche, Executive Vice
David W. Wilcox, Associate Economists Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston
and St. Louis, respectively
Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Ac-
count David Altig, Richard P. Dzina, Ron Feldman, Craig
S. Hakkio, Richard Peach, Glenn D. Rude-
Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability busch, Mark E. Schweitzer, and John A. Wein-
Policy and Research, Board of Governors berg, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of Atlanta, New York, Minneapolis,
Maryann F. Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of Kansas City, New York, San Francisco, Cleve-
Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of land, and Richmond, respectively
Governors; William Nelson, Deputy Director,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gov-
ernors

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that ad- Staff Review of the Economic Situation
vices of the election of John C. Williams as an alternate The information reviewed at the March 15 meeting
member of the Federal Open Market Committee had indicated that the economic recovery continued to pro-
been received by the Secretariat, and that he had ex- ceed at a moderate pace, with a further gradual im-
ecuted his oath of office. provement in labor market conditions. Sizable increas-
es in prices of crude oil and other commodities pushed
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
up headline inflation, but measures of underlying infla-
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
tion were subdued and longer-run inflation expecta-
The Manager of the System Open Market Account
tions remained stable.
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and
foreign financial markets during the period since the The labor market continued to show signs of firming.
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) met on Jan- Private nonfarm payroll employment rose noticeably in
uary 25–26, 2011. He also reported on System open February after a small increase in January, with the
market operations, including the ongoing reinvestment swing in hiring likely magnified by widespread snow-
into longer-term Treasury securities of principal pay- storms, which may have held down the employment
ments received on the SOMA’s holdings of agency figure for January. Initial claims for unemployment
debt and agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities insurance trended lower through early March, and sur-
(MBS) that the Committee authorized in August 2010, veys of hiring plans had improved this year. The un-
as well as the purchase of additional longer-term Treas- employment rate dropped markedly in January after a
ury securities to increase the face value of such securi- similar decrease in the preceding month, then ticked
ties held in the SOMA that the FOMC first authorized down to 8.9 percent in February; the labor force partic-
in November 2010. Since November, purchases by the ipation rate was roughly flat in January and February.
Open Market Desk of the Federal Reserve Bank of The share of workers employed part time for economic
New York had increased the SOMA’s holdings by $310 reasons declined further over the past two months, but
billion. The Manager reported that achieving an in- long-duration unemployment was still elevated.
crease of $600 billion in SOMA holdings by the end of
Total industrial production was little changed in Janu-
June 2011 would require continuing to purchase addi-
ary after a strong rise in December. Manufacturing
tional securities at an unchanged pace of about $80
output posted a relatively subdued gain in January, like-
billion per month. There were no open market opera-
ly held down somewhat by the extensive snowfalls dur-
tions in foreign currencies for the System’s account
ing that month; in addition, a scheduled step-up in as-
over the intermeeting period. By unanimous vote, the
semblies of motor vehicles reportedly was restrained in
Committee ratified the Desk’s transactions over the
part by some temporary bottlenecks in the supply
intermeeting period.
chain. As a result, the rate of capacity utilization in
The Manager also discussed the possible benefits of manufacturing was essentially unchanged in January,
gradually reducing the pace of the Federal Reserve’s and it remained well below its 1972–2010 average. In
purchases of Treasury securities when the current asset February, indicators of near-term industrial production,
purchase program nears completion. As its earlier pro- such as the new orders diffusion indexes in the national
gram of agency MBS purchases drew to a close, the and regional manufacturing surveys, were at levels con-
Federal Reserve tapered its purchases during the first sistent with solid increases in factory output in the
quarter of 2010 in order to avoid disruptions in the coming months. Moreover, motor vehicle assemblies
market for those securities. However, the Manager picked up in February and were scheduled to rise fur-
indicated that the greater depth and liquidity of the ther through the second quarter of this year.
Treasury securities market suggested that it would not
Consumer spending appeared to have increased at a
be necessary to taper purchases in this market. The
modest pace in early 2011 after rising briskly in the
Manager noted that market participants appeared to
fourth quarter of 2010. In January, total real personal
have reached the same conclusion, as they generally did
consumption expenditures (real PCE) were essentially
not seem to expect the Federal Reserve to taper its
flat. In February, nominal retail sales, excluding pur-
purchases of Treasury securities. In light of the Man-
chases of motor vehicles and parts, rose moderately;
ager’s report, almost all meeting participants indicated
sales of light motor vehicles posted a robust gain.
that they saw no need to taper the pace of the Commit-
Consumer spending was supported by a solid increase
tee’s purchases of Treasury securities when its current
in real disposable income in January, reflecting in part
program of asset purchases approaches its end.

--- Page 3 ---

_______________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_5_, _2_0_1_1_________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
the temporary cut in payroll taxes. Household net February. Construction outlays by these governments
worth rose in the fourth quarter, as the increase in equi- fell again in January.
ty values during that period more than offset the fur-
The U.S. international trade deficit widened in Decem-
ther fall in house prices. However, consumer senti-
ber and again in January, with rapid gains in both ex-
ment dropped back in early March, retracing its in-
ports and imports. The largest increases in exports
crease over the preceding four months.
were in capital goods, industrial supplies, and automo-
Activity in the housing market continued to be de- tive products. Nominal imports of petroleum products
pressed, held down by the large inventory of foreclosed rose sharply, reflecting both higher prices and greater
or distressed properties on the market and by weak volumes; imports in other major categories rose solidly
demand. In January, starts and permits for new single- on net.
family homes remained near the low levels that had
Overall consumer prices in the United States rose
prevailed since the middle of 2010. New home sales
somewhat faster in December and January than in ear-
moved down in January; existing home sales stepped
lier months, as consumer energy prices posted further
up somewhat but still were quite low by historical
sizable increases and consumer food prices responded
standards. Measures of house prices softened again in
to the recent upturn in farm commodity prices. The
December and January.
price index for PCE excluding food and energy (the
Real business investment in equipment and software core PCE price index) rose slightly in January, boosted
(E&S) appeared to rise further in recent months. No- by an uptick in prices of core goods after four months
minal shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding of declines; the 12-month change in this core price in-
aircraft increased, on net, in December and January, dex stayed near the very low levels seen in late 2010.
and the expanding backlog of unfilled orders pointed to Recent surveys showed further hefty increases in retail
further gains in shipments in subsequent months. In gasoline prices in February and early March, and prices
addition, readings on business conditions and senti- of nonfuel industrial commodities also rose sharply on
ment remained consistent with solid near-term ad- net. According to the Thomson Reuters/University of
vances in outlays for E&S. Credit conditions contin- Michigan Surveys of Consumers, households’ near-
ued to improve for many firms, though they reportedly term inflation expectations increased substantially in
were still tight for small businesses. In contrast to the early March, likely because of the run-up in gasoline
apparent increase in E&S outlays, nonresidential con- prices; longer-term inflation expectations moved up
struction expenditures dropped further in December somewhat in the early March survey but were still
and January, constrained by high vacancy rates, low within the range that prevailed over the preceding few
prices for commercial real estate, and persistently tight years.
borrowing conditions for construction loans for com-
Labor cost pressures remained muted in the fourth
mercial properties.
quarter, as hourly compensation continued to be re-
Real nonfarm inventory investment appeared to have strained by the wide margin of slack in the labor market
picked up in early 2011 after slowing markedly in the and as productivity rose further. Average hourly earn-
fourth quarter. In the motor vehicles sector, invento- ings posted a modest increase, on net, in January and
ries rose slightly, on net, in January and February after February.
having been drawn down in the fourth quarter. Out-
Growth in real activity in the advanced foreign econo-
side of motor vehicles, the rise in the book value of
mies appeared to pick up after a lackluster performance
business inventories was somewhat larger in January
in the fourth quarter. In the euro area, monthly indica-
than the average monthly increase in the fourth quarter,
tors of activity, such as retail sales and purchasing man-
while inventory-to-sales ratios for most industries cov-
agers indexes, were generally positive in January and
ered by these data were similar to their pre-recession
February. But the divergence in economic perfor-
norms. Survey data also suggested that inventory posi-
mance across euro-area countries remained large, as
tions were generally in a comfortable range.
economic activity appeared to have expanded strongly
In the government sector, the available information in Germany but to have contracted in Greece and Por-
suggested that real defense spending in January and tugal. Prior to the earthquake and tsunami in mid-
February was below its average level in the fourth quar- March, economic activity in Japan had shown signs of
ter. At the state and local level, ongoing fiscal pres- firming. The upbeat tenor of the incoming data for the
sures were reflected in further job cuts in January and emerging market economies suggested that the eco-

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
nomic expansion in these countries continued to out- mium—narrowed a bit more over the intermeeting
pace that in the advanced economies. Foreign con- period but continued to be quite elevated relative to
sumer price inflation, which stepped up noticeably in longer-term norms.
the fourth quarter, remained elevated in early 2011,
In the March 2011 Senior Credit Officer Opinion Sur-
largely because of higher food and energy prices.
vey on Dealer Financing Terms, dealers reported a fur-
Staff Review of the Financial Situation ther easing, over the previous three months, in the
The decisions by the FOMC at its January meeting to price and nonprice terms they offered to different types
continue its asset purchase program and to maintain of counterparties for all of the categories of transac-
the 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds tions covered in the survey. Dealers noted that the
rate were largely in line with market expectations, as demand for funding had increased for a broad range of
was the accompanying statement; they elicited only a securities over the same period. In response to special
modest market reaction. Over the weeks following the questions, dealers reported some increase in the use of
FOMC meeting, nominal Treasury yields and the ex- leverage over the prior six months by traditionally un-
pected path of the federal funds rate in coming quarters levered investors—in particular, asset managers, insur-
moved higher, as market participants apparently read ance companies, and pension funds. In addition, deal-
the incoming economic data as, on balance, somewhat ers reported an increase in leverage over the past six
better than expected. After mid-February, however, months by hedge funds that pursue a variety of invest-
Treasury yields and policy expectations retraced their ment strategies. More broadly, while the availability
earlier rise amid concerns about the possible economic and use of dealer-intermediated leverage had increased
fallout from events in the Middle East and North Afri- since its post-crisis nadir in mid-2009, a review of in-
ca (MENA) region. In the days leading up to the formation from a variety of sources suggested that lev-
March FOMC meeting, the tragic developments in Ja- erage generally remained well below the levels reached
pan spurred a further decline in Treasury yields. On prior to the recent financial crisis.
net, expectations for the federal funds rate, along with
Net debt financing by nonfinancial corporations was
yields on nominal Treasury securities, were little
solid in January and February, although it did not
changed over the intermeeting period.
match the sizable amount seen in the fourth quarter.
Measures of inflation compensation over the next 5 Net issuance of investment- and speculative-grade
years rose, on net, over the intermeeting period, with bonds was robust in the first two months of this year.
most of the increase concentrated at the front end of Commercial and industrial (C&I) loans outstanding
the curve, likely reflecting the jump in oil prices. In also increased, on balance, while the amount of nonfi-
contrast, measures of forward inflation compensation 5 nancial commercial paper outstanding was little
to 10 years ahead were little changed, suggesting that changed. Gross public equity issuance by nonfinancial
longer-term inflation expectations remained stable. firms was relatively subdued in January and February.
Measures of the credit quality of nonfinancial firms
Over the intermeeting period, yields on investment-
continued to improve.
and speculative-grade corporate bonds edged down
relative to those on comparable-maturity Treasury se- Financing conditions for commercial real estate gener-
curities. The secondary-market prices of syndicated ally remained tight. So far this year, issuance of com-
loans continued to move up. Strains in the municipal mercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) appeared
bond market eased as concerns about the budgetary to have maintained its modest fourth-quarter pace.
problems of state and local governments seemed to Data on delinquency rates for commercial real estate
diminish somewhat. Conditions in short-term funding loans were mixed.
markets were little changed.
Rates on conforming fixed-rate residential mortgages,
Broad U.S. stock price indexes were about unchanged, and their spreads relative to the 10-year Treasury yield,
on net, over the intermeeting period. Option-implied were about unchanged over the intermeeting period.
volatility on the S&P 500 index rose sharply in mid- With mortgage rates remaining above the low levels
February in response to events in the MENA region seen last fall, refinancing activity was tepid. Outstand-
and remained somewhat elevated thereafter. The ing residential mortgage debt was estimated to have
staff’s estimate of the spread between the expected real contracted again in the fourth quarter. Rates of serious
equity return for S&P 500 firms and the real 10-year delinquency for subprime and prime mortgages were
Treasury yield—a measure of the equity risk pre- little changed in December and January.

--- Page 5 ---

_______________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_5_, _2_0_1_1_________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
Consumer credit markets showed further signs of im- capacity of the area’s backstop funding facility, to ex-
provement. Total consumer credit expanded mod- tend the maturity of the facility’s loans to Greece, and
erately in January. As was the case in the fourth quar- to lower the interest rates on those loans.
ter, nonrevolving credit expanded while revolving cre-
The European Central Bank (ECB) left its benchmark
dit ran off. Delinquency rates on credit card loans in
policy rate unchanged at its March meeting, but the
securitized pools and on auto loans at finance compa-
emphasis on upside risks to inflation at the postmeeting
nies continued to decline through January, nearly re-
press conference led market participants to infer that
turning to their longer-run averages. The issuance of
the ECB might well tighten policy at its meeting in
consumer asset-backed securities, which had weakened
April. In the United Kingdom, market-based readings
around the turn of the year, posted a moderate gain in
on expected policy rates indicated that investors antic-
February.
ipated some tightening of policy before the end of this
Bank credit declined, on average, in January and Febru- year. In addition, authorities in several emerging mar-
ary as a result of a contraction in core loans—the sum ket economies took steps to tighten policy. The broad
of C&I, real estate, and consumer loans; holdings of nominal index of the U.S. dollar declined about
securities were about flat on net. The Survey of Terms 1 percent, on balance, over the intermeeting period.
of Business Lending conducted in the first week of
Staff Economic Outlook
February showed that spreads of interest rates on C&I
The pace of economic activity appeared to have been a
loans over comparable-maturity Eurodollar and swap
little slower around the turn of the year than the staff
rates decreased somewhat but remained elevated.
had anticipated at the time of the January FOMC meet-
M2 increased at a moderate rate, on average, over Janu- ing, and the near-term forecast for growth of real gross
ary and February. Liquid deposits, the largest compo- domestic product (GDP) was revised down modestly.
nent of M2, expanded somewhat less rapidly than in However, the outlook for economic activity over the
the fourth quarter of 2010. Nonetheless, as has been medium term was broadly similar to the projection
the case for some time, the composition of M2 shifted prepared for the January FOMC meeting. Changes to
toward liquid deposits, likely reflecting their higher the conditioning assumptions underlying the staff pro-
yields relative to other M2 components. Currency con- jection were mostly small and offsetting: Crude oil
tinued to advance at a relatively fast rate in January and prices had risen sharply and federal fiscal policy seemed
February, likely boosted by a strong expansion in for- likely to be marginally more restrictive than the staff
eign holdings of U.S. bank notes. had judged in January, but these negative factors were
counterbalanced by higher household net worth and a
In financial markets abroad, equity prices in the ad-
slightly lower foreign exchange value of the dollar. As
vanced economies rose early in the intermeeting period,
a result, as in the January forecast, real GDP was ex-
but they turned down in mid-February as oil prices in-
pected to rise at a moderate pace over 2011 and 2012,
creased and then fell sharply in mid-March in the af-
supported by accommodative monetary policy, increas-
termath of the earthquake and tsunami in Japan. On
ing credit availability, and greater household and busi-
net over the intermeeting period, stock prices were
ness confidence. Reflecting the recent labor market
down in most of the advanced economies, with Japan’s
data, the projection for the unemployment rate was
index having fallen most significantly. Emerging mar-
lower throughout the forecast period than in the staff’s
ket equity price indexes, which had been underper-
January forecast, but the jobless rate was still expected
forming in previous months, generally ended the period
to decline slowly and to remain elevated at the end of
lower as well, and emerging market equity funds expe-
2012.
rienced outflows. Movements in 10-year sovereign
bond yields in Europe and Canada mirrored those in The staff revised up its projection for consumer price
equity prices, climbing early in the intermeeting period inflation in the near term, largely because of the recent
but falling later. increases in the prices of energy and food. However, in
light of the projected persistence of slack in labor and
In part because of downgrades by credit rating agen-
product markets and the anticipated stability in long-
cies, yields on the 10-year sovereign bonds of Greece,
term inflation expectations, the increase in inflation was
Ireland, and Portugal rose sharply, relative to those on
expected to be mostly transitory if oil and other com-
German bonds, through early March. These spreads
modity prices did not rise significantly further. As a
subsequently declined somewhat in response to a gen-
result, the forecast for consumer price inflation over
eral agreement among euro-area leaders to expand the

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
the medium run was little changed relative to that pre- would continue to expand, the pace of expansion was
pared for the January meeting. uncertain. On the one hand, labor market conditions
were improving, though gradually, and the temporary
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
cut in payroll taxes was contributing to rising after-tax
Economic Outlook
incomes. Some easing of credit conditions for house-
In discussing intermeeting developments and their im-
holds, particularly for auto loans, also appeared to be
plications for the economic outlook, participants
supporting growth in consumer spending. On the oth-
agreed that the information received since their pre-
er hand, declining house prices remained a drag on
vious meeting was broadly consistent with their expec-
household wealth and thus on consumer spending. In
tations and suggested that the economic recovery was
addition, sizable recent increases in oil and gasoline
on a firmer footing. Looking through weather-related
prices had reduced real incomes and weighed on con-
distortions in various indicators, measures of consumer
sumer confidence. Business contacts in a variety of
spending, business investment, and employment
industries had expressed concern that consumers might
showed continued expansion. Housing, however, re-
pull back if gasoline prices rose significantly further and
mained depressed. Meeting participants took note of
persisted at those elevated levels.
the significant decline in the unemployment rate over
the past few months but observed that other indicators A further increase in business activity also indicated
pointed to a more gradual improvement in overall labor that the economic recovery remained on track. Indus-
market conditions. They continued to expect that eco- trial production posted solid gains, supported in part by
nomic growth would strengthen over coming quarters continuing growth in U.S. exports. Business contacts
while remaining moderate. Participants noted that re- in a number of regions reported they were more confi-
cent increases in the prices of oil and other commodi- dent about the recovery; a growing number of contacts
ties were putting upward pressure on headline inflation, indicated they were planning for an expansion in hiring
but that measures of underlying inflation remained and production to meet an anticipated rise in sales.
subdued. They anticipated that the effects on inflation Manufacturing firms were particularly upbeat. Some
of the recent run-up in commodity prices would prove contacts reported they were increasing capital budgets
transitory, in part because they saw longer-term infla- to undertake investment that had been postponed dur-
tion expectations remaining stable. Moreover, a num- ing the recession and early stages of the recovery; in
ber of participants expected that slack in resource utili- some cases, firms were planning to expand capacity.
zation would continue to restrain increases in labor Consistent with the anecdotal evidence, indicators of
costs and prices. Nonetheless, participants observed current and planned business investment in equipment
that rapidly rising commodity prices posed upside risks and software continued to rise and surveys showed a
to the stability of longer-term inflation expectations, further improvement in business sentiment. In addi-
and thus to the outlook for inflation, even as they tion, although residential construction remained weak,
posed downside risks to the outlook for growth in con- investment in energy extraction was growing and
sumer spending and business investment. In addition, spending on commercial construction projects ap-
participants noted that unfolding events in the Middle peared to be bottoming out.
East and North Africa, along with the recent earth-
Meeting participants judged that overall conditions in
quake, tsunami, and subsequent developments in Japan,
labor markets had continued to improve gradually. The
had further increased uncertainty about the economic
unemployment rate had decreased significantly in re-
outlook.
cent months; other labor market indicators, including
Participants’ judgment that the recovery was gaining measures of job growth and hours worked, showed
traction reflected both the incoming economic indica- more-modest improvements. Several participants
tors and information received from business contacts. noted that the drop in unemployment was attributable
Spending by households, which had picked up noticea- more to people withdrawing from the labor force and
bly in the fourth quarter, rose further during the early to fewer layoffs than to increased hiring. Even so, par-
part of 2011, with auto sales showing particular ticipants agreed that gains in employment seemed to be
strength. Although some participants noted that on a gradually rising trajectory, although the recent data
growth in consumer spending so far this year had not had been somewhat erratic and distorted by worse-
been as vigorous as they had anticipated, they attri- than-usual weather in many parts of the country. In
buted the shortfall in part to unusually bad weather. addition, surveys of employers showed that an increas-
While participants expected that household spending ing number of firms were planning to hire. Participants

--- Page 7 ---

_______________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_5_, _2_0_1_1_________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
noted regional differences in the speed of improvement In contrast to headline inflation, core inflation and oth-
in labor markets; scattered reports indicated that firms er measures of underlying inflation remained subdued,
in some regions were having difficulty hiring some though they appeared to have bottomed out. A num-
types of highly skilled workers. Participants generally ber of participants noted that, with significant slack in
judged that there was still substantial slack in the labor resource utilization and with longer-term inflation ex-
market, though estimates of the degree of slack were pectations stable, underlying inflation likely would re-
admittedly imprecise and depended in part on judg- main subdued for some time. However, the impor-
ments about a number of factors, including the extent tance of resource slack as a factor influencing inflation
to which labor force participation would increase as the was debated. Some participants pointed to research
recovery progresses and employment expands. indicating that measures of slack were useful in predict-
ing inflation. Others argued that, historically, such
Credit conditions remained uneven. Bankers again re-
measures were only modestly helpful in explaining large
ported improving credit quality and generally weak loan
movements in inflation; one noted the 2003–04 epi-
demand. Large firms that have access to financial mar-
sode in which core inflation rose rapidly over a few
kets continued to find credit, including bank loans,
quarters even though there appeared to be substantial
available on relatively attractive terms; however, credit
resource slack.
conditions reportedly remained tight for smaller, bank-
dependent firms. Participants noted evidence that the Participants expected that the boost to headline infla-
availability of student loans and of consumer loans— tion from recent increases in energy and other com-
particularly auto loans—was increasing. Indeed, bank modity prices would be transitory and that underlying
and nonbank lenders reported that terms and condi- inflation trends would be little affected as long as
tions for auto loans had returned to historical norms. commodity prices did not continue to rise rapidly and
In contrast, terms for commercial and residential real longer-term inflation expectations remained stable.
estate loans remained tight and the volume of outstand- However, a significant increase in longer-term inflation
ing loans continued to decline, though there was some expectations could contribute to excessive wage and
issuance of CMBS backed by loans on high-quality price inflation, which would be costly to eradicate.
properties in selected large metropolitan areas. A few Accordingly, participants considered it important to
participants expressed concern that the easing of credit pay close attention to the evolution not only of head-
conditions in some sectors was becoming or might be- line and core inflation but also of inflation expecta-
come excessive as investors took on more risk in order tions. In this regard, participants observed that meas-
to obtain higher yields. ures of longer-term inflation compensation derived
from financial instruments had remained stable of late,
Participants observed that headline inflation was being
suggesting that longer-term inflation expectations had
boosted by higher prices for energy and other com-
not changed appreciably, although measures of one-
modities, and that prices of other imported goods also
year inflation compensation had risen notably. Survey-
had risen by a substantial, though smaller, amount. A
based measures of inflation expectations also indicated
number of business contacts indicated that they were
that longer-term expected inflation had risen much less
passing on at least a portion of these higher costs to
than near-term inflation expectations. A few partici-
their customers or that they planned to try to do so
pants noted that the adoption by the Committee of an
later this year; however, contacts were uncertain about
explicit numerical inflation objective could help keep
the extent to which they could raise prices, given cur-
longer-term inflation expectations well anchored.
rent market conditions and the cautious attitudes to-
ward spending still held by households and businesses. Participants generally judged the risks to their forecasts
Other participants noted that commodity and energy of growth in economic activity to be roughly balanced.
costs accounted for a relatively small share of produc- They continued to see some downside risks from the
tion costs for most firms and that labor costs ac- banking and fiscal strains in the European periphery,
counted for the bulk of such costs; moreover, they ob- the continuing fiscal adjustments by U.S. state and local
served that unit labor costs generally had declined in governments, and the ongoing weakness in the housing
recent years as productivity growth outpaced wage market. Several also noted the possibility of larger-
gains. Several participants noted that even large com- than-anticipated near-term cuts in federal government
modity price increases have had only limited effects on spending. Moreover, the economic implications of the
underlying inflation in recent decades. tragedy in Japan—for example, with respect to global
supply chains—were not yet clear. On the upside, the

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
improvement in labor market conditions in recent securities as announced in November in order to pro-
months raised the possibility that household spend- mote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to help
ing—and subsequently business investment—might ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent
expand more rapidly than anticipated; if so, the recov- with the Committee’s mandate. Specifically, the Com-
ery could be stronger than currently projected. Partici- mittee maintained its existing policy of reinvesting
pants judged that the potential for more-widespread principal payments from its securities holdings and
disruptions in oil production, and thus for a larger reaffirmed its intention to purchase $600 billion of
jump in energy prices, posed both downside risks to longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the
growth and upside risks to inflation. Several of them second quarter of 2011. A few members remained un-
indicated, in light of recent developments, that the risks certain about the benefits of the asset purchase pro-
to their forecasts of inflation had shifted somewhat to gram but judged that making changes to the program at
the upside. Finally, a few participants noted that if the this time was not appropriate. The Committee contin-
large size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet were to ued to anticipate that economic conditions, including
lead the public to doubt the Committee’s ability to low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation
withdraw monetary accommodation when appropriate, trends, and stable inflation expectations, were likely to
the result could be upward pressure on inflation expec- warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds
tations and so on actual inflation. To mitigate such rate for an extended period.
risks, participants agreed that the Committee would
Members emphasized that the Committee would con-
continue its planning for the eventual exit from the
tinue to regularly review the pace of its securities pur-
current, exceptionally accommodative stance of mone-
chases and the overall size of the asset purchase pro-
tary policy. In light of uncertainty about the economic
gram in light of incoming information—including in-
outlook, it was seen as prudent to consider possible exit
formation on the outlook for economic activity, devel-
strategies for a range of potential economic outcomes.
opments in financial markets, and the efficacy of the
A few participants indicated that economic conditions
purchase program and any unintended consequences
might warrant a move toward less-accommodative
that might arise—and would adjust the program as
monetary policy this year; a few others noted that ex-
needed to best foster maximum employment and price
ceptional policy accommodation could be appropriate
stability. A few members noted that evidence of a
beyond 2011.
stronger recovery, or of higher inflation or rising infla-
Committee Policy Action tion expectations, could make it appropriate to reduce
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period the pace or overall size of the purchase program. Sev-
ahead, Committee members agreed that no changes to eral others indicated that they did not anticipate making
the Committee’s asset purchase program or to its target adjustments to the program before its intended com-
range for the federal funds rate were warranted at this pletion.
meeting. The information received over the intermeet-
With respect to the statement to be released following
ing period indicated that the economic recovery was on
the meeting, members decided to note the further im-
a firmer footing and that overall conditions in the labor
provement in economic activity and in labor markets.
market were gradually improving. Although the unem-
The Committee also decided to summarize its current
ployment rate had declined in recent months, it re-
thinking about inflation pressures and to emphasize
mained elevated relative to levels that the Committee
that it will closely monitor the evolution of overall in-
judged to be consistent, over the longer run, with its
flation and inflation expectations.
statutory mandate to foster maximum employment and
price stability. Similarly, measures of underlying infla- At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
tion continued to be somewhat low relative to levels voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
seen as consistent with the dual mandate over the long- of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
er run. With longer-term inflation expectations remain- ecute transactions in the System Open Market Account
ing stable and measures of underlying inflation sub- in accordance with the following domestic policy direc-
dued, members anticipated that recent increases in the tive:
prices of energy and other commodities would result in
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
only a transitory increase in headline inflation. Given
monetary and financial conditions that will
this economic outlook, the Committee agreed to con-
foster price stability and promote sustainable
tinue to expand its holdings of longer-term Treasury
growth in output. To further its long-run

--- Page 9 ---

_______________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_5_, _2_0_1_1_________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions expects these effects to be transitory, but it
in reserve markets consistent with federal will pay close attention to the evolution of
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ per- inflation and inflation expectations. The
cent. The Committee directs the Desk to Committee continues to anticipate a gradual
execute purchases of longer-term Treasury return to higher levels of resource utilization
securities in order to increase the total face in a context of price stability.
value of domestic securities held in the Sys-
To promote a stronger pace of economic re-
tem Open Market Account to approximately
covery and to help ensure that inflation, over
$2.6 trillion by the end of June 2011. The
time, is at levels consistent with its mandate,
Committee also directs the Desk to reinvest
the Committee decided today to continue
principal payments from agency debt and
expanding its holdings of securities as an-
agency mortgage-backed securities in longer-
nounced in November. In particular, the
term Treasury securities. The System Open
Committee is maintaining its existing policy
Market Account Manager and the Secretary
of reinvesting principal payments from its
will keep the Committee informed of ongo-
securities holdings and intends to purchase
ing developments regarding the System’s
$600 billion of longer-term Treasury securi-
balance sheet that could affect the attain-
ties by the end of the second quarter of
ment over time of the Committee’s objec-
2011. The Committee will regularly review
tives of maximum employment and price
the pace of its securities purchases and the
stability.”
overall size of the asset-purchase program in
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be- light of incoming information and will adjust
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: the program as needed to best foster maxi-
mum employment and price stability.
“Information received since the Federal
Open Market Committee met in January The Committee will maintain the target
suggests that the economic recovery is on a range for the federal funds rate at 0 to
firmer footing, and overall conditions in the ¼ percent and continues to anticipate that
labor market appear to be improving gradu- economic conditions, including low rates of
ally. Household spending and business in- resource utilization, subdued inflation trends,
vestment in equipment and software contin- and stable inflation expectations, are likely to
ue to expand. However, investment in non- warrant exceptionally low levels for the fed-
residential structures is still weak, and the eral funds rate for an extended period.
housing sector continues to be depressed.
The Committee will continue to monitor the
Commodity prices have risen significantly
economic outlook and financial develop-
since the summer, and concerns about global
ments and will employ its policy tools as ne-
supplies of crude oil have contributed to a
cessary to support the economic recovery
sharp run-up in oil prices in recent weeks.
and to help ensure that inflation, over time,
Nonetheless, longer-term inflation expecta-
is at levels consistent with its mandate.”
tions have remained stable, and measures of
underlying inflation have been subdued. Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C.
Dudley, Elizabeth Duke, Charles L. Evans, Richard W.
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, Charles I. Plosser,
Committee seeks to foster maximum em-
Sarah Bloom Raskin, Daniel K. Tarullo, and Janet L.
ployment and price stability. Currently, the
Yellen.
unemployment rate remains elevated, and
measures of underlying inflation continue to Voting against this action: None.
be somewhat low, relative to levels that the
The Committee then discussed a recommendation,
Committee judges to be consistent, over the
from its subcommittee on communications, that the
longer run, with its dual mandate. The re-
Chairman conduct regular press conferences. Partici-
cent increases in the prices of energy and
pants generally saw such press conferences as a poten-
other commodities are currently putting up-
tially useful way to enhance transparency and strength-
ward pressure on inflation. The Committee
en the Committee’s policy communications. They dis-

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
cussed various implications of, and alternative ar- It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
rangements for, such press conferences. They generally would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, April 26–27,
endorsed holding press conferences after the four 2011. The meeting adjourned at 2:35 p.m. on March
FOMC meetings each year for which participants pro- 15, 2011.
vide numerical projections of several key economic
Notation Vote
variables, conditional on appropriate monetary policy.
By notation vote completed on February 15, 2011, the
While those projections already are made public in the
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
minutes of the relevant FOMC meetings, press confe-
FOMC meeting held on January 25–26, 2011.
rences could be helpful in explaining how the Commit-
tee’s monetary policy strategy is informed by partici-
pants’ projections of the rates of output growth, unem-
ployment, and inflation likely to prevail during each of
the next few years, and by their assessments of the val-
ues of those variables that will prove most consistent,
over the longer run, with the Committee’s mandate to
promote both maximum employment and stable prices. _____________________________
The outcome of the discussion was a decision that the
William B. English
Chairman would begin holding press conferences effec-
Secretary
tive with the April 26–27, 2011, meeting.

# Tables

## Page_10_Table_1


| It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee   |
|--------------------------------------------------------|
| would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, April 26–27,       |
| 2011. The meeting adjourned at 2:35 p.m. on March      |
| 15, 2011.                                              |