# 20151216_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:38:04*
*Pages: 24, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
December 15–16, 2015
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of Market Account
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 15, 2015, Robert deV. Frierson, Secretary of the Board, Office of
at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, t h e Secretary, Board of Governors
December 16, 2015, at 9:00 a.m.
Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking
PRESENT: Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors
Janet L. Yellen, Chair Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Policy and Research, Board of Governors
Lael Brainard
Charles L. Evans James A. Clouse and Stephen A. Meyer, Deputy
Stanley Fischer Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Jeffrey M. Lacker Governors
Dennis P. Lockhart
Jerome H. Powell William B. English, Senior Special Adviser to the
Daniel K. Tarullo Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
John C. Williams Governors
James Bullard, Esther L. George, Loretta J. Mester, David Bowman, Andrew Figura, David Reifschneider,
Eric Rosengren, and Michael Strine, Alternate and Stacey Tevlin, Special Advisers to the Board,
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Patrick Harker and Robert S. Kaplan, Presidents of the Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Dallas, of Board Members, Board of Governors
respectively
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
James M. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Board Members, Board of Governors
Bank of Minneapolis
Michael G. Palumbo, Senior Associate Director,
Brian F. Madigan, Secretary Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Governors; Beth Anne Wilson, Senior Associate
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Director, Division of International Finance, Board
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary of Governors
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers,
Steven B. Kamin, Economist Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors;
Thomas Laubach, Economist Wayne Passmore, Senior Adviser, Division of
David W. Wilcox, Economist Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
David Altig, Eric M. Engen, Michael P. Leahy, Joseph W. Gruber, Deputy Associate Director,
William R. Nelson, and William Wascher, Division of International Finance, Board of
Associate Economists Governors
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Francisco Covas, Christopher J. Gust, and Jason Wu, participants for monetary policy action by the Federal
Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Open Market Committee (FOMC) at this meeting and
Board of Governors; John M. Roberts and in the future. The deputy manager followed with a brief-
Steven A. Sharpe, Assistant Directors, Division of ing on money market developments and System open
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors market operations conducted by the Open Market Desk
during the period since the Committee met on Octo-
Patrick E. McCabe, Adviser, Division of Research and ber 27–28. It was noted that the System’s reverse repur-
Statistics, Board of Governors chase (RRP) agreement operations continued to provide
a soft floor under short-term interest rates. The deputy
Penelope A. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Office manager also discussed plans to publish additional infor-
of the Secretary, Board of Governors mation on details of the Committee’s current Treasury
securities reinvestment policy. The manager then
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of briefed the Committee on several other matters, includ-
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors ing plans to begin publishing the effective federal funds
rate and a broader overnight bank funding rate based on
Katie Ross,1 Manager, Office of the Secretary, Board of the Report of Selected Money Market Rates (FR 2420)
Governors in early March 2016; the possibility that the Federal Re-
serve, in cooperation with the Office of Financial Re-
Valerie Hinojosa, Information Manager, Division of search, might publish a reference rate for overnight
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors transactions collateralized by Treasury securities; and the
staff’s ongoing review of the readiness of various Desk
Mark L. Mullinix, First Vice President, Federal Reserve operations and facilities.
Bank of Richmond
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.
James J. McAndrews, Executive Vice President, Federal
There were no intervention operations in foreign curren-
Reserve Bank of New York
cies for the System’s account over the intermeeting pe-
riod.
Troy Davig, Michael Dotsey, Evan F. Koenig, Spencer
Krane, Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl, Ellis W. Tallman, Staff Review of the Economic Situation
Geoffrey Tootell, and Christopher J. Waller, Senior The information reviewed for the December 15–16
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas meeting suggested that real gross domestic product
City, Philadelphia, Dallas, Chicago, Minneapolis, (GDP) was increasing at a moderate pace and that labor
Cleveland, Boston, and St. Louis, respectively market conditions had improved further. Consumer
price inflation continued to run below the FOMC’s
Douglas Tillett, Robert G. Valletta, and Alexander L. longer-run objective of 2 percent, restrained in part by
Wolman, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks declines in both energy prices and the prices of non-en-
of Chicago, San Francisco, and Richmond, ergy imported goods. Some survey-based measures of
respectively longer-run inflation expectations edged down, while
market-based measures of inflation compensation were
William E. Riordan,2 Markets Officer, Federal Reserve still low.
Bank of New York
Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded at a faster
________________
monthly rate in October and November than in the third
¹ Attended Wednesday session only.
quarter. The unemployment rate ticked down to
2 Attended through the discussion of financial developments
5.0 percent in October and remained at that level in No-
and open market operations.
vember; over the 12 months ending in November, the
unemployment rate fell ¾ percentage point. Both the
Developments in Financial Markets and Open labor force participation rate and the employment-to-
Market Operations population ratio increased slightly, on net, over October
The manager of the System Open Market Account and November. The share of workers employed part
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and for- time for economic reasons was flat, on balance, in recent
eign financial markets, including expectations of market months after declining considerably over the previous

--- Page 3 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r_ 1_5_–_1_6_, _2_0_15_______________________P_a_g_e_ _3
year. The rates of private-sector job openings, hires, and available indicators of drilling activity, such as the num-
quits were little changed in October from their average ber of oil and gas rigs in operation, continued to fall
levels in the third quarter. Recent measures of the gains through early December.
in labor compensation were mixed: Over the four quar-
Total real government purchases appeared to be about
ters ending in the third quarter, compensation per hour
flat in the fourth quarter. Federal government spending
in the business sector advanced at a strong 3½ percent
for defense moved roughly sideways, on balance, over
rate, while the employment cost index rose at a more
recent months. State and local government payrolls
moderate 2 percent pace. Average hourly earnings for
were little changed, on net, in October and November,
all employees increased 2¼ percent over the 12 months
while the level of nominal construction spending of
ending in November.
these governments in October was essentially the same
Manufacturing production increased in October, as its average in the third quarter.
although output in the mining sector continued to de-
The U.S. international trade deficit widened in October
crease. Automakers’ assembly schedules and broader in-
after narrowing in September. Exports declined, on bal-
dicators of manufacturing production, such as the read-
ance, to the lowest level in three years; lower prices for
ings on new orders from national and regional manufac-
commodities, along with reduced shipments of capital
turing surveys, generally pointed to a slow pace of gains
and consumer goods, weighed on nominal exports. Im-
in factory output in the coming months. Information
ports decreased in September and October, partly re-
on crude oil and natural gas extraction through early De-
flecting further declines in the price of imported oil. The
cember indicated further declines in mining output.
available trade data suggested that declines in real net ex-
Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) ap- ports would likely continue to be a drag on real GDP
peared to be rising at a solid rate in the fourth quarter. growth in the fourth quarter.
The components of the nominal retail sales data used by
Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE
the Bureau of Economic Analysis to construct its esti-
price index, rose only ¼ percent over the 12 months
mate of PCE increased in October and moved up at a
ending in October, held down by large declines in con-
faster pace in November, while the rate of sales of light
sumer energy prices. Core PCE inflation, which ex-
motor vehicles remained high. Household spending was
cludes changes in food and energy prices, was 1¼ per-
supported by strong growth in real disposable income in
cent over the same 12-month period, partly restrained by
September and October, and households’ net worth was
declines in the prices of non-energy imported goods.
bolstered by recent gains in home values. In addition,
Over the 12 months ending in November, total con-
consumer sentiment in the University of Michigan Sur-
sumer prices as measured by the consumer price index
veys of Consumers improved a little in November and
(CPI) rose ½ percent, while core CPI inflation was 2 per-
early December.
cent. Survey measures of expected longer-run inflation
Recent information on activity in the housing sector was were relatively stable, although they showed some hints
mixed. Starts of new single-family homes were some- of having edged slightly lower: In November and early
what lower in October than in the third quarter, alt- December, the Michigan survey measure continued to
hough building permits moved up. Meanwhile, starts of run somewhat below its typical range of the past
multifamily units declined. Sales of new homes rose in 15 years, though historical patterns suggest that these
October, while existing home sales decreased. relatively low readings may have reflected softness in to-
tal inflation and energy prices. The measures from both
Real private expenditures for business equipment and in-
the Survey of Professional Forecasters for the fourth
tellectual property products increased at a solid pace in
quarter and the Survey of Primary Dealers in December
the third quarter, but business spending growth looked
moved down slightly.
to be slowing somewhat in the fourth quarter. Nominal
shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding air- Foreign real GDP growth improved in the third quarter
craft edged down in October, although new orders for after being weak in the first half, and recent indicators
these capital goods continued to move up. Recent read- were consistent with a further moderate expansion in the
ings from national and regional surveys of business con- fourth quarter. Economic activity in Canada rebounded
ditions were consistent with more modest increases in in the third quarter, boosted by rising exports and a
business equipment spending than in the third quarter. smaller drag from declines in oil-sector investment. The
Firms’ nominal spending for nonresidential structures Japanese economy expanded in the third quarter follow-
excluding drilling and mining rose in October, although

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
ing a small contraction in the previous quarter. In con- Nonfinancial businesses continued to tap financial mar-
trast, growth in the euro-area economy slowed in the kets at a brisk pace in the intermeeting period. Issuance
third quarter. Recent indicators for economic activity in of investment-grade corporate bonds and institutional
China were relatively favorable, and several other emerg- leveraged loans remained solid, buoyed by demand to fi-
ing Asian economies strengthened in the third quarter. nance mergers and acquisitions. Growth of commercial
Mexican economic growth also picked up in the third and industrial loans on banks’ books continued to be
quarter, but the Brazilian economy continued to con- strong in October and November, driven mainly by the
tract. Falling energy prices kept headline inflation very expansion of large loans at large banks. However, high-
low in many foreign economies. yield bond issuance slowed and refinancing-related lev-
eraged loan issuance stayed weak during the intermeet-
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
ing period.
Federal Reserve communications and economic data re-
leases over the intermeeting period appeared to have led Corporate earnings and credit quality continued to show
investors to raise the odds they assigned to an increase some signs of weakening. Available reports and analysts’
in the target range for the federal funds rate at the De- estimates suggested that aggregate earnings per share in
cember FOMC meeting. The October FOMC state- the third quarter declined slightly compared with year-
ment and the stronger-than-expected October employ- earlier levels, in line with expectations. Earnings were
ment report, in particular, boosted expectations of particularly weak in the energy and materials sectors be-
FOMC action at this meeting. Subsequent data releases cause of declines in prices of crude oil and metals. The
and FOMC communications firmed those views, and in stronger dollar appeared to weigh on earnings growth
the weeks before the meeting, market participants came across many sectors.
to attach high odds to the possibility of a December in-
Conditions in the municipal bond market were generally
crease.
stable. Gross issuance of municipal bonds was solid in
The expected path of the federal funds rate implied by recent months. Yields on municipal bonds declined a
market quotes on interest rate derivatives rose moder- little, leaving their ratios to long-term Treasury yields
ately over the intermeeting period. Nominal yields on somewhat lower but still near the high end of their his-
2- and 10-year Treasury securities rose about 40 basis torical range.
points and 25 basis points, respectively. Measures of in-
Financing conditions for commercial real estate tight-
flation compensation based on Treasury Inflation-Pro-
ened somewhat. Spreads on commercial mortgage-
tected Securities remained low.
backed securities (CMBS) widened further, suggesting
Over the first few weeks of the intermeeting period, the that investors in CMBS continued to reassess the risks
increase in the perceived likelihood of an increase in the in this sector following several years of robust demand
target range for the federal funds rate at the December for these securities. Nonetheless, underwriting stand-
meeting was not accompanied by a rise in implied or re- ards continued to be relatively loose, and financing con-
alized volatility in domestic equity and fixed-income ditions appeared to remain quite accommodative overall.
markets. However, later in the period, concerns among CMBS issuance stayed strong.
market participants about the implications of falling
Residential mortgage market conditions were little
crude oil prices and the credit quality of high-yield bonds
changed, on net, over the intermeeting period. Credit
evidently increased. In reaction, broad measures of U.S.
remained tight for borrowers with low credit scores,
equity prices declined, with a steep selloff in energy-sec-
hard-to-document income, or higher debt-to-income ra-
tor stocks, and the one-month-ahead option-implied
tios. Interest rates on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages in-
volatility on the S&P 500 index, the VIX, climbed. In
creased 30 basis points, in line with increases in yields on
addition, strains in the high-yield bond market increased
mortgage-backed securities and comparable-maturity
notably after a mutual fund that specialized in very low-
Treasury securities. Nevertheless, mortgage rates con-
rated and unrated bonds suspended investor redemp-
tinued to be quite low by historical standards.
tions and closed. Over the intermeeting period, high-
yield bond spreads widened significantly, on net, partic- Consumer credit markets remained accommodative for
ularly for bonds rated triple-C or below, with more pro- most borrowers. Consumer loan balances continued to
nounced increases for firms in the energy sector. In con- rise at a robust pace through October because of sus-
trast, spreads on investment-grade corporate bonds were tained expansion in credit card balances and sizable in-
little changed on balance. creases in auto and student loans; growth of student

--- Page 5 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r_ 1_5_–_1_6_, _2_0_15_______________________P_a_g_e_ _5
loans continued to slow gradually. Student and auto 20 years. The risks to the forecast for real GDP were
loans remained broadly available, even to borrowers seen as tilted somewhat to the downside, reflecting the
with subprime credit histories, but the availability of staff’s assessment that neither monetary nor fiscal policy
credit card loans for subprime borrowers was still tight. was currently well positioned to help the economy with-
stand substantial adverse shocks. Consistent with this
Movements in foreign financial markets over the period
downside risk to aggregate demand, the staff viewed the
reflected increased expectations that the FOMC would
risks to its outlook for the unemployment rate as skewed
begin raising the target range for the federal funds rate
somewhat to the upside. The risks to the projection for
in December, investors’ views about monetary policies
inflation were seen as weighted to the downside, reflect-
abroad, and substantial declines in commodity prices.
ing the possibility that longer-term inflation expectations
The broad nominal index of the dollar rose appreciably.
may have edged down and that the foreign exchange
Equity indexes declined in many advanced and emerging
value of the dollar could rise substantially further, which
market economies amid concerns about corporate earn-
would put downward pressure on inflation.
ings and falling oil and metals prices. Short-term sover-
eign yields changed little in the euro area and Japan but Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
rose moderately in the United Kingdom. Longer-term Economic Outlook
sovereign yields moved higher in Europe along with U.S. In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of
Treasury yields. the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank pres-
idents submitted their projections of the most likely out-
Staff Economic Outlook
comes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, in-
In the economic forecast prepared by the staff for the
flation, and the federal funds rate for each year from
December FOMC meeting, real GDP growth in the sec-
2015 through 2018 and over the longer run.3 Each par-
ond half of this year was little changed, on net, relative
ticipant’s projections were conditioned on his or her
to the projection for the October meeting. The staff’s
judgment of appropriate monetary policy. The longer-
medium-term projection for real GDP growth was re-
run projections represent each participant’s assessment
vised up slightly, on balance, from the previous forecast,
of the rate to which each variable would be expected to
primarily because the recently passed Bipartisan Budget
converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy
Act of 2015 was anticipated to lead to somewhat higher
and in the absence of further shocks to the economy.
federal government purchases. The staff continued to
These projections and policy assessments are described
project that real GDP would expand at a somewhat
in the Summary of Economic Projections, which is an
faster pace than potential output in 2016 through 2018,
addendum to these minutes.
supported primarily by increases in consumer spending.
The unemployment rate was expected to decline gradu- In their discussion of the economic situation and the
ally and to run somewhat below the staff’s estimate of outlook, meeting participants viewed the information re-
its longer-run natural rate over this period. ceived over the intermeeting period as indicating that
economic activity was expanding moderately and con-
The staff’s forecast for inflation was revised down
firming that underutilization of labor resources had di-
slightly in the near term in response to recent data for
minished appreciably since early in the year. Partici-
consumer prices and the further decline in the price of
pants’ outlook indicated that, with gradual adjustments
crude oil; over the medium term, the projection was little
in the stance of monetary policy, real GDP would con-
revised. Energy prices and prices of non-energy im-
tinue to increase at a moderate rate over the medium
ported goods were expected to begin steadily rising next
term and that labor market indicators would continue to
year. The staff projected that inflation would increase
strengthen. They anticipated that the relative strength in
gradually over the next several years and reach the Com-
domestic demand would be only partially offset by some
mittee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent by the end of
further weakness in net exports. Participants generally
2018.
saw the downside risks to U.S. economic activity from
The staff viewed the uncertainty around its December global economic and financial developments, although
projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment still material, as having diminished since late summer. In
rate, and inflation as similar to the average of the past addition, new and revised information on employment
3 The president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis James M. Lyon, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve
did not participate in this FOMC meeting, and the incoming Bank of Minneapolis, submitted economic projections.
president is scheduled to assume office on January 1, 2016.

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
in recent months had reduced earlier concerns about a sector, commercial building was highlighted as an area
possible slowing of progress in the labor market. Ac- of relative strength in a few Districts.
cordingly, taking into account domestic and interna-
As a result of the recently passed Bipartisan Budget Act,
tional developments, most participants judged the risks
federal spending was expected to provide a modest
to the outlook for both economic activity and the labor
boost to economic activity over the next few years. Con-
market to be balanced.
tacts in one District with a relatively large amount of fed-
Incoming data indicated that inflation continued to run eral government activity reported that their businesses
below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective, would also benefit from the reduced uncertainty about
partly reflecting declines in energy prices and prices of the federal fiscal outlook.
non-energy imports. The price of crude oil fell further
Business activity was solid outside of sectors adversely
over the intermeeting period, and many participants low-
affected by low energy prices and weak exports. A num-
ered their near-term forecasts for inflation somewhat
ber of participants commented on the strength in the
while leaving their medium-term forecasts little changed.
services sector in their Districts, citing, in particular, ac-
Nearly all continued to anticipate that inflation would
tivity in high-tech, transportation, leisure and hospitality,
rise to or very close to 2 percent over the medium term
and health-related businesses. Some reported that the
as the transitory effects of declines in energy and import
stronger manufacturing industries in their Districts in-
prices dissipated and the labor market strengthened fur-
cluded aerospace, power generation equipment, and
ther. Over the intermeeting period, market-based
medical equipment, and that the domestic auto industry
measures of inflation compensation stayed low; some
was still a bright spot. However, manufacturing activity
survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expecta-
overall continued to be restrained by weakness in indus-
tions edged down. Although many participants re-
tries with significant international exposures, such as
mained concerned about downside risks attending the
steel, agricultural and drilling equipment, and chemicals.
outlook for inflation, a majority of participants saw the
In addition, domestic energy producers and their service
risks to the outlook for inflation as balanced.
suppliers remained under significant pressure from the
Consumer spending continued to rise at a solid rate in excess supply of crude oil and declining prices. The cut-
recent months; retail sales picked up over the October– backs in drilling led to further reductions in capital
November period, and motor vehicle sales remained spending and to layoffs; credit conditions for some firms
strong. The available information from District business continued to deteriorate. In the agricultural sector, high
contacts was generally consistent with the recent trend levels of domestic crop production and weak global de-
in data on spending, although a couple of reports noted mand had depressed commodity prices, and farm in-
that households were spending cautiously and that some come was expected to decline.
price discounting was likely. Over the coming year, par-
Participants generally agreed that the drag on U.S. eco-
ticipants expected consumer outlays to be supported im-
nomic activity from the appreciation of the dollar since
portantly by ongoing gains in jobs, rising income, and
the summer of 2014 and the slowdown in foreign eco-
improved household balance sheets. In addition, several
nomic growth, particularly in emerging market econo-
participants pointed out that low energy costs should
mies, was likely to continue to depress U.S. net exports
help support consumer expenditures.
for some time. Many expressed the view that the risks
The housing market was recovering gradually, with to the global economy that emerged late this summer
single-family homebuilding continuing to trend up and had receded and anticipated moderate improvement in
multifamily construction remaining at a high level. The economic growth abroad in the coming year as currency
reports on the pace of construction and real estate activ- and commodity markets stabilized. However, partici-
ity across Districts varied. Nonetheless, several partici- pants cited a number of lingering concerns, including the
pants noted factors pointing to continued improvement possibility that further dollar appreciation and persistent
in the housing sector, including ongoing house price ap- weakness in commodity prices could increase the stress
preciation, low levels of home inventories, the substan- on emerging market economies and that China could
tial gap between the rate of household formation and the find it difficult to navigate the cyclical and structural
relatively slow pace of construction, and the possibility changes under way in its economy. Several upside risks
that homebuyers may be entering the market in anticipa- to the U.S. outlook also were noted, including the possi-
tion of higher mortgage rates. Outside of the residential bility that declining energy prices could spur consumer
spending more than currently anticipated.

--- Page 7 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r_ 1_5_–_1_6_, _2_0_15_______________________P_a_g_e_ _7
Consumer prices, as measured by the PCE index, were trends and that the declines in the market-based
little changed, on net, in September and October, held measures could reflect changes in risk and liquidity pre-
down importantly by declines in energy prices; core PCE miums. Many concluded that longer-run inflation ex-
prices posted only small increases. Over the intermeet- pectations remained reasonably stable. However, some
ing period, crude oil prices dropped notably, other com- expressed concerns that inflation expectations may have
modity prices declined, and the dollar appreciated fur- already moved lower, or that they might do so if inflation
ther. The 12-month change in the core PCE price index persisted for much longer at a rate below the Commit-
was 1.3 percent in October and had been running at tee’s objective.
about that rate since the beginning of the year, despite
Labor market conditions improved further in recent
the declines in prices of non-energy imported goods
months: Monthly gains in nonfarm payroll employment
over the period. Several participants noted that alterna-
averaged more than 200,000 over the period from Sep-
tive indicators of underlying inflation, such as the core
tember to November, and the unemployment rate edged
CPI, the trimmed mean PCE, and the sticky price CPI,
lower. The cumulative reduction in the underutilization
showed somewhat higher year-over-year increases, close
of labor resources since early in the year was appreciable.
to or above 2 percent. Inflation by these measures, how-
The unemployment rate, at 5.0 percent in November,
ever, had typically run higher than PCE price inflation,
was 0.7 percentage point lower than in January and close
and a range of views was expressed about their implica-
to most participants’ estimates of its longer-run normal
tions for the outlook for PCE inflation.
level. Broader measures of underemployment that in-
Almost all participants continued to expect that once en- clude marginally attached workers and those employed
ergy prices and prices of non-energy commodities stabi- part time for economic reasons also fell substantially
lized, the effects of the declines in those prices on head- since January. However, the labor force participation
line and core PCE inflation would fade. Moreover, with rate moved down since January as well, with some
margins of resource underutilization having already di- FOMC participants attributing part of the decline to de-
minished appreciably and longer-run inflation expecta- mographic trends or a structural rise in detachment
tions reasonably stable, most anticipated that tightening among prime-age men. A number of participants ob-
resource utilization over the next year would contribute served that wage increases had begun to pick up, or that
to higher inflation. Nearly all participants were now rea- they appeared likely to do so over the coming year.
sonably confident that inflation would move back to Although many participants judged that the improve-
2 percent over the medium term. However, because of ment in labor market conditions had been substantial,
the recent further decline in crude oil prices, many par- some others indicated that further progress in reducing
ticipants judged that falling energy prices would depress labor market slack would be required before conditions
headline inflation somewhat longer than previously an- would be consistent with the Committee’s objective of
ticipated. Also, several observed that the additional ap- maximum employment. In particular, some participants
preciation of the dollar would continue to hold down the stressed the importance of the pace of economic growth
prices of imported goods. Although almost all still ex- staying above that of potential output in order to reduce
pected that the downward pressure on inflation from en- remaining labor underutilization across broader dimen-
ergy and commodity prices would be transitory, many sions—for example, by lowering the still-elevated num-
viewed the persistent weakness in those prices as adding bers of workers employed part time for economic rea-
uncertainty or posing important downside risks to the sons and by encouraging additional workers who are
inflation outlook. currently outside the labor force but want a job to
reenter the labor force.
Participants also discussed readings from various mar-
ket- and survey-based measures of longer-run inflation Most participants expected that the unemployment rate
expectations. Recently, some of the available surveys would edge below their estimates of its longer-run level
had reported softer longer-run inflation expectations, in the coming year and then stabilize for a time, with the
while others suggested still-stable expectations. In addi- further strengthening of the labor market helping move
tion, the market-based measures of inflation compensa- inflation higher. Because labor compensation was still
tion that had declined earlier were still at low levels. A increasing at a subdued rate and inflation remained well
number of participants noted, based on historical pat- below 2 percent, some participants judged that a moder-
terns, that some of the survey-based measures could be ate further decline in unemployment would be unlikely
overly sensitive to energy price fluctuations rather than to lead to a buildup of unduly strong inflation pressures.
indicating shifts in perceptions of underlying inflation

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
A few commented that a sustained period of labor mar- proach to normalizing policy could help minimize the
ket activity above levels consistent with maximum em- risk of having to respond to a negative economic shock
ployment should speed the rise in inflation to the Com- while the policy rate remained near its effective lower
mittee’s objective. bound.
Financial conditions tightened modestly over the inter- While viewing a gradual approach to policy normaliza-
meeting period. Quotes in financial markets and survey tion as likely to be appropriate given their economic out-
results suggested that investors were quite confident that look, participants emphasized the need to adjust the pol-
the Committee would raise the federal funds target range icy path as economic conditions evolved and to avoid
25 basis points at the current meeting. Concerns among appearing to commit to any specific pace of adjustments.
investors about the high-yield bond market increased They stressed the importance of communicating clearly
notably in the days before the meeting after an open- that the future policy path could become shallower if the
ended mutual fund specializing in junk bonds suspended economic expansion weakened and inflation rose more
redemptions and closed. In their discussion, several par- slowly than currently anticipated, and that it could be-
ticipants commented that markets for leveraged finance come steeper if real activity and inflation surprised to the
had been correcting since midyear—particularly for the upside. A few participants also indicated that significant
most risky assets, including those associated with energy risks to financial stability, should they emerge, could al-
firms—and noted that the widening of credit spreads in ter their view of the appropriate policy path.
corporate bond markets appeared to be largely due to
Committee Policy Action
the repricing of riskier assets.
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
During their consideration of economic conditions and ahead, members judged that information received since
monetary policy, almost all participants agreed that the the FOMC met in October indicated that economic ac-
improvements that had occurred in the labor market and tivity had been expanding at a moderate pace. Although
their confidence in a return of inflation to 2 percent over net exports remained soft, consumer and business
the medium term now satisfied the Committee’s criteria spending remained solid, and the housing sector im-
for beginning the policy normalization process. Partici- proved further. Overall, taking into account domestic
pants also discussed the implications of economic con- and foreign developments, members saw the risks to the
ditions going forward for the likely future path of the outlook for both economic activity and the labor market
target range for the federal funds rate. Even after the as balanced, and they expected that, with gradual adjust-
initial increase in the target range, the stance of policy ments in the stance of monetary policy, economic activ-
would remain accommodative. Participants saw several ity would most likely continue to expand at a moderate
reasons why a gradual removal of policy accommodation pace.
would likely be appropriate. Normalizing policy gradu-
Members agreed that a range of recent labor market in-
ally would keep the stance of monetary policy suffi-
dicators, including ongoing job gains and declining un-
ciently accommodative to support further improvement
employment, showed further improvement and con-
in labor market conditions and to exert upward pressure
firmed that underutilization of labor resources had di-
on inflation. Also, a number of participants pointed out
minished appreciably since early this year. Members an-
that because inflation was still running well below the
ticipated that economic activity was likely to continue to
Committee’s objective and the outlook for inflation was
expand at a pace sufficient to lead to a further increase
subject to considerable uncertainty, it would probably
in the utilization of labor resources, and many members
take some time for the data to confirm that inflation was
judged that additional progress would be required to
on a trajectory to return to 2 percent over the medium
reach the Committee’s maximum-employment objec-
term. Gradual adjustments in the federal funds rate
tive.
would also allow policymakers to assess how the econ-
omy was responding to increases in interest rates. In ad- Inflation continued to run below the Committee’s
dition, by several estimates, the neutral short-term real longer-run objective, held down in part by the effects of
interest rate was currently close to zero and was expected declines in energy and non-energy import prices.
to rise only slowly as headwinds restraining the expan- Market-based measures of inflation compensation re-
sion receded. Moreover, the ability of monetary policy mained low; some survey-based measures of longer-
to offset the economic effects of an unanticipated eco- term inflation expectations had edged down. Members
nomic shock remained asymmetric, and a cautious ap- anticipated that the further decline in crude oil prices

--- Page 9 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r_ 1_5_–_1_6_, _2_0_15_______________________P_a_g_e_ _9
over the intermeeting period was likely to exert some ad- Members also discussed their expectations for the size
ditional transitory downward pressure on inflation in the and timing of adjustments in the target range for the fed-
near term. eral funds rate going forward. Based on their current
forecasts for economic activity, the labor market, and in-
Regarding the medium-term outlook, inflation was pro-
flation, as well as their expectation that the neutral short-
jected to increase gradually as energy prices and prices of
term real interest rate will rise slowly over the next few
non-energy imports stabilized and the labor market
years, members expected economic conditions would
strengthened. Overall, taking into account economic de-
evolve in a manner that would warrant only gradual in-
velopments and the outlook for economic activity and
creases in the federal funds rate. However, they also rec-
the labor market, the Committee was now reasonably
ognized that the appropriate path for the federal funds
confident in its expectation that inflation would rise,
rate would depend on the economic outlook as informed
over the medium term, to its 2 percent objective. How-
by incoming data. Members stressed the potential need
ever, for some members, the risks attending their infla-
to accelerate or slow the pace of normalization as the
tion forecasts remained considerable. Among those
economic outlook evolved. In the current situation, be-
risks was the possibility that additional downward
cause of their significant concern about still-low readings
shocks to prices of oil and other commodities or a sus-
on actual inflation and the uncertainty and risks present
tained rise in the exchange value of the dollar could delay
in the inflation outlook, they agreed to indicate that the
or diminish the expected upturn in inflation. A couple
Committee would carefully monitor actual and expected
also worried that a further strengthening of the labor
progress toward its inflation goal. In determining the
market might not prove sufficient to offset the down-
size and timing of further adjustments to monetary pol-
ward pressures from global disinflationary forces. And
icy, some members emphasized the importance of con-
several expressed unease with indications that inflation
firming that inflation would rise as projected and of
expectations may have moved down slightly. In view of
maintaining the credibility of the Committee’s inflation
these risks and the shortfall of inflation from 2 percent,
objective. Based on their current economic outlook,
members expressed their intention to carefully monitor
they continued to anticipate that the federal funds rate
actual and expected progress toward the Committee’s in-
was likely to remain, for some time, below levels that the
flation goal.
Committee expected to prevail in the longer run.
After assessing the outlook for economic activity, the la-
The Committee also maintained its policy of reinvesting
bor market, and inflation and weighing the uncertainties
principal payments from agency debt and agency
associated with the outlook, members agreed to raise the
mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
target range for the federal funds rate to ¼ to ½ percent
securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securi-
at this meeting. A number of members commented that
ties at auction. In view of members’ outlook for mod-
it was appropriate to begin policy normalization in re-
erate growth in economic activity, inflation moving to-
sponse to the substantial progress in the labor market
ward its target only gradually, and the asymmetric risks
toward achieving the Committee’s objective of maxi-
posed by the continued proximity of short-term interest
mum employment and their reasonable confidence that
rates to their effective lower bound, the Committee an-
inflation would move to 2 percent over the medium
ticipated retaining this policy until normalization of the
term. Members agreed that the postmeeting statement
level of the federal funds rate was well under way. This
should report that the Committee’s decision reflected
policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-
both the economic outlook and the time it takes for pol-
term securities at sizable levels, should help maintain ac-
icy actions to affect future economic outcomes. If the
commodative financial conditions.
Committee waited to begin removing accommodation
until it was closer to achieving its dual-mandate objec- At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
tives, it might need to tighten policy abruptly, which voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
could risk disrupting economic activity. Members ob- of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to
served that after this initial increase in the federal funds execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with
rate, the stance of monetary policy would remain accom- the following domestic policy directive, to be released at
modative. However, some members said that their de- 2:00 p.m.:
cision to raise the target range was a close call, particu-
“Effective December 17, 2015, the Federal Open
larly given the uncertainty about inflation dynamics, and
Market Committee directs the Desk to undertake
emphasized the need to monitor the progress of infla-
open market operations as necessary to maintain
tion closely.

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
the federal funds rate in a target range of ¼ to of monetary policy, economic activity will con-
½ percent, including: (1) overnight reverse re- tinue to expand at a moderate pace and labor
purchase operations (and reverse repurchase op- market indicators will continue to strengthen.
erations with maturities of more than one day Overall, taking into account domestic and inter-
when necessary to accommodate weekend, holi- national developments, the Committee sees the
day, or similar trading conventions) at an offer- risks to the outlook for both economic activity
ing rate of 0.25 percent, in amounts limited only and the labor market as balanced. Inflation is ex-
by the value of Treasury securities held outright pected to rise to 2 percent over the medium term
in the System Open Market Account that are as the transitory effects of declines in energy and
available for such operations and by a per-coun- import prices dissipate and the labor market
terparty limit of $30 billion per day; and (2) term strengthens further. The Committee continues
reverse repurchase operations to the extent ap- to monitor inflation developments closely.
proved in the resolution on term RRP operations
The Committee judges that there has been con-
approved by the Committee at its March 17–18,
siderable improvement in labor market condi-
2015, meeting.
tions this year, and it is reasonably confident that
The Committee directs the Desk to continue inflation will rise, over the medium term, to its
rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auc- 2 percent objective. Given the economic out-
tion and to continue reinvesting principal pay- look, and recognizing the time it takes for policy
ments on all agency debt and agency mortgage- actions to affect future economic outcomes, the
backed securities in agency mortgage-backed se- Committee decided to raise the target range for
curities. The Committee also directs the Desk to the federal funds rate to ¼ to ½ percent. The
engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transac- stance of monetary policy remains accommoda-
tions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the tive after this increase, thereby supporting fur-
Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed secu- ther improvement in labor market conditions
rities transactions.” and a return to 2 percent inflation.
The vote also encompassed approval of the statement In determining the timing and size of future ad-
below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: justments to the target range for the federal
funds rate, the Committee will assess realized
“Information received since the Federal Open
and expected economic conditions relative to its
Market Committee met in October suggests that
objectives of maximum employment and 2 per-
economic activity has been expanding at a mod-
cent inflation. This assessment will take into ac-
erate pace. Household spending and business
count a wide range of information, including
fixed investment have been increasing at solid
measures of labor market conditions, indicators
rates in recent months, and the housing sector
of inflation pressures and inflation expectations,
has improved further; however, net exports have
and readings on financial and international devel-
been soft. A range of recent labor market indi-
opments. In light of the current shortfall of in-
cators, including ongoing job gains and declining
flation from 2 percent, the Committee will care-
unemployment, shows further improvement and
fully monitor actual and expected progress to-
confirms that underutilization of labor resources
ward its inflation goal. The Committee expects
has diminished appreciably since early this year.
that economic conditions will evolve in a manner
Inflation has continued to run below the Com-
that will warrant only gradual increases in the
mittee’s 2 percent longer-run objective, partly re-
federal funds rate; the federal funds rate is likely
flecting declines in energy prices and in prices of
to remain, for some time, below levels that are
non-energy imports. Market-based measures of
expected to prevail in the longer run. However,
inflation compensation remain low; some sur-
the actual path of the federal funds rate will de-
vey-based measures of longer-term inflation ex-
pend on the economic outlook as informed by
pectations have edged down.
incoming data.
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
The Committee is maintaining its existing policy
mittee seeks to foster maximum employment
of reinvesting principal payments from its hold-
and price stability. The Committee currently ex-
ings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed
pects that, with gradual adjustments in the stance

--- Page 11 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r_ 1_5_–_1_6_, _2_0_15______________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
securities in agency mortgage-backed securities After these policy decisions, the deputy manager of the
and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities System Open Market Account briefed the Committee
at auction, and it anticipates doing so until nor- on plans for term RRPs over year-end.
malization of the level of the federal funds rate is
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
well under way. This policy, by keeping the
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, January 26–27,
Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
2016. The meeting adjourned at 10:30 a.m. on Decem-
at sizable levels, should help maintain accommo-
ber 16, 2015.
dative financial conditions.”
Notation Vote
Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C.
Dudley, Lael Brainard, Charles L. Evans, Stanley By notation vote completed on November 17, 2015, the
Fischer, Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, Jerome Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
H. Powell, Daniel K. Tarullo, and John C. Williams. Committee meeting held on October 27–28, 2015.
Voting against this action: None.
To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target
range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors
voted unanimously to raise the interest rates on required
and excess reserve balances by ¼ percentage point, to
½ percent, effective December 17, 2015. The Board of
_____________________________
Governors also voted unanimously to approve a ¼ per-
centage point increase in the primary credit rate (dis- Brian F. Madigan
count rate) to 1 percent, effective December 17, 2015.4 Secretary
4 In taking this action, the Board approved requests submitted Subsequently, the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and
by the boards of directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis were informed by the Secretary of the Board of
Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, the Board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit
St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco. This vote rate of 1 percent, effective December 17, 2015.) This vote of
also encompassed approval by the Board of Governors of the the Board of Governors also encompassed approval of the re-
establishment of a 1 percent primary credit rate by the remain- newal by all 12 Federal Reserve Banks of the existing formulas
ing Federal Reserve Banks, effective on the later of Decem- for calculating the rates applicable to discounts and advances
ber 17, 2015, and the date such Reserve Banks informed the under the secondary and seasonal credit programs.
Secretary of the Board of such a request. (Secretary’s note:

--- Page 12 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- the Committee’s goal of 2 percent. Consistent with this
tee (FOMC) meeting held on December 15–16, 2015, outlook, most participants projected that the appropriate
meeting participants submitted their projections of the level of the federal funds rate would be below its longer-
most likely outcomes for real output growth, the unem- run level through 2018.
ployment rate, inflation, and the federal funds rate for
Almost all participants viewed the levels of uncertainty
each year from 2015 to 2018 and over the longer run.1
associated with their outlooks for economic growth and
Each participant’s projection was based on information
the unemployment rate as broadly similar to the norms
available at the time of the meeting, together with his or
of the previous 20 years. Nearly all also viewed the levels
her assessment of appropriate monetary policy and as-
of uncertainty associated with their inflation forecasts as
sumptions about the factors likely to affect economic
broadly similar to historical norms. Most participants
outcomes. The longer-run projections represent each
saw the risks to their outlooks for real GDP growth and
participant’s assessment of the value to which each var-
the unemployment rate as broadly balanced. A majority
iable would be expected to converge, over time, under
viewed the risks attending their projections for both
appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of fur-
PCE and core PCE inflation as broadly balanced, but
ther shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary
many saw these risks as weighted to the downside.
policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each
Among those who saw the risks to their inflation out-
participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for
look as tilted to the downside, several highlighted the
economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her
continued strength of the dollar and some recent indica-
individual interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objec-
tions that inflation expectations had declined as contrib-
tives of maximum employment and stable prices.
uting to those risks.
FOMC participants generally expected that, under ap-
The Outlook for Economic Activity
propriate monetary policy, real gross domestic product
Participants generally projected that, conditional on their
(GDP) growth in 2016 and 2017 would be at or some-
individual assumptions about appropriate monetary pol-
what above their individual estimates of the longer-run
icy, real GDP would increase in 2016 and 2017 at a pace
growth rate and would converge toward its longer-run
somewhat above their estimates of its longer-run rate.
rate in 2018 (table 1 and figure 1). All participants pro-
Real GDP growth would then slow in 2018 to a rate at
jected that the unemployment rate would decline further
or near their individual estimates of the longer-run nor-
in 2016. Most participants expected that in 2018 the un-
mal rate. Participants pointed to a number of factors
employment rate would remain somewhat below their
that they expect will contribute to moderate output
individual judgments of its longer-run normal rate. Par-
growth over the next few years, including labor market
ticipants projected that inflation, as measured by the
conditions that are supportive of economic expansion,
four-quarter change in the price index for personal con-
household and business balance sheets that had im-
sumption expenditures (PCE), would pick up in 2016
proved significantly since the financial crisis, and a
and 2017 from the very low rate seen in 2015. Almost
stance of monetary policy that was expected to remain
all participants projected inflation in 2018 to be at or
accommodative.
very near the Committee’s 2 percent objective.
Compared with their contributions to the Summary of
As shown in figure 2, all but two participants thought
Economic Projections (SEP) in September, participants’
that it would be appropriate to raise the target range for
projections of real GDP growth from 2016 to 2018 were
the federal funds rate before the end of 2015. Most par-
generally little changed. The median value of partici-
ticipants expected that it would be appropriate to raise
pants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2016 was re-
the target range for the federal funds rate gradually over
vised up slightly to 2.4 percent; some participants cited
the projection period as headwinds to economic growth
the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2015, which was passed in
dissipate slowly over time and as inflation rises toward
1 The president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis James M. Lyon, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve
did not participate in this FOMC meeting, and the incoming Bank of Minneapolis, submitted economic projections.
president is scheduled to assume office on January 1, 2016.

--- Page 13 ---

,stnediserp
knaB
evreseR
laredeF
dna
srebmem
draoB
evreseR
laredeF
fo
snoitcejorp
cimonocE
.1
elbaT
5102
rebmeceD
,ycilop
yratenom
etairporppa
detcejorp
fo
stnemssessa
laudividni
rieht
rednu
tnecreP
3egnaR
2ycnednetlartneC
1naideM
regnoL
8102
7102
6102
5102
regnoL
8102
7102
6102
5102
regnoL
8102
7102
6102
5102
elbairaV
nur
nur
nur
3.2–8.1
4.2–7.1
5.2–8.1
7.2–0.2
2.2–0.2
2.2–8.1
2.2–8.1
3.2–0.2
5.2–3.2
1.2
0.2
0.2
2.2
4.2
1.2
PDGlaerniegnahC
7.2–8.1
4.2–6.1
6.2–9.1
8.2–1.2
5.2–9.1
2.2–8.1
2.2–8.1
4.2–0.2
6.2–2.2
3.2–0.2
0.2
0.2
2.2
3.2
1.2
noitcejorprebmetpeS
8.5–7.4
3.5–5.4
0.5–5.4
9.4–3.4
0.5
0.5–8.4
0.5–6.4
8.4–6.4
8.4–6.4
0.5
9.4
7.4
7.4
7.4
0.5
etartnemyolpmenU
8.5–7.4
3.5–6.4
0.5–5.4
0.5–5.4
2.5–9.4
2.5–9.4
0.5–7.4
9.4–7.4
9.4–7.4
1.5–0.5
9.4
8.4
8.4
8.4
0.5
noitcejorprebmetpeS
0.2
1.2–7.1
0.2–7.1
1.2–2.1
5.0–3.0
0.2
0.2–9.1
0.2–8.1
7.1–2.1
4.0
0.2
0.2
9.1
6.1
4.0
noitaflniECP
0.2
1.2–8.1
2.2–7.1
4.2–5.1
0.1–3.0
0.2
0.2
0.2–8.1
8.1–5.1
5.0–3.0
0.2
0.2
9.1
7.1
4.0
noitcejorprebmetpeS
1.2–7.1
0.2–6.1
1.2–4.1
4.1–2.1
0.2–9.1
0.2–7.1
7.1–5.1
3.1
0.2
9.1
6.1
3.1
4noitaflniECPeroC
1.2–8.1
2.2–7.1
4.2–5.1
7.1–2.1
0.2–9.1
0.2–8.1
8.1–5.1
4.1–3.1
0.2
9.1
7.1
4.1
noitcejorprebmetpeS
detcejorP:omeM
htapycilopetairporppa
0.4–0.3
9.3–1.2
4.3–9.1
1.2–9.0
4.0–1.0
5.3–3.3
5.3–9.2
0.3–9.1
4.1–9.0
4.0
5.3
3.3
4.2
4.1
4.0
etarsdnuflaredeF
0.4–0.3
9.3–9.2
9.3–0.1
9.2–1.0-
9.0–1.0-
8.3–3.3
6.3–0.3
4.3–1.2
1.2–1.1
6.0–1.0
5.3
4.3
6.2
4.1
4.0
noitcejorprebmetpeS
suoiverp
eht
fo
retrauq
htruof
eht
morf
segnahc
tnecrep
era
noitaflni
fo
serusaem
htob
rof
snoitcejorp
dna
)PDG(
tcudorp
citsemod
ssorg
laer
ni
egnahc
fo
snoitcejorP
:etoN
noitpmusnoclanosreprofxedniecirpeht,ylevitcepser
,niegnahcfosetaregatnecrepehteranoitaflniECPerocdnanoitaflniECP
.detacidniraeyehtforetrauqhtruofehtotraey
htruof
eht
ni
etar
tnemyolpmenu
nailivic
egareva
eht
rof
era
etar
tnemyolpmenu
eht
rof
snoitcejorP
.ygrene
dna
doof
gnidulcxe
ECP
rof
xedni
ecirp
eht
dna
)ECP(
serutidnepxe
s’tnapicitraphcaetneserpersnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.ycilopyratenometairporppafotnemssessarehrosihnodesaberasnoitcejorps’tnapicitraphcaE
.detacidniraeyehtforetrauq
snoitcejorpehT
.ymonoceehtotskcohsrehtruffoecnesbaehtnidnaycilopyratenometairporpparednuegrevnocotdetcepxeebdluowelbairavhcaehcihwotetarehtfotnemssessa
sdnuflaredefehtrofleveltegratetairporppadetcejorpehtroetarsdnuflaredefehtrofegnartegratetairporppadetcejorpehtfotniopdimehtfoeulavehteraetarsdnuflaredefehtrof eettimmoCtekraMnepOlaredeFehtfogniteemehthtiwnoitcnujnocniedamerewsnoitcejorprebmetpeSehT
.nurregnolehtrevororaeyradnelacdefiicepsehtfodneehttaetar
.5102,71–61rebmetpeSno
eht
si
naidem
eht
,neve
si
snoitcejorp
fo
rebmun
eht
nehW
.tsehgih
ot
tsewol
morf
degnarra
era
snoitcejorp
eht
nehw
noitcejorp
elddim
eht
si
naidem
eht
,doirep
hcae
roF
.1
.snoitcejorpelddimowtehtfoegareva
.raeyhcaenielbairavhcaerofsnoitcejorptsewoleerhtdnatsehgiheerhtehtsedulcxeycnednetlartnecehT
.2
.raeytahtnielbairavtahtrof,tsehgihottsewolmorf,snoitcejorp’stnapicitrapllasedulcniraeyneviganielbairavarofegnarehT
.3
.detcelloctoneranoitaflniECPerocrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.4
_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________

--- Page 14 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _15_–_1_6_,_ 2_0_1_5____________P_a_g_e_ _3
Figure1. Medians,centraltendencies,andrangesofeconomicprojections,2015–18andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections 4
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections 3
2
Actual 1
+
0
-
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesofthevariablesare
annual.

--- Page 15 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure2. FOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy: Midpointoftargetrangeortargetlevelfor
thefederalfundsrate
Percent
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
2015 2016 2017 2018 Longer run
Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual par-
ticipant’sjudgmentofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfundsrateortheappropriatetarget
levelforthefederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun.

--- Page 16 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _15_–_1_6_,_ 2_0_1_5____________P_a_g_e_ _5
late October, as adding support to economic growth in over the projection period and to be at or very close to
the near term. Very few participants changed their fore- 2 percent by 2018. Factors cited by participants as con-
casts for real GDP growth in the longer run, resulting in tributing to their outlook that inflation will rise over the
an unchanged median. medium term included recent signs of a pickup in wage
growth, their expectation of tighter resource utilization,
All participants projected that the unemployment rate
their expectation that the effects of recent appreciation
would be at or below their individual judgments of its
in the dollar and declines in oil prices on inflation will
longer-run normal level from 2016 through 2018. Com-
fade, their anticipation that inflation expectations will re-
pared with the September SEP, most participants’ pro-
main at levels consistent with the FOMC’s longer-run
jected paths for the unemployment rate were revised
objective, and still-accommodative monetary policy.
down a little over those three years, with the median of
the projections in the fourth quarter of each year at Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri-
4.7 percent. Many also revised down slightly their esti- bution of participants’ views about the outlook for infla-
mates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment, tion. The distribution of participants’ projections for
although the median forecast of 4.9 percent was un- PCE price inflation in 2016 and 2017 shifted to the left
changed since September. Participants generally cited compared with the September SEP, while the distribu-
stronger-than-expected labor market data in recent tions of projections for 2018 and in the longer run were
months as a factor explaining the downward revisions to little changed. The distributions of projections for core
their unemployment rate forecasts. PCE price inflation moved lower for 2016 and 2017
compared with September but did not change for 2018.
Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distribution of partici-
pants’ views regarding the likely outcomes for real GDP Appropriate Monetary Policy
growth and the unemployment rate through 2018 and in Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’
the longer run. The distributions of the projections for judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target
real GDP growth over the next several years and in the federal funds rate at the end of each calendar year from
longer run narrowed some since the September SEP. 2015 to 2018 and over the longer run. Relative to Sep-
The diversity of views across participants on the outlook tember, the projections of the appropriate levels of the
for GDP growth reflected, in part, differences in their federal funds rate over the next three years generally
individual assessments of the size and persistence of the shifted to lower values. The median projection for next
effects of lower energy prices and a stronger dollar on year was unchanged, but the medians for 2017 and 2018
real activity; the time it would take for the headwinds declined slightly. The median projection now stands at
that have been restraining the pace of the economic ex- 1.4 percent at the end of 2016, 2.4 percent at the end of
pansion, such as financial and economic conditions 2017, and 3.3 percent at the end of 2018. Given their
abroad, to dissipate; and the appropriate path of mone- expectations that economic headwinds will persist and
tary policy. With regard to the unemployment rate, the that inflation will rise gradually to 2 percent over the next
distributions of projections over the next three years three years, most participants judged that it would be ap-
shifted modestly to lower values since September. propriate for the federal funds rate to remain below its
longer-run normal level from 2016 to 2018. Participants
The Outlook for Inflation
projected that a gradual rise in the federal funds rate over
Nearly all participants saw PCE price inflation picking
that period would be appropriate as some of those head-
up in 2016, rising further in 2017, and then reaching a
winds, such as sluggish foreign economic growth, dimin-
rate in 2018 at or very close to the Committee’s 2 percent
ish and the temporary factors holding down inflation
longer-run objective. However, relative to the Septem-
dissipate. Some participants noted that a gradual in-
ber SEP, almost all participants marked down their pro-
crease in the federal funds rate would be consistent with
jections for PCE price inflation in 2016, observing that
their expectation that the neutral short-term real interest
recent declines in energy prices and the continued
rate will rise slowly over the next few years.
strength in the dollar could exert additional downward
pressure on inflation in the near term. Revisions to par- Both the median and the range of participants’ projec-
ticipants’ inflation forecasts in 2017 were more mixed, tions of the federal funds rate in the longer run, at
while the projections for inflation in 2018 were little 3.5 percent and 3 to 4 percent, respectively, were un-
changed. Most participants also marked down their pro- changed since September. However, several participants
jections for core PCE price inflation in 2016, although revised their projections for the longer-run federal funds
almost all still expected core inflation to rise gradually rate slightly lower. All participants judged that inflation

--- Page 17 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2015–18andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2015
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 18 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _15_–_1_6_,_ 2_0_1_5____________P_a_g_e_ _7
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2015–18andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2015
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8
4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8
4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8
4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8
4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8
4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 19 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2015–18andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2015
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _15_–_1_6_,_ 2_0_1_5____________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2015–18
Number of participants
2015
December projections 18
September projections
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’judgmentsofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfunds
rateortheappropriatetargetlevelforthefederalfundsrate,2015–18andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2015
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
−0. 3 7 −0. 1 2 0.1 3 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8
−0.13 0.12 0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
−0. 3 7 −0. 1 2 0.1 3 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8
−0.13 0.12 0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
−0. 3 7 −0. 1 2 0.1 3 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8
−0.13 0.12 0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
−0. 3 7 −0. 1 2 0.1 3 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8
−0.13 0.12 0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
−0. 3 7 −0. 1 2 0.1 3 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8
−0.13 0.12 0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Note: Themidpointsofthetargetrangesforthefederalfundsrateandthetargetlevelsforthefederalfundsrate
aremeasuredattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun.

--- Page 22 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _15_–_1_6_,_ 2_0_1_5___________P__ag_e_ _1_1
in the longer run would be equal to the Committee’s ob- Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
jective of 2 percent, implying that their individual judg- Percentage points
Variable 2015 2016 2017 2018
ments regarding the appropriate longer-run level of the
real federal funds rate, in the absence of further shocks Change in real GDP1 . . . . . ±0.9 ±1.8 ±2.1 ±2.1
to the economy, ranged from 1 to 2 percent, the same as Unemployment rate1 . . . . . ±0.1 ±0.8 ±1.4 ±1.8
in September.
Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.2 ±1.0 ±1.0 ±1.0
Participants’ views of the appropriate path for monetary NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root mean
squared error of projections for 1995 through 2014 that were released in the
policy were informed by their judgments about the state
winter by various private and government forecasters. As described in the
of the economy and the outlook for labor markets and box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a
inflation. One important consideration for many partic- 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment,
and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of projec-
ipants was their estimate of the extent of slack remaining
tion errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider
in the labor market, as informed by the incoming data and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook
on various labor market indicators. Another was pro- from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Se-
ries 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys-
spects for inflation to return to the Committee’s objec-
tem, November), available at www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds
tive of 2 percent; in making such assessments, partici- /2007/200760/200760abs.html; and Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, Division of Research and Statistics (2014), “Updated His-
pants considered a range of factors, including measures
torical Forecast Errors,” memorandum, April 9, www.federalre-
of inflation compensation and longer-run inflation ex- serve.gov/foia/files/20140409-historical-forecast-errors.pdf.
pectations as well as the likely persistence and size of the 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that
effects from low energy prices and the strong dollar.
has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts.
Participants also emphasized the potential for interna- Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the
tional developments to continue to have important im- fourth quarter of the year indicated.
plications for domestic economic activity and inflation
weighted to the upside fell appreciably since September.
and thus for appropriate monetary policy. Several par-
Diminished risks to domestic economic activity from
ticipants discussed potential interactions between policy
developments abroad and the strength of recent labor
normalization and risks to financial stability. In addition,
market data were among the reasons noted for the more
given the continued proximity of short-term interest
upbeat assessment of risks.
rates to their effective lower bound, asymmetric risks
around the outlook for employment and inflation were As in the September SEP, participants generally agreed
noted as one reason why a gradual approach to raising that the levels of uncertainty associated with their infla-
the federal funds rate may be appropriate. tion forecasts were broadly similar to the average level
over the past 20 years. The number of participants who
Uncertainty and Risks
viewed the risks to their inflation forecasts as weighted
As in the September SEP, nearly all participants contin-
to the downside declined slightly since September, and a
ued to judge the levels of uncertainty around their pro-
majority now viewed the risks to both PCE and core
jections for real GDP growth and the unemployment
PCE inflation as broadly balanced. Among those who
rate as broadly similar to the average level of the past
saw risks to inflation as tilted to the downside, several
20 years (figure 4).2 Most participants saw the risks to
highlighted the continued strength of the dollar and
their outlooks for real GDP growth and unemployment
some recent indications that inflation expectations had
as broadly balanced, as the number of participants who
declined as contributing to their perception of those
viewed the risks to economic growth as weighted to the
risks.
downside and the risks to the unemployment rate as
2 Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for the discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con- economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess
sumer price inflation over the period from 1995 through 2014. the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projec-
At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” tions.

--- Page 23 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4. Uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth Risks to GDP growth
December projections December projections
18 18
September projections September projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation Risks to PCE inflation
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation Risks to core PCE inflation
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”Defini-
tionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 24 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _15_–_1_6_,_ 2_0_1_5___________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the current year, 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the second
members of the Board of Governors and the year, and 0.9 to 5.1 percent in the third and
presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform fourth years. The corresponding 70 percent
discussions of monetary policy among policy- confidence intervals for overall inflation would
makers and can aid public understanding of the be 1.8 to 2.2 percent in the current year, and
basis for policy actions. Considerable uncer- 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second, third, and fourth
tainty attends these projections, however. The years.
economic and statistical models and relation- Because current conditions may differ from
ships used to help produce economic forecasts those that prevailed, on average, over history,
are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the participants provide judgments as to whether
real world, and the future path of the economy the uncertainty attached to their projections of
can be affected by myriad unforeseen develop- each variable is greater than, smaller than, or
ments and events. Thus, in setting the stance broadly similar to typical levels of forecast un-
of monetary policy, participants consider not certainty in the past, as shown in table 2. Partic-
only what appears to be the most likely eco- ipants also provide judgments as to whether the
nomic outcome as embodied in their projec- risks to their projections are weighted to the up-
tions, but also the range of alternative possibil- side, are weighted to the downside, or are
ities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the broadly balanced. That is, participants judge
potential costs to the economy should they oc- whether each variable is more likely to be above
cur. or below their projections of the most likely out-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical come. These judgments about the uncertainty
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including and the risks attending each participant’s projec-
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports tions are distinct from the diversity of partici-
and those prepared by the Federal Reserve pants’ views about the most likely outcomes.
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Forecast uncertainty is concerned with the risks
Federal Open Market Committee. The projec- associated with a particular projection rather
tion error ranges shown in the table illustrate than with divergences across a number of differ-
the considerable uncertainty associated with ent projections.
economic forecasts. For example, suppose a As with real activity and inflation, the out-
participant projects that real gross domestic look for the future path of the federal funds rate
product (GDP) and total consumer prices will is subject to considerable uncertainty. This un-
rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, certainty arises primarily because each partici-
3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- pant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of
tending those projections is similar to that ex- monetary policy depends importantly on the
perienced in the past and the risks around the evolution of real activity and inflation over time.
projections are broadly balanced, the numbers If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected
reported in table 2 would imply a probability of manner, then assessments of the appropriate
about 70 percent that actual GDP would ex- setting of the federal funds rate would change
pand within a range of 2.1 to 3.9 percent in the from that point forward.

# Tables

## Page_13_Table_1


|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                             |
|------------------|------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                             |
|                  | 6102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                             |
|                  | 5102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                             |
| 2ycnednetlartneC | regnoL
nur | 2.2–8.1 2.2–8.1 0.5–8.4 2.5–9.4
0.2 0.2
2.2–8.1 2.2–8.1 0.5–6.4 0.5–7.4 0.2–9.1 0.2–9.1 0.2–9.1
0.2
3.2–0.2 4.2–0.2 8.4–6.4 9.4–7.4 0.2–8.1 0.2–8.1 0.2–7.1 0.2–8.1
5.2–3.2 6.2–2.2 8.4–6.4 9.4–7.4 7.1–2.1 8.1–5.1 7.1–5.1 8.1–5.1
3.2–0.2 1.5–0.5 5.0–3.0 4.1–3.1
1.2 0.5 4.0 3.1 | 5.3–3.3 8.3–3.3
5.3–9.2 6.3–0.3
0.3–9.1 4.3–1.2
4.1–9.0 1.2–1.1
6.0–1.0
4.0 |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                             |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                             |
|                  | 6102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                             |
|                  | 5102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                             |
| 1naideM          | regnoL
nur | 0.2 0.2 9.4 9.4 0.2 0.2
0.2 0.2 7.4 8.4 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
2.2 2.2 7.4 8.4 9.1 9.1 9.1 9.1
4.2 3.2 7.4 8.4 6.1 7.1 6.1 7.1
1.2 1.2 0.5 0.5 4.0 4.0 3.1 4.1                                                                                                                             | 5.3 5.3
3.3 4.3
4.2 6.2
4.1 4.1
4.0 4.0                                     |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                             |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                             |
|                  | 6102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                             |
|                  | 5102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                             |