# 20150917_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:37:55*
*Pages: 25, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
September 16–17, 2015
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Robert deV. Frierson, Secretary of the Board, Office of
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of the Secretary, Board of Governors
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Wednesday, September 16, Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking
2015, at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Thursday, Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors
September 17, 2015, at 8:30 a.m.
Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability
PRESENT:
Policy and Research, Board of Governors
Janet L. Yellen, Chair
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman James A. Clouse and Stephen A. Meyer, Deputy
Lael Brainard Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Charles L. Evans Governors
Stanley Fischer
Jeffrey M. Lacker William B. English, Senior Special Adviser to the
Dennis P. Lockhart Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
Jerome H. Powell Governors
Daniel K. Tarullo
John C. Williams David Bowman, Andrew Figura, David Reifschneider,
and Stacey Tevlin, Special Advisers to the Board,
James Bullard, Esther L. George, Loretta J. Mester, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Eric Rosengren, and Michael Strine, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office
of Board Members, Board of Governors
Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Narayana
Kocherlakota, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, Board Members, Board of Governors
respectively
Christopher J. Erceg, Senior Associate Director,
Brian F. Madigan, Secretary Division of International Finance, Board of
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Governors; David E. Lebow and Michael G.
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Palumbo, Senior Associate Directors, Division of
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel
Steven B. Kamin, Economist Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers,
Thomas Laubach, Economist Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
David W. Wilcox, Economist
John J. Stevens, Deputy Associate Director, Division of
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy, Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
William R. Nelson, Daniel G. Sullivan, William
Wascher, and John A. Weinberg, Associate Stephanie R. Aaronson, Assistant Director, Division of
Economists Research and Statistics, Board of Governors;
Francisco Covas and Elizabeth Klee, Assistant
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open
Market Account Eric C. Engstrom, Adviser, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Penelope A. Beattie,¹ Assistant to the Secretary, Office reverse repurchase agreement operations at the end of
of the Secretary, Board of Governors the third quarter.
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
Katie Ross,¹ Manager, Office of the Secretary, Board of
domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.
Governors
There were no intervention operations in foreign curren-
cies for the System’s account over the intermeeting pe-
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of
riod.
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
System Open Market Account Reinvestment Policy
Elmar Mertens, Senior Economist, Division of A staff briefing provided background on the macroeco-
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors nomic effects of alternative approaches to ceasing rein-
vestments of principal on securities held in the SOMA
Randall A. Williams, Information Management Analyst, after the Committee begins to normalize the stance of
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors policy by increasing the target range for the federal funds
rate. The briefing presented analysis that was based on
Gregory L. Stefani, First Vice President, Federal an assumption that the cessation of reinvestments, once
Reserve Bank of Cleveland implemented, would be permanent. The briefing sug-
gested that if economic conditions evolved in line with a
Alberto G. Musalem, Executive Vice President, Federal modal outlook, differences in macroeconomic outcomes
Reserve Bank of New York would be minor across approaches that ceased reinvest-
ments soon after initial policy firming or continued rein-
Mary Daly, Troy Davig, Evan F. Koenig, Paolo A. Pe- vestments until certain levels of the federal funds rate,
senti, Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl, Ellis W. Tallman, such as 1 percent or 2 percent, were reached. As a result,
and Christopher J. Waller, Senior Vice Presidents, the appropriate path of the federal funds rate would be
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Kansas only modestly affected. However, if substantial adverse
City, Dallas, New York, Minneapolis, Cleveland, shocks occurred, continuing reinvestment until normal-
and St. Louis, respectively ization of the level of the federal funds rate was well un-
der way could help avoid situations that would warrant
Giovanni Olivei, Keith Sill, and Douglas Tillett, Vice a larger reduction in the federal funds rate than perhaps
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Phil- could be accomplished given the constraint posed by the
adelphia, and Chicago, respectively effective lower bound to nominal interest rates.
________________
In the ensuing discussion, participants considered the
¹ Attended Wednesday’s session only.
advantages and disadvantages of alternative approaches
to reinvestment. Participants referred to the Commit-
tee’s statement on Policy Normalization Principles and
Plans, which indicates that the timing of the cessation or
Developments in Financial Markets, Open Market
phasing out of reinvestments will depend on how eco-
Operations, and Policy Normalization
nomic and financial conditions and the economic out-
The manager of the System Open Market Account
look evolve. Several participants emphasized that con-
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and for-
tinuing reinvestments for some time after the initial pol-
eign financial markets. The deputy manager followed
icy firming could help manage potential risks, particu-
with a briefing on money market developments and Sys-
larly by reducing the probability that the federal funds
tem open market operations conducted by the Open
rate might return to the effective lower bound. Some
Market Desk during the period since the Federal Open
participants expressed a view that, in contrast to the as-
Market Committee (FOMC) met on July 28–29. Daily
sumption in the staff analysis, the Committee could
take-up in the Desk’s overnight reverse repurchase
choose to resume reinvestments if macroeconomic con-
agreement operations declined somewhat, apart from
ditions warranted. At the same time, it was also high-
month-ends, likely reflecting some increase in money
lighted that a larger balance sheet could entail costs, and
market interest rates. The deputy manager also dis-
that the Principles and Plans indicate that, in the longer
cussed recent test operations of the Term Deposit Facil-
run, the SOMA portfolio should be no larger than nec-
ity and updated the Committee on plans for tests of term

--- Page 3 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ _M_e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_6_-_1_7_, _2_01_5_______________________P_a_g_e_ _3
essary to conduct monetary policy efficiently and effec- the recent decline in stock market prices, but it remained
tively. The Committee made no decisions regarding its above its year-earlier level.
strategy for ceasing or phasing out reinvestments at this
Activity in the housing sector remained on a gradual up-
meeting.
ward trend. Starts of new single-family homes rose fur-
Staff Review of the Economic Situation ther early in the third quarter and were slightly above the
The information reviewed for the September 16–17 pace of permit issuance. In the multifamily sector, starts
meeting suggested that real gross domestic product fell back after having been temporarily elevated in June.
(GDP) was expanding at a moderate pace in the third Sales of new and existing homes both increased in July.
quarter. Labor market conditions continued to improve,
Real private expenditures for business equipment and in-
but labor compensation gains were modest. Consumer
tellectual property products appeared to be rising mod-
price inflation remained below the Committee’s longer-
erately. Nominal shipments of nondefense capital goods
run objective of 2 percent and was restrained by further
excluding aircraft increased in July, and orders for non-
declines in energy prices and non-energy import prices.
defense capital goods pointed to modest gains in ship-
Survey measures of longer-run inflation expectations re-
ments in the coming months, consistent with recent
mained stable, while market-based measures of inflation
readings from surveys of business conditions. Real
compensation moved lower.
spending for nonresidential structures excluding drilling
Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded at a solid and mining increased sharply in the second quarter, and
pace in July and August. The unemployment rate stayed nominal business expenditures for such structures rose
at 5.3 percent in July but fell to 5.1 percent in August. further in July. In contrast, real business spending for
With the labor force participation rate unchanged over drilling and mining structures fell steeply in the second
this period, the employment-to-population ratio edged quarter. Available indicators of drilling activity, such as
up. The share of workers employed part time for eco- counts of rigs in operation, suggested spending would
nomic reasons remained elevated. The rate of private- decline less rapidly in the third quarter.
sector job openings increased in July and was at a high
Total real government purchases appeared to be declin-
level, while the rates of hiring and quits were little
ing slightly in the third quarter. Federal government pur-
changed.
chases likely decreased, as defense spending moved
Industrial production increased, on balance, during July down further through August. State and local govern-
and August. Manufacturing production fell in August ment purchases seemed to be increasing, on balance, as
primarily because of a large drop in the output of motor the payrolls of these governments expanded at a faster
vehicles and parts that reversed a substantial portion of pace in July and August than in the second quarter, while
its jump in July. Automakers scheduled further declines their nominal construction expenditures edged down in
in assemblies over the remainder of the year, and July after a large gain in the second quarter.
broader indicators of manufacturing production, includ-
The U.S. international trade deficit widened in June be-
ing readings on new orders from national and regional
fore narrowing substantially in July. Exports rose in July,
manufacturing surveys, generally suggested that factory
supported by increased shipments of non-aircraft capital
output would be little changed over that period. Mining
goods and automobiles, but remained subdued. In con-
output moved up, on net, in July and August after a steep
trast, imports declined in July, reversing a June increase,
decline in the second quarter.
as imports of consumer goods fell back.
Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) ap-
Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE
peared to be rising at a moderate pace in the third quar-
price index, edged up over the 12 months ending in July,
ter. The components of the nominal retail sales data
restrained importantly by declines in energy prices. Core
used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis to construct
PCE prices, which exclude food and energy prices, in-
its estimates of PCE increased at a strong rate in July and
creased 1¼ percent over the same period, with the in-
August, and sales of light motor vehicles moved up in
crease damped in part by declines in the prices of non-
both months. Household spending was supported by
energy imports. Over the 12 months ending in August,
moderate growth in real disposable income in July and a
total consumer prices as measured by the consumer
wealth-to-income ratio that remained high even after re-
price index (CPI) edged up, while the core CPI increased
cent declines in equity values. Consumer sentiment in
1¾ percent. Measures of expected longer-run inflation
the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers de-
from a variety of surveys, including the Michigan survey,
creased in early September, reportedly in part because of

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
the Survey of Professional Forecasters, and the Desk’s Over the intermeeting period, the concerns about global
Survey of Primary Dealers, remained stable. However, economic growth and turbulence in financial markets led
market-based measures of inflation compensation fell to to greater uncertainty among market participants about
near their historical lows, reportedly in response to the the likely timing of the start of the normalization of the
recent appreciation of the dollar, the decline in oil prices, stance of U.S. monetary policy. Based on federal funds
and readings on realized inflation that were slightly be- futures, the probability of a first increase in the target
low market expectations. range for the federal funds rate at the September meet-
ing fell slightly; the probabilities attached to subsequent
Measures of labor compensation rose faster than con-
meetings through January 2016 were generally little
sumer prices over the past year, but the modest increases
changed and rose for meetings later that year. Similarly,
in compensation were similar to those seen in recent
results from the Desk’s September Survey of Primary
years. Over the four quarters ending in the second quar-
Dealers and Survey of Market Participants indicated
ter, the employment cost index increased nearly 2 per-
that, on average, respondents pushed out their expected
cent and compensation per hour in the nonfarm busi-
timing of the first increase in the target range for the fed-
ness sector rose 2¼ percent. Over the 12 months end-
eral funds rate. Regarding the most likely meeting date
ing in August, average hourly earnings for all employees
for the first rate increase, survey respondents were about
increased 2¼ percent.
evenly split between September and December. Data on
Foreign economic growth remained weak in the second overnight index swap rates indicated that investors
quarter, held back by contractions in real GDP in Can- marked down the expected path of the federal funds
ada, Japan, Brazil, and Taiwan, even as activity continued rate, on balance, over the intermeeting period.
to expand at a moderate pace in the euro area and the
Despite the decline in global equity markets and the
United Kingdom. Indicators for the third quarter
downward shift in the expected path of the federal funds
pointed to a slight pickup in the pace of foreign growth,
rate, yields on nominal Treasury securities moved up
particularly as recent data for Canada suggested that
modestly, with some market participants citing pur-
some of the first-half weakness there was dissipating.
ported sales of Treasury securities by foreign govern-
However, recent indicators for some other countries,
ment authorities to finance foreign exchange market in-
most notably China, were subdued. Inflation rates con-
tervention as a factor that likely put upward pressure on
tinued to be quite low in the advanced foreign econo-
Treasury yields. Measures of inflation compensation
mies, and market-based measures of inflation compen-
based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities fell to
sation had recently moved down in the euro area and
near their historical lows.
Japan. In contrast, inflation in the emerging market
economies had risen in recent months as a result of Broad U.S. equity price indexes were highly correlated
higher food prices and widespread currency deprecia- with foreign equity indexes over the intermeeting period
tion. and posted net declines. Although concerns about
global economic growth likely contributed to the de-
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
clines in domestic equity prices, investors may also have
Although U.S. economic data releases generally met
reassessed valuations and risk in equity markets. Do-
market expectations, domestic financial conditions tight-
mestic equity indexes were quite volatile in late August
ened modestly as concerns about prospects for global
and early September, and one-month-ahead option-
economic growth, centered on China, prompted an in-
implied volatility on the S&P 500 index reached levels
crease in financial market volatility and a deterioration in
last seen in 2011. Spreads on 10-year triple-B-rated and
risk sentiment during the intermeeting period. Stock
speculative-grade corporate bonds over comparable-
market indexes in most advanced and emerging market
maturity Treasury securities widened slightly over the in-
economies ended the period sharply lower. Tighter fi-
termeeting period.
nancial market conditions and greater volatility contrib-
uted to a reduction of the odds that market participants Financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses tight-
appeared to place on the first increase in the federal ened modestly over the summer. Corporate bond and
funds rate occurring at the September FOMC meeting institutional leveraged loan issuance remained solid
and to a flatter expected path for the policy rate thereaf- through July but moderated in August. The growth of
ter. Nevertheless, yields on short- and longer-term nom- commercial and industrial loans on banks’ books slowed
inal Treasury securities were modestly higher than when in July and August; the deceleration was concentrated in
the Committee met in July.

--- Page 5 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ _M_e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_6_-_1_7_, _2_01_5_______________________P_a_g_e_ _5
banks with greater exposures to oil and gas firms. Fi- generally stronger than expected, but equity prices de-
nancing for commercial real estate (CRE) remained clined, the foreign exchange value of the dollar appreci-
broadly available, with CRE loans on banks’ books ex- ated further, and indicators of foreign economic growth
panding and issuance of commercial mortgage-backed were generally weak. The staff left its forecast for real
securities (CMBS) staying robust. However, spreads on GDP growth over the second half of the year little
investment-grade CMBS widened noticeably in August, changed but lowered its projection for economic growth
reportedly a result of heavy issuance as well as the in- over the next several years. The staff also further
creased volatility in broader financial markets. trimmed its assumptions for the rates of increase in
productivity and potential output over the medium term.
Conditions in the market for residential mortgages con-
On net, the level of GDP was anticipated to rise above
tinued to improve slowly, with interest rates on 30-year
its potential next year, and that gap was projected to
fixed-rate mortgages declining slightly. Bank holdings of
widen gradually over the medium term. The unemploy-
closed-end residential loans increased modestly, and the
ment rate was projected to run a little below the staff’s
Mortgage Bankers Association’s index of mortgage
estimate of its longer-run natural rate over this period.
credit availability edged up further. However, credit
availability for borrowers with low credit scores, hard- The staff projected that consumer price inflation would
to-document income, or high debt-to-income ratios re- move down over the near term by more than in the pre-
mained tight. vious projection. Crude oil prices declined further over
the intermeeting period and were expected to result in
Financing conditions in consumer credit markets re-
lower consumer energy prices, and the effects of recent
mained generally accommodative, and the performance
dollar appreciation and lower commodity prices were
of outstanding consumer loans was largely stable. Credit
anticipated to push down non-oil import prices. With
card balances expanded amid gradually easing lending
energy prices and non-oil import prices expected to
standards, and student and auto loans continued to be
begin to increase steadily next year, the staff projected
broadly available, even to borrowers with subprime
that inflation would rise gradually over the next several
credit scores. Delinquency rates on credit card loans and
years but would still be slightly below the Committee’s
auto loans stayed low through the second quarter, while
longer-run objective of 2 percent at the end of 2018. In-
delinquency rates on student loans remained elevated.
flation was anticipated to move up to 2 percent thereaf-
The exchange value of the U.S. dollar rose notably over ter, with inflation expectations in the longer run assumed
the period against the currencies of most major U.S. to be consistent with the Committee’s objective and
trading partners. While the dollar depreciated against slack in labor and product markets projected to have
the euro and the yen, it appreciated against the Canadian waned.
dollar. The dollar also strongly appreciated against the
The staff viewed the uncertainty around its September
currencies of most emerging market economies, as most
projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment
Asian currencies weakened against the dollar following a
rate, and inflation as similar to the average of the past
depreciation of the Chinese renminbi, and as the curren-
20 years. The risks to the forecast for real GDP and
cies of commodity exporters fell along with declining
inflation were seen as tilted to the downside, reflecting
commodity prices. Sovereign yields in the advanced for-
the staff’s assessment that neither monetary nor fiscal
eign economies ended the period roughly unchanged.
policy was well positioned to help the economy with-
Changes in peripheral euro-area sovereign yield spreads
stand substantial adverse shocks. Consistent with this
were mixed, with Greek sovereign spreads narrowing
downside risk to aggregate demand and with the further
significantly over the period as Greece and the euro area
adjustments to the staff’s supply-side assumptions, the
finalized Greece’s third bailout package. In contrast,
staff viewed the risks to its outlook for the unemploy-
falling commodity prices and concerns about the pace of
ment rate as tilted to the upside.
global growth contributed to capital outflows and gen-
erally wider spreads on dollar-denominated debt in Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
emerging Asia and Latin America. Economic Outlook
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of
Staff Economic Outlook
the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank pres-
The U.S. economic forecast prepared by the staff for the
idents submitted their projections of the most likely out-
September FOMC meeting was a little weaker, on bal-
comes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, in-
ance, than the one prepared for the July FOMC meeting.
flation, and the federal funds rate for each year from
Recent information on real U.S. economic activity was

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
2015 through 2018 and over the longer run, conditional Consumer spending was rising at a solid rate after a
on each participant’s judgment of appropriate monetary modest increase in the first quarter. Participants noted
policy. The longer-run projections represent each par- that ongoing gains in employment and real income were
ticipant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable providing support for the rise in spending, and this sup-
would be expected to converge, over time, under appro- port was expected to continue going forward. House-
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further hold credit performance was also favorable, with delin-
shocks to the economy. These projections and policy quency rates on credit cards and auto loans low. The
assessments are described in the Summary of Economic available reports from District contacts in the retail and
Projections, which is an addendum to these minutes. auto industries confirmed the recent solid gains in con-
sumer spending. Contacts were generally optimistic
In their discussion of the economic situation and the
about the outlook, although retail sales appeared to be
outlook, meeting participants viewed the information re-
softening in a few areas where economic activity was ad-
ceived over the intermeeting period as indicating that
versely affected by declines in the energy sector and the
economic activity was expanding moderately. Although
increase in the foreign exchange value of the dollar.
net exports remained soft, household spending and busi-
ness fixed investment were increasing moderately, and Housing activity was improving, with sales and new con-
the housing sector recovered further. The labor market struction trending higher. Solid gains in employment
continued to improve, with solid job gains and declining and favorable mortgage rates were anticipated to con-
unemployment, and labor market indicators showed that tinue to underpin the recovery in housing. Contacts in
underutilization of labor resources had diminished since a number of Districts were upbeat about prospects for
early in the year. the sector, citing strengthening sales, rising home prices,
an upturn in household formations, and reports that
Growth in real GDP over the first half of the year was
buyers had accelerated purchases in anticipation of the
stronger than participants expected when they prepared
possibility that mortgage rates might move higher in the
their June forecasts, and the unemployment rate de-
near term. Multifamily construction was particularly
clined somewhat more than anticipated. Participants
strong in a couple of Districts, but in another a shortage
made only small adjustments to their projections for
of lots was constraining builders’ ability to meet strong
economic activity over the medium term. They contin-
demand for new single-family homes.
ued to anticipate that, with appropriate policy accommo-
dation, the pace of expansion of real activity would re- The information on business spending from District
main somewhat above its longer-run rate over the next contacts was mixed. Nonresidential construction was
two years and lead to further improvement in labor mar- reported to be expanding in a number of regions. In
ket conditions. Most continued to see the risks to real manufacturing, the auto industry remained a bright spot,
activity and unemployment as nearly balanced, but many but the appreciation of the dollar was still restraining
acknowledged that recent global economic and financial production of goods for export. Optimism remained
developments may have increased the downside risks to relatively high according to some District contacts, al-
economic activity somewhat. though a few regional activity surveys noted some cau-
tion related to uncertainty about recent economic devel-
Inflation continued to run below the Committee’s
opments abroad. The weakness in commodity prices
longer-run objective, partly reflecting declines in energy
and the appreciation of the dollar also continued to
prices and in prices of non-energy imports. Market-
weigh on activity in the energy and agricultural sectors.
based measures of inflation compensation moved lower;
Moreover, the outlook for the energy sector appeared to
survey measures of longer-term inflation expectations
be worsening. The substantial global supply of crude oil
remained stable. Participants anticipated that recent
seemed likely to maintain downward pressure on energy
global developments would likely put further downward
prices for some time, leading to a deterioration in credit
pressure on inflation in the near term; compared with
conditions for some U.S. producers and a further reduc-
their previous forecasts, more now saw the risks to in-
tion in their capital outlays.
flation as tilted to the downside. But participants still
expected that, as the labor market continued to improve Participants agreed that labor market conditions had im-
and the transitory effects of declines in energy and non- proved considerably since earlier in the year. Payroll em-
oil import prices dissipated, inflation would rise gradu- ployment had been increasing steadily. Underutilization
ally toward 2 percent over the medium term. of labor resources had diminished along a number of di-
mensions: The unemployment rate had fallen to a level

--- Page 7 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ _M_e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_6_-_1_7_, _2_01_5_______________________P_a_g_e_ _7
close to most participants’ estimates of its longer-run non-energy imports. Still, almost all participants antici-
normal rate, and the numbers of discouraged workers pated that inflation would continue to run below 2 per-
and those employed part time for economic reasons had cent in the near term, particularly in light of the further
moved lower. With the cumulative improvement in la- decline in oil prices and further appreciation of the dollar
bor market conditions, most participants thought that over the intermeeting period. Participants also discussed
the underutilization of labor resources had been sub- various measures of expectations for inflation over the
stantially reduced, and a few of them expressed the view longer run. Surveys continued to show stable longer-run
that underutilization had been eliminated. But some inflation expectations, and most participants continued
others believed that labor market slack in addition to that to anticipate that longer-run inflation expectations
measured by the unemployment rate remained and that would remain well anchored. A few participants ex-
further progress was possible before labor market con- pressed some concern about the decline in market-based
ditions were fully consistent with the Committee’s ob- measures of inflation compensation. However, it was
jective of maximum employment. They pointed out noted that the decline seemed to be related to the further
that, even recognizing the downward trend in labor force drop in oil prices or may importantly reflect shifts in risk
participation, the level of the participation rate, particu- and liquidity premiums, and thus may not signal addi-
larly for prime-age adults, remained depressed; similarly, tional broad and persistent downward price pressures.
the number of workers on part-time schedules for eco-
Participants discussed the potential implications of re-
nomic reasons was still elevated. A number of partici-
cent economic and financial developments abroad for
pants noted that eliminating slack along such broader di-
U.S. economic activity and inflation. A material slow-
mensions might require a temporary decline in the un-
down in economic growth in China and potential ad-
employment rate below its longer-run normal level, and
verse spillovers to other economies were likely to de-
that this development could speed the return of inflation
press U.S. net exports to some extent. In addition, con-
to 2 percent.
cerns associated with developments in China and other
The incoming information on wages and labor compen- emerging market economies had contributed to a further
sation, including an especially low reading on the em- appreciation of the dollar and declines in prices of oil
ployment cost index for the second quarter, showed no and other commodities, which were likely to hold down
broad-based acceleration. To some, the continued sub- U.S. consumer price inflation in the near term. In the
dued trend in wages was evidence of an absence of up- United States, equity prices fell, on balance, amid signif-
ward pressure on inflation from current levels of labor icant volatility, and risk spreads for businesses widened.
utilization. Several others, however, noted that weak Many participants judged that the effects of these devel-
productivity growth and low price inflation might be opments on domestic economic activity were likely to be
contributing to modest wage increases. A number of small, but they acknowledged the risk that they might
participants reported that some of their business con- restrain U.S. economic growth somewhat. In particular,
tacts were experiencing labor shortages in various occu- the appreciation of the dollar since mid-2014 was still a
pations and geographic areas resulting in upward pres- substantial drag on net exports, and the further rise in
sure on wages, with a few indicating that the pickup in the dollar over the intermeeting period could augment
wages had become more widespread. the restraint on U.S. net exports. Some participants
commented that the recent decline in equity prices
Recent readings on headline consumer price inflation re-
needed to be viewed in the context of overall valuation
flected only small increases in core inflation and renewed
levels, which they saw as relatively high, and a couple
weakness in consumer energy prices. As a result, the
noted that volatility had begun to subside.
12-month changes in both the total and core PCE price
indexes for August were expected to still be well below During their discussion of economic conditions and
the Committee’s 2 percent objective. Participants con- monetary policy, participants indicated that they did not
tinued to judge that a significant portion of the shortfall see the changes in asset prices during the intermeeting
was the result of the transitory effects of declines in period as bearing significantly on their policy choice ex-
prices of oil and non-energy commodities. A few par- cept insofar as they affected the outlook for achieving
ticipants pointed out that since January when the steep the Committee’s macroeconomic objectives and the
drop in energy prices ended, core PCE prices had risen risks associated with that outlook. Many of them saw
at an annual rate of 1.7 percent, closer to the Commit- the likely effects of recent developments on the path of
tee’s objective, despite the continued decline in prices of economic activity and inflation as small or transitory.
Most participants continued to anticipate that, based on

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
their assessment of current economic conditions and Committee Policy Action
their outlook for economic activity, the labor market, In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
and inflation, the conditions for policy firming had been ahead, members judged that information received since
met or would likely be met by the end of the year. How- the FOMC met in July indicated that economic activity
ever, some participants judged that the downside risks to was expanding at a moderate pace. Although net ex-
the outlook for economic growth and inflation had in- ports remained soft, economic growth was broadly
creased. In their view, although the time for policy nor- based. Members noted that recent global and financial
malization might be near, it would be appropriate to wait market developments might restrain economic activity
for information, including evidence of further improve- somewhat as a result of the higher level of the dollar and
ment in the labor market, confirming that the outlook possible effects of slower economic growth in China and
for economic growth had not deteriorated significantly in a number of emerging market and commodity-
and that inflation was still on a path to return to 2 per- producing economies. Nevertheless, they still viewed
cent over the medium term. A few mentioned that a the risks to U.S. economic activity as nearly balanced,
pickup in wage increases could bolster their confidence and they continued to expect that, with appropriate pol-
that resource utilization had tightened sufficiently to icy accommodation, economic activity would most likely
help move inflation toward the Committee’s objective, continue to expand at a moderate pace.
but they did not view an acceleration in wages as a nec-
Members agreed that labor market conditions had im-
essary condition for gaining such confidence.
proved considerably since earlier in the year, with ongo-
Participants weighed a number of risks associated with ing solid gains in payroll employment and the unemploy-
the timing of policy firming. Some participants were ment rate falling to a level quite close to their estimates
concerned that the downside risks to inflation could be of its longer-run normal rate. Members anticipated that
realized if the target range for the federal funds rate was economic activity was likely to continue to expand at a
increased before it was clear that economic growth pace sufficient to lead to a further reduction in underuti-
would remain at an above-trend pace and downward lization of labor resources. Headline inflation continued
pressures on inflation had abated. They also worried to be held down by the effects of declines in energy and
that such a premature tightening might erode the credi- commodity prices, and the year-over-year increase in
bility of the Committee’s inflation objective if inflation core PCE inflation remained below the Committee’s ob-
stayed at a rate below 2 percent for a prolonged period. jective. Survey-based measures of longer-term inflation
It was noted that monetary policy was better positioned expectations had remained stable; market-based
to respond effectively to unanticipated upside inflation measures of inflation compensation had moved lower.
surprises than to persistent below-objective inflation, Members anticipated that the declines in oil prices and
particularly when the federal funds rate was still near its the appreciation of the dollar over the intermeeting pe-
effective lower bound. Such considerations also argued riod were likely to exert some additional downward pres-
for increasing the target range for the federal funds rate sure on inflation in the near term. Members expected
gradually after policy normalization was under way. inflation to rise gradually toward 2 percent over the me-
Some other participants, however, expressed concerns dium term as the labor market improved further and the
about delaying the start of normalizing the target range transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices
for the federal funds rate much longer. For example, a dissipated, but they agreed to continue to monitor infla-
significant delay risked an undesired buildup of inflation- tion developments closely.
ary pressures or economic and financial imbalances that
In assessing whether economic conditions had im-
would be costly to unwind and that eventually could
proved sufficiently to initiate a firming in the stance of
have adverse consequences for economic growth. In ad-
policy, many members said that the improvement in la-
dition, a prompt decision to firm policy could provide a
bor market conditions met or would soon meet one of
signal of confidence in the strength of the U.S. economy
the Committee’s criteria for beginning policy normaliza-
that might spur rather than restrain economic activity.
tion. But some indicated that their confidence that in-
These participants preferred to begin policy firming
flation would gradually return to the Committee’s 2 per-
soon, with most of them expecting that beginning the
cent objective over the medium term had not increased,
process before long would allow the target range for the
in large part because recent global economic and finan-
federal funds rate to be increased gradually.
cial developments had imparted some restraint to the
economic outlook and placed further downward pres-
sure on inflation in the near term. Most members agreed

--- Page 9 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ _M_e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_6_-_1_7_, _2_01_5_______________________P_a_g_e_ _9
that their confidence that inflation would move to the ment of actual and expected progress toward its objec-
Committee’s inflation objective would increase if, as ex- tives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.
pected, economic activity continued to expand at a mod- Members agreed that the Committee’s evaluation of pro-
erate rate and labor market conditions improved further. gress on its objectives would take into account a wide
Many expected those conditions to be met later this year, range of information, including measures of labor mar-
although several members were concerned about down- ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and in-
side risks to the outlook for real activity and inflation. flation expectations, and readings on financial and inter-
national developments. They also agreed to indicate that
Other factors important to the Committee’s assessment
the Committee continued to anticipate that it would be
of the inflation outlook were the expectation that the in-
appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds
fluences of lower energy and commodity prices on head-
rate when it sees some further improvement in the labor
line inflation would abate, as had occurred in previous
market and is reasonably confident that inflation will
episodes, and that inflation expectations would remain
move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium
stable. With energy and commodity prices expected to
term. It was noted that the expected path of the federal
stabilize, members’ projections of inflation incorporated
funds rate, rather than the exact timing of the initial in-
a step-up in headline inflation next year. However, sev-
crease, was most important in influencing financial con-
eral members saw a risk that the additional downward
ditions and thus the outlook for the economy and infla-
pressure on inflation from lower oil prices and a higher
tion. The Committee reiterated its expectation that,
foreign exchange value of the dollar could persist and, as
even after employment and inflation are near mandate-
a result, delay or diminish the expected upturn in infla-
consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some
tion. And, while survey measures of longer-run inflation
time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below
expectations remained stable, a couple of members ex-
levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run.
pressed unease with the decline in market-based
measures of inflation compensation over the intermeet- The Committee also maintained its policy of reinvesting
ing period. principal payments from its agency debt and agency
mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
After assessing the outlook for economic activity, the la-
securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securi-
bor market, and inflation and weighing the uncertainties
ties at auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s
associated with the outlook, all but one member con-
holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels,
cluded that, although the U.S. economy had strength-
should help maintain accommodative financial condi-
ened and labor underutilization had diminished, eco-
tions.
nomic conditions did not warrant an increase in the tar-
get range for the federal funds rate at this meeting. They At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
agreed that developments over the intermeeting period voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
had not materially altered the Committee’s economic of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to
outlook. Nevertheless, in part because of the risks to the execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with
outlook for economic activity and inflation, the Com- the following domestic policy directive:
mittee decided that it was prudent to wait for additional
“Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
information confirming that the economic outlook had
Federal Open Market Committee seeks
not deteriorated and bolstering members’ confidence
monetary and financial conditions that will
that inflation would gradually move up toward 2 percent
foster maximum employment and price
over the medium term. One member, however, pre-
stability. In particular, the Committee seeks
ferred to raise the target range for the federal funds rate
conditions in reserve markets consistent with
at this meeting, indicating that the current low level of
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to
real interest rates was not appropriate in the context of
¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
current economic conditions.
undertake open market operations as necessary
The Committee agreed to maintain the target range for to maintain such conditions. The Committee
the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and to reaffirm directs the Desk to maintain its policy of rolling
in its postmeeting statement that the Committee’s deci- over maturing Treasury securities into new
sion about how long to maintain the current target range issues and its policy of reinvesting principal
for the federal funds rate would depend on its assess- payments on all agency debt and agency
mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
backed securities. The Committee also directs Committee expects inflation to rise gradually to-
the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon ward 2 percent over the medium term as the la-
swap transactions as necessary to facilitate bor market improves further and the transitory
settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency effects of declines in energy and import prices
mortgage-backed securities transactions. The dissipate. The Committee continues to monitor
System Open Market Account manager and the inflation developments closely.
secretary will keep the Committee informed of
To support continued progress toward maxi-
ongoing developments regarding the System’s
mum employment and price stability, the Com-
balance sheet that could affect the attainment
mittee today reaffirmed its view that the current
over time of the Committee’s objectives of
0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds
maximum employment and price stability.”
rate remains appropriate. In determining how
The vote encompassed approval of the statement below long to maintain this target range, the Commit-
to be released at 2:00 p.m.: tee will assess progress—both realized and ex-
pected—toward its objectives of maximum em-
“Information received since the Federal Open
ployment and 2 percent inflation. This assess-
Market Committee met in July suggests that
ment will take into account a wide range of in-
economic activity is expanding at a moderate
formation, including measures of labor market
pace. Household spending and business fixed
conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and
investment have been increasing moderately,
inflation expectations, and readings on financial
and the housing sector has improved further;
and international developments. The Commit-
however, net exports have been soft. The labor
tee anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise
market continued to improve, with solid job
the target range for the federal funds rate when
gains and declining unemployment. On bal-
it has seen some further improvement in the la-
ance, labor market indicators show that un-
bor market and is reasonably confident that in-
derutilization of labor resources has diminished
flation will move back to its 2 percent objective
since early this year. Inflation has continued to
over the medium term.
run below the Committee’s longer-run objec-
tive, partly reflecting declines in energy prices The Committee is maintaining its existing policy
and in prices of non-energy imports. Market- of reinvesting principal payments from its hold-
based measures of inflation compensation ings of agency debt and agency mortgage-
moved lower; survey-based measures of longer- backed securities in agency mortgage-backed se-
term inflation expectations have remained sta- curities and of rolling over maturing Treasury
ble. securities at auction. This policy, by keeping the
Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
at sizable levels, should help maintain accom-
mittee seeks to foster maximum employment
modative financial conditions.
and price stability. Recent global economic and
financial developments may restrain economic When the Committee decides to begin to re-
activity somewhat and are likely to put further move policy accommodation, it will take a bal-
downward pressure on inflation in the near anced approach consistent with its longer-run
term. Nonetheless, the Committee expects that, goals of maximum employment and inflation of
with appropriate policy accommodation, eco- 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates
nomic activity will expand at a moderate pace, that, even after employment and inflation are
with labor market indicators continuing to near mandate-consistent levels, economic con-
move toward levels the Committee judges con- ditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the
sistent with its dual mandate. The Committee target federal funds rate below levels the Com-
continues to see the risks to the outlook for eco- mittee views as normal in the longer run.”
nomic activity and the labor market as nearly
Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C.
balanced but is monitoring developments
Dudley, Lael Brainard, Charles L. Evans, Stanley Fischer,
abroad. Inflation is anticipated to remain near
Dennis P. Lockhart, Jerome H. Powell, Daniel K. Ta-
its recent low level in the near term but the
rullo, and John C. Williams.

--- Page 11 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ _M_e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_6_-_1_7_, _2_01_5______________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Voting against this action: Jeffrey M. Lacker. 2015. The meeting adjourned at 10:55 a.m. on
September 17, 2015.
Mr. Lacker dissented because he believed that maintain-
ing exceptionally low real interest rates was not appro- Notation Vote
priate for an economy with persistently strong consump- By notation vote completed on August 18, 2015, the
tion growth and tightening labor markets. He viewed Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
current disinflationary forces as likely to be transitory, Committee meeting held on July 28–29, 2015.
and was reasonably confident that inflation would move
toward 2 percent. In his view, further delay in removing
monetary policy accommodation would represent a risky
departure from past patterns of FOMC behavior in re- _____________________________
sponse to such economic conditions. Brian F. Madigan
Secretary
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, October 27–28,

--- Page 12 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- 2016 and 2017, reflecting the effects of remaining head-
tee (FOMC) meeting held on September 16–17, 2015, winds along with other factors.
meeting participants submitted their projections of the
Most participants viewed the levels of uncertainty asso-
most likely outcomes for real output growth, the unem-
ciated with their outlooks for economic growth and the
ployment rate, inflation, and the federal funds rate for
unemployment rate as broadly similar to the average
each year from 2015 to 2018 and over the longer run.
level of the past 20 years. Most also judged the level of
Each participant’s projection was based on information
uncertainty about inflation to be broadly similar to the
available at the time of the meeting together with his or
average level of the past 20 years, although a few partic-
her assessment of appropriate monetary policy and as-
ipants viewed it as higher. In addition, most participants
sumptions about the factors likely to affect economic
continued to see the risks to the outlook for economic
outcomes. The longer-run projections represent each
growth and for the unemployment rate as broadly bal-
participant’s assessment of the value to which each var-
anced, although some viewed the risks to economic
iable would be expected to converge, over time, under
growth as weighted to the downside and some saw the
appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of fur-
risks to unemployment as weighted to the upside. A few
ther shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary
more participants saw the risks to inflation as weighted
policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each
to the downside than as balanced, while one judged these
participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for
risks to be tilted to the upside.
economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her
individual interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objec- The Outlook for Economic Activity
tives of maximum employment and stable prices. Participants generally projected that, conditional on their
individual assumptions about appropriate monetary pol-
FOMC participants generally expected that, under ap-
icy, real gross domestic product (GDP) would grow
propriate monetary policy, economic growth in 2015
from 2015 through 2017 at a pace slightly above their
would be at or slightly above their individual estimates
estimates of its longer-run normal rate, and that real
of the U.S. economy’s longer-run normal growth rate
GDP growth would then slow in 2018 to a rate at or near
and would increase somewhat in 2016 before slowing to
their individual estimates of the longer-run rate. Partic-
or toward its longer-run rate in 2017 and 2018 (table 1
ipants pointed to a number of factors that they expected
and figure 1). Most participants projected that the un-
would contribute to moderate real output growth over
employment rate would decline a bit further over the re-
the next few years, including improving labor market
mainder of 2015 and be at or slightly below their indi-
conditions, strengthened household and business bal-
vidual judgments of its longer-run normal level from
ance sheets, the boost to consumer spending from low
2016 through 2018. Participants projected that inflation,
energy prices, diminishing restraint from fiscal policy,
as measured by the four-quarter change in the price in-
and still-accommodative monetary policy.
dex for personal consumption expenditures (PCE),
would be very low this year but then would pick up no- Compared with their Summary of Economic Projections
tably next year and rise further in 2017; all participants (SEP) contributions in June, all participants revised up
projected that inflation would be at or close to the Com- their projections of real GDP growth for 2015, reflecting
mittee’s 2 percent longer-run objective in 2018. stronger-than-anticipated growth over the first half of
the year. Most participants revised down their projec-
As shown in figure 2, all but four participants anticipated
tions of real GDP growth in 2016 and 2017. Several
that it would be appropriate to begin raising the target
participants cited slower projected productivity growth
range for the federal funds rate in 2015. Most expected
as a reason for their downward revisions. The median
that it would be appropriate to raise the target federal
value of participants’ current projections for real GDP
funds rate fairly gradually over the projection period as
growth was 2.1 percent in 2015, 2.3 percent in 2016,
headwinds to economic growth fade, labor market indi-
2.2 percent in 2017, and 2.0 percent in 2018. Although
cators reach levels consistent with the Committee’s man-
about half of the participants marked down their projec-
dated objective of maximum employment, and inflation
tions of real GDP growth in the longer run, the median
moves up to 2 percent. Most participants continued to
remained at 2.0 percent.
expect that it would be appropriate for the federal funds
rate still to be appreciably below its longer-run level in Most participants projected that the unemployment rate
would decline a bit further over the remainder of 2015

--- Page 13 ---

,stnediserp
knaB
evreseR
laredeF
dna
srebmem
draoB
evreseR
laredeF
fo
snoitcejorp
cimonocE
.1
elbaT
5102
rebmetpeS
,ycilop
yratenom
etairporppa
detcejorp
fo
stnemssessa
laudividni
rieht
rednu
tnecreP
3egnaR
2ycnednetlartneC
1naideM
regnoL
8102
7102
6102
5102
regnoL
8102
7102
6102
5102
regnoL
8102
7102
6102
5102
elbairaV
nur
nur
nur
7.2–8.1
4.2–6.1
6.2–9.1
8.2–1.2
5.2–9.1
2.2–8.1
2.2–8.1
4.2–0.2
6.2–2.2
3.2–0.2
0.2
0.2
2.2
3.2
1.2
PDGlaerniegnahC
5.2–8.1
.a.n
5.2–0.2
0.3–3.2
3.2–7.1
3.2–0.2
.a.n
5.2–1.2
7.2–4.2
0.2–8.1
0.2
.a.n
3.2
5.2
9.1
noitcejorpenuJ
8.5–7.4
3.5–6.4
0.5–5.4
0.5–5.4
2.5–9.4
2.5–9.4
0.5–7.4
9.4–7.4
9.4–7.4
1.5–0.5
9.4
8.4
8.4
8.4
0.5
etartnemyolpmenU
8.5–0.5
.a.n
5.5–8.4
2.5–6.4
3.5–0.5
2.5–0.5
.a.n
1.5–9.4
1.5–9.4
3.5–2.5
0.5
.a.n
0.5
1.5
3.5
noitcejorpenuJ
0.2
1.2–8.1
2.2–7.1
4.2–5.1
0.1–3.0
0.2
0.2
0.2–8.1
8.1–5.1
5.0–3.0
0.2
0.2
9.1
7.1
4.0
noitaflniECP
0.2
.a.n
2.2–7.1
4.2–5.1
0.1–6.0
0.2
.a.n
0.2–9.1
9.1–6.1
8.0–6.0
0.2
.a.n
0.2
8.1
7.0
noitcejorpenuJ
1.2–8.1
2.2–7.1
4.2–5.1
7.1–2.1
0.2–9.1
0.2–8.1
8.1–5.1
4.1–3.1
0.2
9.1
7.1
4.1
4noitaflniECPeroC
.a.n
2.2–7.1
4.2–5.1
6.1–2.1
.a.n
0.2–9.1
9.1–6.1
4.1–3.1
.a.n
0.2
8.1
3.1
noitcejorpenuJ detcejorP:omeM
htapycilopetairporppa
0.4–0.3
9.3–9.2
9.3–0.1
9.2–1.0-
9.0–1.0-
8.3–3.3
6.3–0.3
4.3–1.2
1.2–1.1
6.0–1.0
5.3
4.3
6.2
4.1
4.0
etarsdnuflaredeF
3.4–3.3
.a.n
9.3–0.2
9.2–4.0
9.0–1.0
8.3–5.3
.a.n
8.3–4.2
4.2–4.1
9.0–4.0
8.3
.a.n
9.2
6.1
6.0
noitcejorpenuJ
suoiverp
eht
fo
retrauq
htruof
eht
morf
segnahc
tnecrep
era
noitaflni
fo
serusaem
htob
rof
snoitcejorp
dna
)PDG(
tcudorp
citsemod
ssorg
laer
ni
egnahc
fo
snoitcejorP
:etoN
noitpmusnoclanosreprofxedniecirpeht,ylevitcepser
,niegnahcfosetaregatnecrepehteranoitaflniECPerocdnanoitaflniECP
.detacidniraeyehtforetrauqhtruofehtotraey
htruof
eht
ni
etar
tnemyolpmenu
nailivic
egareva
eht
rof
era
etar
tnemyolpmenu
eht
rof
snoitcejorP
.ygrene
dna
doof
gnidulcxe
ECP
rof
xedni
ecirp
eht
dna
)ECP(
serutidnepxe
s’tnapicitraphcaetneserpersnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.ycilopyratenometairporppafotnemssessarehrosihnodesaberasnoitcejorps’tnapicitraphcaE
.detacidniraeyehtforetrauq
snoitcejorpehT
.ymonoceehtotskcohsrehtruffoecnesbaehtnidnaycilopyratenometairporpparednuegrevnocotdetcepxeebdluowelbairavhcaehcihwotetarehtfotnemssessa
detcejorpehtroetarsdnuflaredefehtrofegnartegratetairporppadetcejorpehtfotniopdimehtfo)tniopegatnecrep8/1tseraenehtotdednuor(eulavehteraetarsdnuflaredefehtrof fogniteemehthtiwnoitcnujnocniedamerewsnoitcejorpenuJehT
.nurregnolehtrevororaeyradnelacdefiicepsehtfodneehttaetarsdnuflaredefehtrofleveltegratetairporppa
.5102,71–61enuJnoeettimmoCtekraMnepOlaredeFeht
eht
si
naidem
eht
,neve
si
snoitcejorp
fo
rebmun
eht
nehW
.tsehgih
ot
tsewol
morf
degnarra
era
snoitcejorp
eht
nehw
noitcejorp
elddim
eht
si
naidem
eht
,doirep
hcae
roF
.1
.snoitcejorpelddimowtehtfoegareva
.raeyhcaenielbairavhcaerofsnoitcejorptsewoleerhtdnatsehgiheerhtehtsedulcxeycnednetlartnecehT
.2
.raeytahtnielbairavtahtrof,tsehgihottsewolmorf,snoitcejorp’stnapicitrapllasedulcniraeyneviganielbairavarofegnarehT
.3
.detcelloctoneranoitaflniECPerocrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.4
_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________

--- Page 14 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro__je_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_e_r _1_6_-1_7_,_ 2_0_1_5____________P_a_g_e_ _3
Figure1. Medians,centraltendencies,andrangesofeconomicprojections,2015–18andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections 4
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections 3
2
Actual 1
+
0
-
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesofthevariablesare
annual.

--- Page 15 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure2. OverviewofFOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy
Number of participants
Appropriate timing of policy firming
14
13
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
3
2
1
1
2015 2016 2017
Percent
Appropriate pace of policy firming: Midpoint of target range or target level for the federal funds rate
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
+
0
-
0.5
2015 2016 2017 2018 Longer run
Note: Intheupperpanel,theheightofeachbardenotesthenumberofFOMCparticipantswhojudgethat,under
appropriatemonetarypolicy,thefirstincreaseinthetargetrangeforthefederalfundsratefromitscurrentrangeof0to
1/4percentwilloccurinthespecifiedcalendaryear. InJune2015,thenumbersofFOMCparticipantswhojudgedthat
the first increase in the target federal fundsrate would occur in 2015, 2016, and 2017 were, respectively, 15, 2, and 0.
Inthelowerpanel,eachshadedcircleindicatesthevalue(roundedtothenearest1/8percentagepoint)ofanindividual
participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate
targetlevelforthefederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun.

--- Page 16 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro__je_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_e_r _1_6_-1_7_,_ 2_0_1_5____________P_a_g_e_ _5
and be at or below their individual judgments of its close to the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective
longer-run normal level from 2016 through 2018. The in 2018. Some participants also marked down their pro-
median of participants’ forecasts for the unemployment jections for core PCE inflation from 2015 through 2017,
rate in the fourth quarter of each year was 5.0 percent in although almost all still expected core inflation to rise
2015 and 4.8 percent from 2016 through 2018. Com- gradually over the projection period and to reach a level
pared with the June SEP, participants’ projected paths at or near 2 percent in 2018. The median values of pro-
for the unemployment rate generally shifted down some- jections for PCE inflation were 0.4 percent in 2015,
what through 2017. Many participants noted that recent 1.7 percent in 2016, 1.9 percent in 2017, and 2.0 percent
data pointing to faster-than-expected improvement in la- in 2018, and the median values for core PCE inflation
bor market conditions were an important factor under- were 1.4 percent in 2015, 1.7 percent in 2016, 1.9 percent
lying the downward revisions to their unemployment in 2017, and 2.0 percent in 2018. Factors cited by par-
rate forecasts. All but a few participants revised down ticipants as likely to contribute to a rise of inflation to-
their estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unem- ward 2 percent included stable longer-term inflation ex-
ployment; as a result, the median estimate edged down pectations, tighter resource utilization, a pickup in wage
to 4.9 percent. Several participants noted that still-sub- growth, the waning effects of declines in energy prices
dued wage and price inflation despite the stronger-than- and appreciation of the dollar, and still-accommodative
expected momentum in the labor market suggested a monetary policy.
lower level of the longer-run normal rate of unemploy-
Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri-
ment than they had thought previously. A few also men-
bution of participants’ views about the outlook for infla-
tioned research indicating that demographic groups with
tion. The range of participants’ projections for PCE in-
lower average unemployment rates have accounted for
flation in 2015 widened slightly compared with June, re-
an increasing fraction of the labor force.
flecting in part differences in participants’ assessments
Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distribution of partici- of the effects of the declines in energy and import prices
pants’ views regarding the likely outcomes for real GDP on the outlook for inflation. The dispersion for PCE
growth and the unemployment rate through 2018 and in inflation for 2016 and 2017 was about unchanged. Sim-
the longer run. The diversity of views across participants ilarly, the ranges for core PCE inflation widened slightly
reflected, in part, their individual assessments of a num- in 2015 and were unchanged for 2016 and 2017. The
ber of factors, including the effects of lower oil prices on distributions for both inflation measures in 2017 and
consumer spending and business investment, the extent 2018 were notably more concentrated near the Commit-
to which dollar appreciation and weaker foreign eco- tee’s 2 percent longer-run objective than those for 2015
nomic growth would affect real activity, the rate at which and 2016.
the forces that have been restraining the pace of the eco-
nomic expansion would continue to abate, the degree to Appropriate Monetary Policy
which ongoing improvements in the labor market would Participants judged that it would be appropriate to raise
support stronger consumption growth, and the appro- the target range for the federal funds rate over the pro-
priate path of monetary policy. Relative to the June SEP, jection period as forces that have been restraining the
the dispersion of participants’ projections for real GDP expansion abate and as labor market indicators and in-
growth was roughly unchanged through 2016 but was flation move toward values the Committee judges con-
somewhat wider in 2017 and the longer run. The dis- sistent with the attainment of its mandated objectives of
persion of participants’ projections for the unemploy- maximum employment and price stability. As shown in
ment rate in the longer run also widened somewhat. figure 2, all but four participants anticipated that it would
be appropriate to begin raising the target range for the
The Outlook for Inflation federal funds rate during 2015. However, most pro-
Compared with the June SEP, almost all participants jected that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate
marked down their projections for PCE inflation this would remain noticeably below their individual estimates
year, noting that inflation had been running below their of its longer-run normal level through 2017. Most par-
earlier projections and that further declines in energy ticipants saw the appropriate level of the federal funds
prices and import prices were putting additional tempo- rate as close to its longer-run normal level by 2018.
rary downward pressure on PCE inflation. Nearly all
Most participants projected that the unemployment rate
participants saw PCE inflation picking up in 2016 and
would be at or only slightly above their estimates of its
rising further in 2017, and almost all saw inflation at or
longer-run normal level at the end of the year in which

--- Page 17 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2015–18andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2015
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 6 1. 8 2. 0 2. 2 2. 4 2. 6 2. 8 3. 0
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 6 1. 8 2. 0 2. 2 2. 4 2. 6 2. 8 3. 0
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 6 1. 8 2. 0 2. 2 2. 4 2. 6 2. 8 3. 0
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 6 1. 8 2. 0 2. 2 2. 4 2. 6 2. 8 3. 0
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 18 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro__je_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_e_r _1_6_-1_7_,_ 2_0_1_5____________P_a_g_e_ _7
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2015–18andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2015
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 19 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2015–18andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2015
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3 0.5 0. 7 0. 9 1. 1 1.3 1. 5 1. 7 1.9 2. 1 2. 3
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro__je_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_e_r _1_6_-1_7_,_ 2_0_1_5____________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2015–18
Number of participants
2015
September projections 18
June projections
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
they judged the initial increase in the target range for the of the economy’s longer-run growth potential generally
federal funds rate would be warranted. All participants cited as a contributing factor. The median estimate of
projected that inflation would be below the Committee’s the longer-run normal federal funds rate declined 25 ba-
2 percent objective in that year, but they also saw infla- sis points from June, and the range moved down from
tion rising substantially closer to 2 percent in the follow- 3.25 to 4.25 percent to 3.0 to 4.0 percent. All partici-
ing year. pants judged that inflation in the longer run would be
equal to the Committee’s objective of 2 percent, imply-
Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’
ing that their individual judgments regarding the appro-
judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target
priate longer-run level of the real federal funds rate in
federal funds rate at the end of each calendar year from
the absence of further shocks to the economy ranged
2015 to 2018 and over the longer run. Relative to June,
from 1.0 to 2.0 percent.
the median value of the federal funds rate decreased
25 basis points at the end of 2015, 2016, and 2017 to Participants’ views of the appropriate path for monetary
0.38 percent, 1.38 percent, and 2.63 percent, respec- policy were informed by their judgments about the state
tively, and the dispersion of the projections for the fed- of the economy, including the values of the unemploy-
eral funds rate widened from 2015 through 2017. ment rate and other labor market indicators that would
be consistent with maximum employment, their esti-
Almost all participants judged that it would be appropri-
mates of the current extent of slack in the labor market,
ate for the federal funds rate to remain noticeably below
the prospects for inflation to return to the Committee’s
its longer-run normal level over the next two years even
longer-term objective of 2 percent, the implications of
though the unemployment rate was anticipated to be
international developments for the domestic economy,
near its mandate-consistent level and most participants
the pace at which headwinds that have been restraining
expected inflation to be close to 2 percent by 2017. The
economic activity dissipate and underlying momentum
reasons cited for only gradually increasing the federal
in the economy strengthens, the desire to minimize po-
funds rate included an assessment that the headwinds
tential disruptions in financial markets that could result
that have been holding back the economic expansion
from a steep increase in the target federal funds rate fol-
will continue to exert some restraint on economic activ-
lowing liftoff, and the risks around the outlook for eco-
ity, partly because weak activity abroad and the recent
nomic activity and inflation. Some participants also
appreciation of the dollar are likely to continue to damp
mentioned the prescriptions of various monetary policy
U.S. net exports for some time. As support for a view
rules as factors they considered in judging the appropri-
that accommodative monetary policy would remain ap-
ate path for the federal funds rate.
propriate over the next few years, some participants also
noted their assessment that residual slack in the labor Uncertainty and Risks
market will still be evident in measures of labor utiliza- Nearly all participants continued to judge the levels of
tion other than the unemployment rate, or that the risks uncertainty attending their projections for real GDP
to the economic outlook are asymmetric as a result of growth and the unemployment rate as broadly similar to
the constraints on monetary policy associated with the the norms during the previous 20 years (figure 4).1 Most
effective lower bound on the federal funds rate. Most participants continued to see the risks to their outlooks
participants expected the federal funds rate to be at or for real GDP growth as broadly balanced, although a
only slightly below its longer-run normal level by 2018. larger number than in June viewed the risks to real GDP
growth as weighted to the downside. Those participants
Relative to the June SEP, more than half of the partici-
who viewed the risks as weighted to the downside cited,
pants revised down their estimates of the longer-run
level of the federal funds rate, with a lower assessment
1 Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for the
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con-
sumer price inflation over the period from 1995 through
2014. At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncer-
tainty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty
in the economic forecasts and explains the approach used to
assess the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ pro-
jections.

--- Page 22 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro__je_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_e_r _1_6_-1_7_,_ 2_0_1_5___________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’judgmentsofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfunds
rateortheappropriatetargetlevelforthefederalfundsrate,2015–18andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2015
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
−0. 3 7 −0. 1 2 0.1 3 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
−0.13 0.12 0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
−0. 3 7 −0. 1 2 0.1 3 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
−0.13 0.12 0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
−0. 3 7 −0. 1 2 0.1 3 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
−0.13 0.12 0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
−0. 3 7 −0. 1 2 0.1 3 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
−0.13 0.12 0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
−0. 3 7 −0. 1 2 0.1 3 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
−0.13 0.12 0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Note: Themidpointsofthetargetrangesforthefederalfundsrateandthetargetlevelsforthefederalfundsrate
aremeasuredattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun.

--- Page 23 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4. Uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth Risks to GDP growth
September projections September projections
18 18
June projections June projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation Risks to PCE inflation
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation Risks to core PCE inflation
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”Defini-
tionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 24 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro__je_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_e_r _1_6_-1_7_,_ 2_0_1_5___________P__ag_e_ _1_3
for example, a weaker outlook for economic activity Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
abroad and the recent appreciation of the dollar. Most Percentage points
participants judged the risks to the outlook for the un- Variable 2015 2016 2017 2018
employment rate to be broadly balanced, though more Change in real GDP1 . . . . . ±1.3 ±1.9 ±2.1 ±2.2
participants than in June viewed the risks to the unem- Unemployment rate1 . . . . . ±0.3 ±1.0 ±1.7 ±1.9
ployment rate as weighted to the upside.
Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.8 ±1.0 ±1.1 ±1.0
As in the June SEP, participants generally agreed that the NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the
levels of uncertainty associated with their inflation fore- root mean squared error of projections for 1995 through 2014 that
were released in the fall by various private and government fore-
casts were broadly similar to historical norms. Many par-
casters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain
ticipants viewed the risks to their inflation forecast as assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual out-
balanced. However, the risks were seen as tilted to the comes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in
ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the
downside by more than half of the participants, an in- past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip
crease since the June SEP. These participants cited the (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from His-
torical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series
recent declines in market-based measures of inflation
2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
compensation and commodity prices and the apprecia- System, November), available at www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/
tion of the dollar as factors that could place greater 2007/200760/200760abs.html; and Board of Governors of the Fed-
eral Reserve System, Division of Research and Statistics (2014), “Up-
downward pressure on prices than anticipated.
dated Historical Forecast Errors,” memorandum, April 9, www.fed
eralreserve.gov/foia/files/20140409-historical-forecast-errors.pdf.
1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
that has been most widely used in government and private economic
forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.

--- Page 25 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_4____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the year, 0.9 to 5.1 percent in the third year, and
members of the Board of Governors and the 0.8 to 5.2 percent in the fourth year. The corre-
presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform sponding 70 percent confidence intervals for
discussions of monetary policy among policy- overall inflation would be 1.2 to 2.8 percent in
makers and can aid public understanding of the the current year, 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second
basis for policy actions. Considerable uncer- year, 0.9 to 3.1 percent in the third year, and
tainty attends these projections, however. The 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the fourth year.
economic and statistical models and relation- Because current conditions may differ from
ships used to help produce economic forecasts those that prevailed, on average, over history,
are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the participants provide judgments as to whether
real world, and the future path of the economy the uncertainty attached to their projections of
can be affected by myriad unforeseen develop- each variable is greater than, smaller than, or
ments and events. Thus, in setting the stance broadly similar to typical levels of forecast un-
of monetary policy, participants consider not certainty in the past, as shown in table 2. Partic-
only what appears to be the most likely eco- ipants also provide judgments as to whether the
nomic outcome as embodied in their projec- risks to their projections are weighted to the up-
tions, but also the range of alternative possibil- side, are weighted to the downside, or are
ities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the broadly balanced. That is, participants judge
potential costs to the economy should they oc- whether each variable is more likely to be above
cur. or below their projections of the most likely out-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical come. These judgments about the uncertainty
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including and the risks attending each participant’s projec-
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports tions are distinct from the diversity of partici-
and those prepared by the Federal Reserve pants’ views about the most likely outcomes.
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Forecast uncertainty is concerned with the risks
Federal Open Market Committee. The projec- associated with a particular projection rather
tion error ranges shown in the table illustrate than with divergences across a number of differ-
the considerable uncertainty associated with ent projections.
economic forecasts. For example, suppose a As with real activity and inflation, the out-
participant projects that real gross domestic look for the future path of the federal funds rate
product (GDP) and total consumer prices will is subject to considerable uncertainty. This un-
rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, certainty arises primarily because each partici-
3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- pant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of
tending those projections is similar to that ex- monetary policy depends importantly on the
perienced in the past and the risks around the evolution of real activity and inflation over time.
projections are broadly balanced, the numbers If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected
reported in table 2 would imply a probability of manner, then assessments of the appropriate
about 70 percent that actual GDP would ex- setting of the federal funds rate would change
pand within a range of 1.7 to 4.3 percent in the from that point forward.
current year, 1.1 to 4.9 percent in the second

# Tables

## Page_13_Table_1


|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                              |
|------------------|------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                              |
|                  | 6102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                              |
|                  | 5102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                              |
| 2ycnednetlartneC | regnoL
nur | 2.2–8.1 3.2–0.2 2.5–9.4 2.5–0.5
0.2 0.2
2.2–8.1 0.5–7.4 0.2–9.1
.a.n .a.n 0.2 .a.n .a.n
4.2–0.2 5.2–1.2 9.4–7.4 1.5–9.4 0.2–8.1 0.2–9.1 0.2–8.1 0.2–9.1
6.2–2.2 7.2–4.2 9.4–7.4 1.5–9.4 8.1–5.1 9.1–6.1 8.1–5.1 9.1–6.1
3.2–0.2 0.2–8.1 1.5–0.5 3.5–2.5 5.0–3.0 8.0–6.0 4.1–3.1 4.1–3.1 | 8.3–3.3 8.3–5.3
6.3–0.3
.a.n
4.3–1.2 8.3–4.2
1.2–1.1 4.2–4.1
6.0–1.0 9.0–4.0 |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                              |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                              |
|                  | 6102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                              |
|                  | 5102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                              |
| 1naideM          | regnoL
nur | 0.2 0.2 9.4 0.5 0.2 0.2
0.2 .a.n 8.4 .a.n 0.2 .a.n 0.2 .a.n
2.2 3.2 8.4 0.5 9.1 0.2 9.1 0.2
3.2 5.2 8.4 1.5 7.1 8.1 7.1 8.1
1.2 9.1 0.5 3.5 4.0 7.0 4.1 3.1                                                                                                                             | 5.3 8.3
4.3 .a.n
6.2 9.2
4.1 6.1
4.0 6.0                                     |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                              |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                              |
|                  | 6102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                              |
|                  | 5102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                              |