# 20150617_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:37:54*
*Pages: 25, Tables: 3*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
June 16–17, 2015
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Robert deV. Frierson,2 Secretary of the Board, Office
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the of the Secretary, Board of Governors
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on
Tuesday, June 16, 2015, at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking
Wednesday, June 17, 2015, at 9:00 a.m. Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors
PRESENT: James A. Clouse and Stephen A. Meyer, Deputy
Janet L. Yellen, Chair Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Governors; Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director,
Lael Brainard Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Charles L. Evans Governors
Stanley Fischer
Jeffrey M. Lacker Andreas Lehnert, Deputy Director, Office of Financial
Dennis P. Lockhart Stability Policy and Research, Board of Governors
Jerome H. Powell
Daniel K. Tarullo William B. English, Senior Special Adviser to the
John C. Williams Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
Governors
James Bullard, Esther L. George, Loretta J. Mester, and
Eric Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal David Bowman, Andrew Figura, David Reifschneider,
Open Market Committee and Stacey Tevlin, Special Advisers to the Board,
Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Narayana Kocherlakota, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office
of Board Members, Board of Governors
Helen E. Holcomb and Blake Prichard, First Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Philadelphia, respectively Board Members, Board of Governors
Brian F. Madigan, Secretary Christopher J. Erceg and Beth Anne Wilson, Senior
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Associate Directors, Division of International
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Finance, Board of Governors; David E. Lebow
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary and Michael G. Palumbo, Senior Associate
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Directors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Board of Governors
Steven B. Kamin, Economist
Thomas Laubach, Economist Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers,
David W. Wilcox, Economist Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
David Altig, Eric M. Engen,1 Michael P. Leahy, Gretchen C. Weinbach, Associate Director, Division of
Jonathan P. McCarthy, William R. Nelson, Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Glenn D. Rudebusch, and William Wascher,
Associate Economists
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account ________________
1 Attended Wednesday’s session only.
Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open 2 Attended the joint session of the Federal Open Market
Market Account Committee and the Board of Governors.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Jane E. Ihrig, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
In a joint session of the Federal Open Market Commit-
Glenn Follette and Paul A. Smith, Assistant Directors, tee (FOMC) and the Board of Governors of the Federal
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Reserve System, the manager of the System Open Mar-
Governors ket Account (SOMA) reported on developments in do-
mestic and foreign financial markets. The manager also
Robert J. Tetlow, Adviser, Division of Monetary discussed System open market operations conducted by
Affairs, Board of Governors the Open Market Desk during the period since the Com-
mittee met on April 28–29. The Desk’s overnight re-
Penelope A. Beattie,2 Assistant to the Secretary, Office verse repurchase agreement (RRP) operations continued
of the Secretary, Board of Governors to provide a soft floor for money market interest rates.
The manager updated the Committee on plans for term
Katie Ross,2 Manager, Office of the Secretary, Board of RRP operations at the end of the second quarter and
Governors noted that testing of the Federal Reserve’s Term Deposit
Facility continued. The manager also reviewed the rein-
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of vestment policy for maturing Treasury securities. Spe-
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors cifically, at Treasury auctions, the Desk rolls over the
maturing securities held in the SOMA into newly issued
Stephen Lin, Senior Economist, Division of securities in proportion to the issue amounts of the new
International Finance, Board of Governors; securities, and the Federal Reserve receives the interest
Deborah J. Lindner, Senior Economist, Division of rate determined competitively in the public auction of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors the newly issued securities.
The manager updated the Committee on tentative plans
Benjamin K. Johannsen, Marcel A. Priebsch, and
to improve the calculation of the effective federal funds
Francisco Vazquez-Grande,3 Economists, Division
rate published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New
of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
York. The effective federal funds rate, currently defined
as the volume-weighted mean of interest rates on federal
Randall A. Williams, Information Management Analyst,
funds transactions, would be redefined as the volume-
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
weighted median. Staff analysis suggested that the
volume-weighted median would usually differ little from
Mark A. Gould, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
the volume-weighted mean, but that the median would
Bank of San Francisco
be a more robust statistic when some trades occur at in-
terest rates that are unrepresentative of general market
Michael Strine, Executive Vice President, Federal
conditions or when there are data problems such as re-
Reserve Bank of New York
porting errors. The change in approach would be imple-
mented next year in conjunction with the transition to
Kartik B. Athreya, Evan F. Koenig, Susan McLaugh-
the Report of Selected Money Market Rates (FR 2420)
lin,3 Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl, Ellis W. Tallman,
as the data source for the calculation of the effective fed-
Geoffrey Tootell, and Christopher J. Waller, Senior
eral funds rate. A volume-weighted median would also
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Rich-
be used to construct a representative measure of condi-
mond, Dallas, New York, Minneapolis, Cleveland,
tions in the broader set of markets covered by the new
Boston, and St. Louis, respectively
Roc Armenter, Deborah L. Leonard, Anna Paulson,
Douglas Tillett, and Jonathan L. Willis, Vice Presi-
dents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, New
York, Chicago, Chicago, and Kansas City, respec-
tively
________________
3 Attended Tuesday’s session only.

--- Page 3 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_6_–_1_7,_ 2_0_1_5_________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
overnight bank funding rate.4 The manager noted that as its first-quarter average. The labor force participation
additional background information on these changes rate and the employment-to-population ratio rose a bit
would be published by the Desk shortly following the over April and May, and the share of workers employed
release of the minutes from this meeting. Participants part time for economic reasons edged down on net. The
expressed no objections to the proposal. rate of private-sector job openings moved up a little, on
balance, in March and April, while the rates of hiring and
The staff also provided an update to the Committee on
quits were essentially unchanged.
a review of the current system of primary dealers and the
Desk’s overall framework for establishing, maintaining, Industrial production decreased during April and May
and publishing information on the Federal Reserve’s after declining in the first quarter. The output of both
counterparty relationships for operations in both do- the manufacturing and mining sectors fell over the past
mestic and foreign financial markets. While the current two months, likely reflecting the continuing effects of
sets of counterparties were performing well and meeting earlier increases in the foreign exchange value of the dol-
the Desk’s needs, the staff noted that it would report lar and lower crude oil prices. Automakers’ assembly
back to the Committee in the future should potential en- schedules suggested that light motor vehicle production
hancements to the counterparty framework be identi- would increase at a solid pace in the near term, but
fied. The Desk anticipated that it would conduct regular broader indicators of manufacturing production, such as
reviews of the counterparty framework approximately the readings on new orders from national and regional
every three years in the future. manufacturing surveys, generally pointed to modest
gains in factory output in the coming months.
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Open
Market Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeet- Growth in real personal consumption expenditures
ing period. There were no intervention operations in (PCE) appeared to pick up early in the second quarter
foreign currencies for the System’s account over the in- from its modest pace in the previous quarter. The com-
termeeting period. ponents of the nominal retail sales data used by the Bu-
reau of Economic Analysis to construct its estimate of
The Board meeting concluded at the end of the discus-
PCE increased in May, and the data for sales in the pre-
sion of developments in financial markets and the Fed-
vious two months were revised up. Sales of light motor
eral Reserve’s balance sheet.
vehicles were much higher in May than in April. Among
Staff Review of the Economic Situation the factors that influence household spending, real dis-
The information reviewed for the June 16–17 meeting posable income rose in April and gains in households’
suggested that real gross domestic product (GDP) was net worth were supported by further advances in home
increasing moderately in the second quarter after edging values. Moreover, consumer sentiment in the University
down in the first quarter. Labor market conditions im- of Michigan Surveys of Consumers in early June re-
proved somewhat further in recent months. Consumer mained near its highest level since prior to the most re-
price inflation continued to run below the FOMC’s cent recession.
longer-run objective of 2 percent and was restrained sig-
Activity in the housing sector improved somewhat in re-
nificantly by earlier declines in energy prices and de-
cent months but continued to be slow. Starts and build-
creases in prices of non-energy imports. Survey
ing permits of both new single-family homes and multi-
measures of longer-run inflation expectations remained
family units increased, on balance, in April and May.
stable, while market-based measures of inflation com-
Sales of new homes rose in April; existing home sales
pensation were still low.
moved down, although pending home sales increased.
Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded at a faster
pace in April and May than in the first quarter. The un-
employment rate was 5.5 percent in May, about the same
4 On February 2, 2015, in addition to announcing preliminary
plans to improve the calculation of the effective federal funds
rate, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York indicated that it
planned to begin to publish an additional interest rate, the
overnight bank funding rate, which will be based on both fed-
eral funds transactions and the Eurodollar transactions of
U.S.-managed banking offices.

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Growth in real private expenditures for business equip- in the nonfarm business sector rose 1¾ percent over the
ment and intellectual property products appeared to re- same period. Average hourly earnings for all employees
main relatively slow in the second quarter. Nominal increased 2¼ percent over the 12 months ending in May.
shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding air- There were some tentative signs that these labor com-
craft rose in April. Forward-looking indicators, such as pensation measures were accelerating a little in the first
new orders for these capital goods along with national quarter.
and regional surveys of business conditions, pointed to
Economic growth in many foreign economies slowed in
only modest increases in business equipment spending
the first quarter. Real GDP contracted in Canada, where
in the near term. Firms’ nominal spending for nonresi-
lower oil prices depressed investment, and in Brazil,
dential structures excluding drilling and mining rose in
where business and consumer confidence weakened and
April. In contrast, the number of oil rigs in operation
high inflation prompted a significant tightening of mon-
continued to fall through early June, suggesting a further
etary policy. In addition, real GDP growth slowed in
decline in real business spending for drilling and mining
China and Mexico. By contrast, the euro-area economy
structures in the second quarter.
continued its recovery, and real GDP growth in Japan
Nominal federal spending data for April and May increased sharply. Inflation rates turned positive in re-
pointed toward a further decline in real federal govern- cent months in many foreign economies following the
ment purchases in the second quarter. Real state and trough in oil prices earlier this year.
local government purchases appeared to be rising in the
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
second quarter, with increases in both payrolls and nom-
Over the intermeeting period, longer-term Treasury
inal construction spending in recent months.
yields increased notably amid heightened volatility, ap-
The U.S. international trade deficit widened substantially parently boosted by a rise in yields on core euro-area
in March but narrowed in April, leaving the deficit mod- sovereign bonds and, to a lesser extent, stronger-than-
estly wider than in February. After decreasing for four anticipated news about the U.S. labor market late in the
straight months, exports increased in both March and period. The sharp rise in yields on core euro-area sov-
April, as shipments to Asia picked up following the res- ereign bonds seemed to reflect a notable rise in term pre-
olution in February of labor disputes at West Coast miums from significantly compressed levels as well as an
ports. Imports rebounded in March from the depressed increase in the path of expected future short-term rates
levels in January and February but fell back in April, following some positive data for the European econ-
close to the first-quarter average. While real net exports omy.
made a large negative contribution to the change in real
The nominal Treasury yield curve steepened appreciably,
GDP in the first quarter of 2015, April data suggested
on net, with 2-, 5-, and 10-year yields ending the inter-
that net exports might be a considerably smaller drag on
meeting period about 15 to 35 basis points higher. Most
GDP growth in the second quarter of the year.
of the increase in nominal yields was attributable to a rise
Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE in real yields, as measures of inflation compensation
price index, only edged up over the 12 months ending in were relatively stable.
April, held down primarily by earlier large declines in en-
Various measures typically used to assess liquidity in
ergy prices. Core PCE inflation, which excludes food
Treasury and mortgage-backed securities (MBS) markets
and energy prices, was 1¼ percent over the same
were little changed over the intermeeting period; they
12-month period, restrained in part by declines in the
have generally pointed to relatively stable market func-
prices of non-energy imports. Measures of expected
tioning over the past several years. However, the major-
longer-run inflation from a number of surveys, including
ity of respondents to the June Senior Credit Officer
the Michigan survey, the Survey of Professional Fore-
Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms indicated
casters, and the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers, re-
that, over the past five years, liquidity and functioning in
mained stable. However, market-based measures of in-
these markets, especially in Treasury markets, have dete-
flation compensation were still low, although somewhat
riorated. Respondents attributed the deterioration pri-
higher than early in the year. Measures of labor com-
marily to securities dealers’ decreased willingness to pro-
pensation rose at moderate rates, outpacing the rise in
vide balance sheet resources for market making as a re-
consumer prices over the past year. The employment
sult of both regulatory changes and changes in internal
cost index increased 2¾ percent over the four quarters
risk-management practices.
ending in the first quarter, while compensation per hour

--- Page 5 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_6_–_1_7,_ 2_0_1_5_________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
On balance, the expected path of the federal funds rate and other longer-term rates. Financing conditions in
implied by futures contracts steepened noticeably be- consumer credit markets stayed accommodative in
yond 2015, with a portion of this shift coming after the March and April. Auto and student loans expanded at a
May employment report. Some evidence suggested that robust pace through April, while revolving credit picked
a significant part of the increase may have reflected up in March and April after a slow start at the beginning
higher term premiums. By contrast, Federal Reserve of the year.
communications following the April FOMC meeting
Sovereign bond yields in foreign economies rose notably
were characterized by investors as generally in line with
during the intermeeting period, especially in the ad-
expectations and elicited limited market reaction.
vanced economies, led by a substantial increase in Ger-
Results from the June Survey of Primary Dealers and the man bund yields. A number of factors may have con-
June Survey of Market Participants indicated little tributed to the increase in yields, including a reappraisal
change since the April survey in modal forecasts of the of term premiums, which appeared to have fallen to very
federal funds rate through 2018. Respondents again saw low levels in April. The rise in yields was also supported
the September 2015 FOMC meeting as the most likely by the release of some stronger-than-expected inflation
time for the first increase in the target range for the fed- data in the euro area and by European Central Bank
eral funds rate. The expected pace of tightening after communications that volatility in yields was to be ex-
the initial increase in the target range for the federal pected. Against this backdrop and with a step-up in con-
funds rate, whenever that might occur, was similar to cerns about developments in Greece, equity prices de-
that reported in the April survey. clined in most countries. Stock prices in Japan and es-
pecially in China were the main exceptions. The foreign
Over the intermeeting period, most broad U.S. equity
exchange value of the dollar increased a bit, on balance,
price indexes moved down a bit, on net, amid mixed
during the intermeeting period against the currencies of
macroeconomic news and little information on earnings.
major U.S. trading partners. While the dollar declined
Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index over the
against the euro and other European currencies, it rose
next month increased, on balance, but remained near the
against the Canadian dollar, the yen, and many emerging
lower end of its historical range. Spreads on 10-year
market currencies, boosted in part by the strong U.S.
triple-B-rated corporate bonds over comparable-
employment report for May.
maturity Treasury securities widened somewhat, on net,
while spreads on speculative-grade corporate bonds nar- Staff Economic Outlook
rowed slightly. In the economic forecast prepared by the staff for the
June FOMC meeting, real GDP growth in the second
Financing conditions for large nonfinancial businesses
half of this year was expected to step up from its pace in
continued to be accommodative. Gross corporate bond
the first half. However, economic growth in the second
issuance remained quite strong, and institutional lever-
half was projected to be a little lower than in the projec-
aged loan issuance picked up significantly. Commercial
tion prepared for the April meeting, largely reflecting a
and industrial loans on banks’ balance sheets continued
small downward revision to the forecast for household
to increase at a solid pace. Meanwhile, financing condi-
spending. The staff’s medium-term projection for real
tions for small businesses continued to improve, though
GDP growth was essentially unrevised from the previ-
the growth of small business loans on banks’ books re-
ous forecast. The staff continued to project that real
mained subdued, partly reflecting still-tepid demand for
GDP would expand at a faster pace than potential out-
credit from owners of small businesses.
put in 2016 and 2017, supported primarily by increases
Financing for commercial real estate remained broadly in consumer spending, even as the normalization of the
available, although the expansion of commercial real es- stance of monetary policy was assumed to proceed. The
tate loans on banks’ books slowed in April and May, re- expansion in economic output over the medium term
portedly because of sales of loans secured by nonfarm was anticipated to trim resource slack; the unemploy-
nonresidential properties into pools of commercial ment rate was expected to decline gradually to the staff’s
mortgage-backed securities. Measures of residential estimate of its longer-run natural rate.
mortgage credit availability continued to improve grad-
The staff’s forecast for inflation in the near term was lit-
ually over the intermeeting period. Nevertheless, credit
tle changed, and it was unrevised over the medium term.
remained tight for borrowers with lower credit scores.
Energy prices and non-oil import prices were expected
Interest rates on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages increased
to begin steadily rising next year, but the staff projected
about 30 basis points, broadly in line with MBS yields

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
that inflation would continue to be below the Commit- quarter real GDP. The unemployment rate was un-
tee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent over 2016 and changed over the period between the April and June
2017. However, inflation was anticipated to reach 2 per- meetings, but payroll employment posted solid gains,
cent thereafter, with inflation expectations in the longer and, on balance, a range of labor market indicators sug-
run assumed to be consistent with the Committee’s ob- gested that underutilization of labor resources dimin-
jective and slack in labor and product markets projected ished somewhat. Although participants marked down
to have waned. their expectations for the rate of increase in real GDP
over the first half of the year, their projections for eco-
The staff viewed the extent of uncertainty around its
nomic growth in the second half of 2015 and over 2016
June projections for real GDP growth, the unemploy-
and 2017 were broadly similar to those prepared for the
ment rate, and inflation as similar to the average over the
March meeting. Under their respective assumptions
past 20 years. The risks to the forecasts for real GDP
about appropriate monetary policy, participants gener-
growth and inflation were seen as tilted a little to the
ally expected real GDP to expand at a rate sufficient to
downside, reflecting the staff’s assessment that neither
continue to move labor market conditions toward levels
monetary policy nor fiscal policy was well positioned to
judged consistent with the Committee’s dual mandate.
help the economy withstand substantial adverse shocks.
Inflation readings available since the April meeting con-
At the same time, the staff saw the risks around its out-
tinued to run below the Committee’s longer-run objec-
look for the unemployment rate as roughly balanced.
tive, partly reflecting earlier declines in energy prices and
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the continued decreases in prices of non-energy imports.
Economic Outlook However, energy prices appeared to have stabilized.
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of Participants continued to project a gradual rise in infla-
the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank pres- tion toward 2 percent over the medium term as the labor
idents submitted their projections of the most likely out- market improved further and the transitory effects of
comes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, in- earlier declines in energy and import prices dissipated.
flation, and the federal funds rate for each year from
In discussing how to interpret the reported weakness in
2015 through 2017 and over the longer run, conditional
real GDP during the first quarter, participants consid-
on each participant’s judgment of appropriate monetary
ered alternative estimates of real economic activity based
policy.5 The longer-run projections represent each par-
on various data-filtering models maintained by Board
ticipant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable
and Reserve Bank staff. These models yielded a range
would be expected to converge, over time, under appro-
of estimates, but, overall, they suggested that real activity
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further
in the first quarter was likely stronger than the then-
shocks to the economy. These projections and policy
current official estimate of real GDP. Some participants
assessments are described in the Summary of Economic
indicated that the higher alternative estimates seemed
Projections, which is an addendum to these minutes.
more consistent with the increases in real gross domestic
In their discussion of the economic situation and the income and private domestic final purchases in the first
outlook, meeting participants viewed the information re- quarter as well as the strength in employment and hours
ceived over the intermeeting period as indicating that worked. However, the alternative estimates left open the
economic activity was expanding moderately after little question of when and to what extent the seasonal adjust-
change in the first quarter of the year. Early in 2015, a ment and other measurement issues associated with of-
number of factors—including unfavorable weather in ficial estimates of GDP in the first quarter might un-
parts of the country and labor disputes at West Coast wind.
ports—temporarily held down real GDP; several analy-
ses also suggested that difficulties with seasonal adjust-
ment likely contributed to an underestimate of first-
5 The incoming president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Phil-
adelphia assumed office after the June FOMC meeting, on
July 1, and a new president of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Dallas has yet to be selected. Blake Prichard and Helen E.
Holcomb, first vice presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Philadelphia and Dallas, respectively, submitted economic
projections.

--- Page 7 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_6_–_1_7,_ 2_0_1_5_________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
While participants generally saw the risks to their projec- the saving rate since last fall may signal more cautious
tions of economic activity and the labor market as bal- behavior among households that might last for some
anced, they gave a number of reasons to be cautious in time.
assessing the outlook. Some pointed to the risk that the
A number of participants noted that housing starts and
weaker-than-anticipated rise in economic activity over
permits rose considerably in recent months, and indica-
the first half of the year could reflect factors that might
tors of sales activity turned more positive. Nonetheless,
continue to restrain sales and production, and that eco-
home construction was still below the trend that would
nomic activity might not have sufficient momentum to
appear consistent with population growth, sales re-
sustain progress toward the Committee’s objectives. In
mained at low levels, and credit availability was still rela-
particular, they were concerned that consumers could re-
tively tight.
main cautious or that the drag on sectors affected by
lower energy prices and the higher dollar could persist. Reports on manufacturing in a number of regions of-
Others, however, viewed the strength in the labor mar- fered some signs that the sector was no longer weaken-
ket in recent months as potentially signaling a stronger- ing, with a couple of Districts’ diffusion indexes turning
than-expected bounceback in economic activity. Several up. Still, cutbacks in spending on drilling and mining
mentioned their uncertainty about whether Greece and equipment, slow demand for other business equipment,
its official creditors would reach an agreement and about and the drag on exports from slow foreign demand and
the likely pace of economic growth abroad, particularly previous increases in the dollar continued to weigh on
in China and other emerging market economies. Other industrial production. Motor vehicle production was
concerns were related to whether the apparent weakness highlighted as a bright spot. In those Districts in which
in productivity growth recently would be reversed or activity had been adversely affected by the drop in en-
continue. On the one hand, a rebound in productivity ergy prices, drilling activity was either contracting less
growth in coming quarters might restrain hiring and slow rapidly or was stabilizing. Higher oil production could
the improvement in labor market conditions. On the continue to hold down energy prices in the near term,
other hand, if productivity growth remained weak, the but industry contacts anticipated some recovery in prices
labor market might tighten more quickly and inflation over the coming year, which should stem layoffs and
might rise more rapidly than anticipated. cuts in capital spending in the energy sector. Agricultural
production in several Districts appeared likely to benefit
At the time of the April meeting, the increase in con-
from wet weather, but weak farm income continued to
sumer spending was estimated to have been unexpect-
weigh on the sector. Several participants reported that
edly weak in the first quarter following strong gains in
the services sector was a relative source of strength in
the second half of 2014. The additional information that
their Districts. In general, business contacts continued
had become available since then, including more com-
to express optimism about stronger sales and production
plete estimates of outlays for services and revised data
in the second half of the year.
on retail sales, indicated that consumer spending was
somewhat better than previously reported, rising at a In their discussion of labor market conditions, partici-
moderate pace in the first quarter. In addition, the pants offered their views on recent developments and
strong rebound in motor vehicle sales and the solid gain the progress that had occurred in reducing underutiliza-
in retail sales in May suggested that the pace of consumer tion of labor resources. They generally agreed that labor
spending was picking up in the current quarter. Moreo- market conditions had improved somewhat over the in-
ver, a number of fundamental factors determining con- termeeting period, variously citing solid increases in pay-
sumer spending remained positive, including the boost roll employment and job openings; low levels of unem-
to real income from the earlier decline in energy prices, ployment insurance claims; and, despite an unchanged
low interest rates, sustained moderate gains in wage and unemployment rate, some further reduction in broader
salary income, stronger household balance sheets, and measures of underutilization, particularly among those
the high levels of households’ confidence about the eco- not actively searching for jobs, but available and inter-
nomic outlook and about their income prospects. Many ested in work. Several participants pointed to some fa-
participants anticipated that these factors would support vorable trends that had developed over a longer period,
a solid pace of consumer spending going forward. How- such as the flattening out of the labor force participation
ever, others remained concerned that consumers had rate and a shift in the flow of workers into more stable
not increased their spending as much as expected in re- and higher-skilled jobs. A number of participants noted
sponse to the drop in energy prices, and that the rise in that the outlook for continued job gains was evident in

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
reports on hiring intentions from business contacts in policy, inflation would move up to or toward the Com-
their Districts who indicated that more firms planned mittee’s objective over the medium term. Among the
additions to their payrolls over the coming year than a factors influencing the trajectories of their inflation fore-
year earlier. While the cumulative improvements in la- casts were their outlooks for the pace of real activity, la-
bor market conditions over the past year had been sub- bor market conditions and wage developments, and in-
stantial, most participants judged that further progress flation expectations.
would be required to eliminate underutilization of labor
In their discussion of financial market developments
resources; some of them anticipated that the utilization
over the intermeeting period, several participants com-
gap would close around the end of the year. Several
mented on the rise in the 10-year Treasury yield, which
other participants indicated that, in their view, labor
accompanied a steeper run-up in the 10-year German
market slack had already been largely eliminated.
yield. The sharp rise in German yields appeared to re-
The ongoing rise in labor demand appeared to have be- flect a retracing of the earlier decline in German rates to
gun to result in a firming of wage increases. Recent read- unsustainably low levels. It was noted that the increase
ings on the employment cost index, hourly compensa- in U.S. yields was not especially large in a historical con-
tion, and average hourly earnings of employees sug- text and that volatility in U.S. fixed-income markets was
gested some acceleration in wages. According to busi- still somewhat below pre-crisis levels. However, many
ness contacts in a number of Districts, many firms look- participants expressed concern that a failure of Greece
ing for new workers said they had been raising wages and its official creditors to resolve their differences could
selectively to attract them; some had also begun to raise result in disruptions in financial markets in the euro area,
wages more generally. However, several participants with possible spillover effects on the United States. And
pointed out that, even with the recent upturn, wage in- some participants reiterated the importance of effective
creases remain subdued. Committee communications in reducing the likelihood
of an outsized financial market reaction around the time
Participants discussed how the incoming information re-
that policy normalization begins.
garding inflation influenced their expectations for reach-
ing the FOMC’s 2 percent inflation objective over the During their discussion of economic conditions and
medium term. Total PCE inflation continued to run be- monetary policy, participants commented on a number
low the Committee’s objective. However, participants of considerations associated with the timing and pace of
noted that the apparent stabilization of crude oil prices policy normalization. Most participants judged that the
and the foreign exchange value of the dollar would re- conditions for policy firming had not yet been achieved;
duce the downward pressure on inflation from falling a number of them cautioned against a premature deci-
prices of energy and imported goods. Core PCE price sion. Many participants emphasized that, in order to de-
inflation, as measured on a 12-month change basis, had termine that the criteria for beginning policy normaliza-
slowed slightly from an already low rate. However, sev- tion had been met, they would need additional infor-
eral participants pointed out that the 3-month change in mation indicating that economic growth was strengthen-
that index had firmed recently, signaling some improve- ing, that labor market conditions were continuing to im-
ment in the inflation outlook. In addition, some cited prove, and that inflation was moving back toward the
alternative measures of inflation, such as the trimmed Committee’s objective. Other concerns that were men-
mean and median consumer price indexes (CPIs) and tioned were the potential erosion of the Committee’s
the trimmed mean PCE, which continued to run at credibility if inflation were to persist below 2 percent and
higher levels than overall PCE inflation. Survey the limited ability of monetary policy to offset downside
measures of longer-term inflation expectations remained shocks to inflation and economic activity when the fed-
stable, and market-based measures of inflation compen- eral funds rate was at its effective lower bound. Some
sation, while still low, were higher than earlier in the year. participants viewed the economic conditions for increas-
Nonetheless, a couple of participants continued to be ing the target range for the federal funds rate as having
concerned that the extended period of low inflation been met or were confident that they would be met
might persist and feed through to inflation expectations, shortly. They identified several possible risks associated
citing estimates from various inflation forecasting mod- with delaying the start of policy firming. One such risk
els and the downtrend in the 10-year CPI projections in was the possibility that the Committee might need to
the Survey of Professional Forecasters. Participants tighten more rapidly than financial markets currently an-
continued to anticipate that, with appropriate monetary ticipate—an outcome that could be associated with a sig-
nificant rise in longer-term interest rates or heightened

--- Page 9 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_6_–_1_7,_ 2_0_1_5_________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
financial market volatility. Another was that prolonging range for the federal funds rate becomes appropriate. It
a high degree of monetary policy accommodation might was noted that the Committee might, in addition to
result in an undesirable increase in inflation or might providing specific instructions to the Desk regarding op-
have adverse consequences for financial and macroeco- erations at that time, update other language in the di-
nomic stability. It was also pointed out that a prompt rective.
start to normalization would likely convey the Commit-
Committee Policy Action
tee’s confidence in prospects for the economy. During
In its discussion of monetary policy for the period ahead,
the discussion, a number of participants recommended
the Committee agreed that the weakness in the first
that, around the time of the first increase in the target
quarter was at least in part the result of transitory factors,
range, the Committee consider how it would update its
and members anticipated that economic growth would
communications regarding the likely path of the federal
resume in the second quarter. Although they expressed
funds rate, with several indicating that the Committee
some uncertainty about the extent of the likely near-term
should remain data dependent in making adjustments to
pickup, members expected moderate economic growth
the target range.
over the medium term. Labor market conditions had
Participants also discussed plans for publishing opera- improved somewhat further, and members anticipated
tional details regarding the implementation of monetary further progress in coming months. Ongoing gains in
policy around the time of the first increase in the target employment and wages along with a high level of con-
range. All participants supported a staff proposal for the sumer confidence were expected to provide support to
Federal Reserve to issue an implementation note that household spending. Signs of stronger housing activity
would communicate separately from the Committee’s were encouraging. However, the outlook for business
postmeeting policy statement the specific measures to be investment remained soft, and net exports were likely to
employed to implement the FOMC’s decision about the continue to be restrained by the earlier appreciation of
stance of policy. Following scheduled FOMC meetings, the dollar. Inflation had been well below the Commit-
this implementation note would be released at the same tee’s longer-run objective, but, with oil prices and the
time as the Committee’s postmeeting statement; it would foreign exchange value of the dollar stabilizing, mem-
convey operational details regarding the settings of the bers expected that inflation would gradually rise toward
policy tools and the changes in administered rates being 2 percent over the medium term. Members thus saw
employed to achieve the Committee’s desired stance of economic conditions as continuing to approach those
policy, and it would include the FOMC’s domestic policy consistent with warranting a start to the normalization
directive to the Desk. If adjustments to policy tools or of the stance of monetary policy. In these circum-
administered rates subsequently proved necessary to im- stances, members agreed to continue making decisions
plement an unchanged policy stance, the implementa- about the appropriate target range for the federal funds
tion note could be revised without altering the Commit- rate on a meeting-by-meeting basis, with their decisions
tee’s policy statement. Participants agreed that this strat- depending on the implications of economic and financial
egy provided a number of advantages, including focus- developments for the prospects for labor markets and
ing the Committee’s postmeeting statement on infor- inflation.
mation about economic conditions and the stance of
With respect to its objective of maximum employment,
monetary policy; communicating the details of policy-
the Committee judged that, on balance, a range of labor
makers’ operational decisions, including the FOMC’s
market indicators suggested that underutilization of la-
domestic policy directive, in one place; reducing the risk
bor resources had diminished somewhat over the inter-
that Federal Reserve communications regarding any
meeting period. Most members saw room for additional
technical adjustments to the operation of its policy tools
progress in reducing labor market slack, while a couple
after the commencement of policy firming might be mis-
of members indicated that they viewed the unemploy-
taken as conveying information about the stance of pol-
ment rate as very close or essentially identical to its
icy; and emphasizing that operational decisions regard-
mandate-consistent level. Many expected that labor
ing the Federal Reserve’s policy tools will be made in
market underutilization would be largely eliminated
concert by the Federal Reserve Board and the FOMC
around year-end if economic activity strengthened as
with the aim of maintaining the federal funds rate in the
they expected. However, some members were more un-
range established by the FOMC. Participants also dis-
certain about the extent of progress in the labor market
cussed how the language of the domestic policy directive
to date or were concerned that if the pace of economic
could be revised when the first increase in the target
growth remained slow, labor market conditions might

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
improve only gradually. Most agreed that they would 2 percent over the medium term as the labor market im-
need more information on developments in the labor proves further and the transitory effects of earlier de-
market to establish a solid basis for assessing whether clines in energy and import prices dissipate.
labor market conditions had improved sufficiently to in-
The Committee agreed to maintain the target range for
itiate tightening.
the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and to reaffirm
Inflation had continued to run below the Committee’s in the statement that the Committee’s decision about
2 percent objective. Most members agreed that the re- how long to maintain the current target range for the
cent stability in crude oil prices had increased their con- federal funds rate would depend on its assessment of ac-
fidence that the downward pressure on inflation from tual and expected progress toward its objectives of max-
earlier declines in energy prices was abating, and some imum employment and 2 percent inflation. Members
noted the recent stability of the foreign exchange value continued to judge that their evaluation of progress on
of the dollar, which could eventually stem the decline in their objectives would take into account a wide range of
prices of imports. Market-based measures of inflation information, including measures of labor market condi-
compensation remained low, but they had risen some tions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation ex-
from their levels earlier in the year, and survey measures pectations, and readings on financial and international
of inflation expectations continued to be stable. How- developments. Members agreed to retain the indication
ever, core inflation was still well below 2 percent. The that the Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate
Committee agreed to continue to monitor inflation de- to raise the target range for the federal funds rate when
velopments closely. In considering the Committee’s cri- it has seen further improvement in the labor market and
teria for beginning policy normalization, all members is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to
but one indicated that they would need to see more evi- its 2 percent objective over the medium term.
dence that economic growth was sufficiently strong and
The Committee also maintained its policy of reinvesting
labor market conditions had firmed enough to return in-
principal payments from agency debt and agency mort-
flation to the Committee’s longer-run objective over the
gage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed secu-
medium term; one member was already reasonably con-
rities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securities at
fident of such an outcome.
auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s hold-
The Committee concluded that, although it had seen ings of longer-term securities at sizable levels, should
some progress, the conditions warranting an increase in help maintain accommodative financial conditions. The
the target range for the federal funds rate had not yet Committee agreed to reiterate its expectation that, even
been met, and that additional information on the out- after employment and inflation are near mandate-
look, particularly for labor markets and inflation, would consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some
be necessary before deciding to implement such an in- time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below
crease. One member, however, indicated a readiness to levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run.
take that step at this meeting but also expressed a will-
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
ingness to wait another meeting or two for additional
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
data before raising the target range.
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to
In considering how to communicate the rationale for the execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with
Committee’s policy decision, members discussed the im- the following domestic policy directive:
portance of adjusting the language in the postmeeting
“Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
statement to acknowledge the evolution of progress to-
Federal Open Market Committee seeks
ward the Committee’s objectives. The Committee
monetary and financial conditions that will
judged it appropriate to communicate that it had seen
foster maximum employment and price
some further improvement in labor market conditions
stability. In particular, the Committee seeks
over the intermeeting period, stating that a range of la-
conditions in reserve markets consistent with
bor market indicators suggested that underutilization of
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to
labor resources diminished somewhat. It also decided
¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk
to indicate the likelihood that energy prices might soon
to undertake open market operations as
exert less downward influence on inflation, saying that
necessary to maintain such conditions. The
energy prices appeared to have stabilized, and to restate
Committee directs the Desk to maintain its
its expectation that inflation would rise gradually toward
policy of rolling over maturing Treasury

--- Page 11 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_6_–_1_7,_ 2_0_1_5________________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
securities into new issues and its policy of level in the near term, but the Committee ex-
reinvesting principal payments on all agency pects inflation to rise gradually toward 2 per-
debt and agency mortgage-backed securities cent over the medium term as the labor mar-
in agency mortgage-backed securities. The ket improves further and the transitory effects
Committee also directs the Desk to engage in of earlier declines in energy and import prices
dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as dissipate. The Committee continues to mon-
necessary to facilitate settlement of the itor inflation developments closely.
Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed
To support continued progress toward maxi-
securities transactions. The System Open
mum employment and price stability, the
Market Account manager and the secretary
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the
will keep the Committee informed of ongoing
current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the
developments regarding the System’s balance
federal funds rate remains appropriate. In de-
sheet that could affect the attainment over
termining how long to maintain this target
time of the Committee’s objectives of
range, the Committee will assess progress—
maximum employment and price stability.”
both realized and expected—toward its objec-
The vote encompassed approval of the statement below tives of maximum employment and 2 percent
to be released at 2:00 p.m.: inflation. This assessment will take into ac-
count a wide range of information, including
“Information received since the Federal Open
measures of labor market conditions, indica-
Market Committee met in April suggests that
tors of inflation pressures and inflation expec-
economic activity has been expanding moder-
tations, and readings on financial and interna-
ately after having changed little during the first
tional developments. The Committee antici-
quarter. The pace of job gains picked up while
pates that it will be appropriate to raise the
the unemployment rate remained steady. On
target range for the federal funds rate when it
balance, a range of labor market indicators
has seen further improvement in the labor
suggests that underutilization of labor re-
market and is reasonably confident that infla-
sources diminished somewhat. Growth in
tion will move back to its 2 percent objective
household spending has been moderate and
over the medium term.
the housing sector has shown some improve-
ment; however, business fixed investment and The Committee is maintaining its existing pol-
net exports stayed soft. Inflation continued icy of reinvesting principal payments from its
to run below the Committee’s longer-run ob- holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-
jective, partly reflecting earlier declines in en- backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
ergy prices and decreasing prices of non- securities and of rolling over maturing Treas-
energy imports; energy prices appear to have ury securities at auction. This policy, by keep-
stabilized. Market-based measures of infla- ing the Committee’s holdings of longer-term
tion compensation remain low; survey-based securities at sizable levels, should help main-
measures of longer-term inflation expecta- tain accommodative financial conditions.
tions have remained stable.
When the Committee decides to begin to re-
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the move policy accommodation, it will take a bal-
Committee seeks to foster maximum employ- anced approach consistent with its longer-run
ment and price stability. The Committee ex- goals of maximum employment and inflation
pects that, with appropriate policy accommo- of 2 percent. The Committee currently antic-
dation, economic activity will expand at a ipates that, even after employment and infla-
moderate pace, with labor market indicators tion are near mandate-consistent levels, eco-
continuing to move toward levels the Com- nomic conditions may, for some time, warrant
mittee judges consistent with its dual man- keeping the target federal funds rate below
date. The Committee continues to see the levels the Committee views as normal in the
risks to the outlook for economic activity and longer run.”
the labor market as nearly balanced. Inflation
Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C.
is anticipated to remain near its recent low
Dudley, Lael Brainard, Charles L. Evans, Stanley Fischer,

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, Jerome H. Pow- By notation vote completed on June 3, 2015, the
ell, Daniel K. Tarullo, and John C. Williams. Committee unanimously approved the selection of
Brian F. Madigan to serve as secretary, effective June 4,
Voting against this action: None.
2015, until the selection of a successor at the first
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2016.
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, July 28–29,
2015. The meeting adjourned at 10:40 a.m. on June 17,
2015.
Notation Votes _____________________________
By notation vote completed on May 19, 2015, the Brian F. Madigan
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Secretary
Committee meeting held on April 28–29, 2015.

--- Page 13 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- FOMC participants generally expected that, under ap-
tee (FOMC) meeting held on June 16–17, 2015, meeting propriate monetary policy, growth of real gross domestic
participants submitted their projections of the most product (GDP) in 2015 would be somewhat below their
likely outcomes for real output growth, the unemploy- individual estimates of the U.S. economy’s longer-run
ment rate, inflation, and the federal funds rate for each normal growth rate but would increase in 2016 before
year from 2015 to 2017 and over the longer run.1 Each slowing to or toward its longer-run rate in 2017 (table 1
participant’s projection was based on information avail- and figure 1). Participants generally expected that the
able at the time of the meeting together with his or her unemployment rate would continue to decline in 2015
assessment of appropriate monetary policy and assump- and 2016, and that the unemployment rate would be at
tions about the factors likely to affect economic out- or below their individual judgments of its longer-run
comes. The longer-run projections represent each par- normal level by the end of 2017. Participants anticipated
ticipant’s assessment of the value to which each variable that inflation, as measured by the four-quarter percent
would be expected to converge, over time, under appro- change in the price index for personal consumption ex-
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further penditures (PCE), would be appreciably below 2 percent
shocks to the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” this year but expected it to step up next year, and a sub-
is defined as the future path of policy that each partici- stantial majority of participants projected that inflation
pant deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic would be at or close to the Committee’s goal of 2 per-
activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual cent in 2017.
interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objectives of
As shown in figure 2, all but two participants anticipated
maximum employment and stable prices.
that further improvement in economic conditions and
________________ the economic outlook would make it appropriate to
1 The incoming president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Phil- begin raising the target range for the federal funds rate
adelphia assumed office after the June FOMC meeting, on in 2015. The economic outlooks of individual partici-
July 1, and a new president of the Federal Reserve Bank of pants implied that it likely would be appropriate to raise
Dallas has yet to be selected. Blake Prichard and Helen E.
the target federal funds rate fairly gradually over the pro-
Holcomb, first vice presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
jection period in order to promote labor market condi-
of Philadelphia and Dallas, respectively, submitted economic
tions and inflation the Committee judges most con-
projections.
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, June 2015
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2015 2016 2017 Longer run 2015 2016 2017 Longer run
Change in real GDP . . . . . 1.8 to 2.0 2.4 to 2.7 2.1 to 2.5 2.0 to 2.3 1.7 to 2.3 2.3 to 3.0 2.0 to 2.5 1.8 to 2.5
March projection . . . . . 2.3 to 2.7 2.3 to 2.7 2.0 to 2.4 2.0 to 2.3 2.1 to 3.1 2.2 to 3.0 1.8 to 2.5 1.8 to 2.5
Unemployment rate . . . . . 5.2 to 5.3 4.9 to 5.1 4.9 to 5.1 5.0 to 5.2 5.0 to 5.3 4.6 to 5.2 4.8 to 5.5 5.0 to 5.8
March projection . . . . . 5.0 to 5.2 4.9 to 5.1 4.8 to 5.1 5.0 to 5.2 4.8 to 5.3 4.5 to 5.2 4.8 to 5.5 4.9 to 5.8
PCE inflation . . . . . . . . . . . 0.6 to 0.8 1.6 to 1.9 1.9 to 2.0 2.0 0.6 to 1.0 1.5 to 2.4 1.7 to 2.2 2.0
March projection . . . . . 0.6 to 0.8 1.7 to 1.9 1.9 to 2.0 2.0 0.6 to 1.5 1.6 to 2.4 1.7 to 2.2 2.0
Core PCE inflation3 . . . . . 1.3 to 1.4 1.6 to 1.9 1.9 to 2.0 1.2 to 1.6 1.5 to 2.4 1.7 to 2.2
March projection . . . . . 1.3 to 1.4 1.5 to 1.9 1.8 to 2.0 1.2 to 1.6 1.5 to 2.4 1.7 to 2.2
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal
consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian
unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy.
Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy
and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The March projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
on March 17–18, 2015.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

--- Page 14 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure1. Centraltendenciesandrangesofeconomicprojections,2015–17andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
Central tendency of projections 4
Range of projections
3
2
Actual 1
+
0
-
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesofthevariablesare
annual.

--- Page 15 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_6_–_1_7_, _2_0_1_5______________P_a_g_e_ _3
Figure2. OverviewofFOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy
Number of participants
Appropriate timing of policy firming
16
15
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
2
1
2015 2016
Percent
Appropriate pace of policy firming: Midpoint of target range or target level for the federal funds rate
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
2015 2016 2017 Longer run
Note: Intheupperpanel,theheightofeachbardenotesthenumberofFOMCparticipantswhojudgethat,under
appropriatemonetarypolicy,thefirstincreaseinthetargetrangeforthefederalfundsratefromitscurrentrangeof0
to1/4percentwilloccurinthespecifiedcalendaryear. InMarch2015,thenumbersofFOMCparticipantswhojudged
that the first increase in the target federal funds rate would occur in 2015 and 2016 were, respectively, 15 and 2. In
the lower panel, each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual
participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate
targetlevelforthefederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun.

--- Page 16 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
sistent with attaining its mandated objectives of maxi- 2.1 to 2.5 percent in 2017. The central tendency of the
mum employment and stable prices. Most participants projections of GDP growth in the longer run was un-
continued to expect that it would be appropriate for the changed from March at 2.0 to 2.3 percent.
federal funds rate to stay appreciably below its longer-
Most participants projected that the unemployment rate
run level for some time after inflation and unemploy-
would continue to decline through 2016, and nearly all
ment are near mandate-consistent levels, reflecting the
projected that by the fourth quarter of 2017, the unem-
effects of remaining headwinds holding back the eco-
ployment rate would be at or below their individual judg-
nomic expansion, and other factors.
ments of its longer-run normal level. The central
Most participants viewed the uncertainty associated with tendencies of participants’ forecasts for the unemploy-
their outlooks for economic growth and the unemploy- ment rate in the fourth quarter of each year were 5.2 to
ment rate as broadly similar to the average level of the 5.3 percent in 2015, and 4.9 to 5.1 percent in both 2016
past 20 years. Most participants also judged the level of and 2017. Compared with the March SEP, participants’
uncertainty about inflation to be broadly similar to the projections for the unemployment rate edged up in 2015
average level of the past 20 years, although some partic- but were little different over the medium term. Several
ipants viewed it as higher. In addition, most participants participants indicated that the differences from their
continued to see the risks to the outlook for economic March projections for the unemployment rate over the
growth and for the unemployment rate as broadly bal- medium term were modest in part because of the mon-
anced, though some viewed the risks to economic etary policy response that they incorporated into their
growth as weighted to the downside. A majority of par- forecasts to mitigate an otherwise weaker trajectory for
ticipants saw the risks to inflation as balanced; of the five expenditures.
who did not see inflation risks as balanced, four saw risks
Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distribution of partici-
as tilted to the downside.
pants’ views regarding the likely outcomes for real GDP
The Outlook for Economic Activity growth and the unemployment rate through 2017 and in
Participants generally projected that, conditional on their the longer run. Some of the diversity of views reflected
individual assumptions about appropriate monetary pol- participants’ individual assessments of a number of fac-
icy, real GDP would grow slowly in the first half of 2015, tors, including the effects of lower oil prices on con-
but that this near-term weakness would give way to sumer spending and business investment, the extent to
growth in 2016 that exceeds their estimates of its longer- which dollar appreciation would affect real activity, the
run normal rate; most participants expected real GDP rate at which the forces that have been restraining the
growth to slow in 2017 to rates at or near their individual pace of the economic recovery would continue to abate,
estimates of the longer-run rate. Participants generally the trajectory for growth in consumption as labor mar-
regarded the weakness in economic activity in the first ket slack diminishes, and the appropriate path of mone-
half of this year to be temporary and pointed to a num- tary policy. Relative to the March SEP, the dispersion
ber of factors that they expected would contribute to of participants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2015
solid output growth through 2016, including improving narrowed considerably, reflecting in part the release of
labor market conditions, strengthened household and the national income and product accounts data for the
business balance sheets, waning effects of the earlier in- first quarter of this year, which were not available when
creases in the exchange value of the dollar, a boost to the FOMC met in March.
consumer spending from low energy prices, diminishing
The Outlook for Inflation
restraint from fiscal policy, and still-accommodative
All participants projected headline PCE inflation to
monetary policy.
come in at or below 1 percent this year—mostly due to
Compared with their Summary of Economic Projections the temporary effects of earlier declines in energy prices
(SEP) contributions in March, all participants revised and decreases in non-energy import prices—but to
down their projections of real GDP growth for 2015, climb to 1½ percent or more in 2016. A sizable majority
but many expected the economy to make up at least of participants expected that headline inflation would be
some of the shortfall over the remainder of the forecast at or close to the Committee’s goal in 2017. Most par-
period. Beyond the near term, changes in participants’ ticipants projected only a slight decline in core PCE in-
forecasts were small. The central tendencies of partici- flation this year and anticipated a gradual rise over the
pants’ current projections for real GDP growth were remainder of the forecast period. Relative to the March
1.8 to 2.0 percent in 2015, 2.4 to 2.7 percent in 2016, and SEP, participants’ projections for PCE inflation changed

--- Page 17 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_6_–_1_7_, _2_0_1_5______________P_a_g_e_ _5
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2015–17andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2015
June projections 18
March projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 6 1. 8 2. 0 2. 2 2. 4 2. 6 2. 8 3. 0
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 6 1. 8 2. 0 2. 2 2. 4 2. 6 2. 8 3. 0
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 6 1. 8 2. 0 2. 2 2. 4 2. 6 2. 8 3. 0
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 6 1. 8 2. 0 2. 2 2. 4 2. 6 2. 8 3. 0
1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 18 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2015–17andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2015
June projections 18
March projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 19 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_6_–_1_7_, _2_0_1_5______________P_a_g_e_ _7
very little. The central tendencies for PCE inflation were unchanged from March at 0.63 percent; however, the
0.6 to 0.8 percent in 2015, 1.6 to 1.9 percent in 2016, and mean federal funds rate projection of 0.58 percent for
1.9 to 2.0 percent in 2017; for core PCE inflation, the that date was 19 basis points lower than in March. The
central tendencies were 1.3 to 1.4 percent in 2015, 1.6 to median projections for the ends of 2016 and 2017 were
1.9 percent in 2016, and 1.9 to 2.0 percent in 2017. Fac- 1.63 percent and 2.88 percent, respectively—both 25 ba-
tors cited by participants as likely to contribute to infla- sis points lower than in March. Compared with the
tion rising toward 2 percent included stable longer-term March SEP, the dispersion of the projections for the ap-
inflation expectations, steadily diminishing resource propriate level of the federal funds rate was a bit nar-
slack, a pickup in wage growth, the waning effects of de- rower over 2015 and 2016, and about the same as in
clines in energy prices, and still-accommodative mone- March for 2017.
tary policy.
A sizable majority of participants judged that it would be
Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri- appropriate for the federal funds rate at the end of 2017
bution of participants’ views about the outlook for infla- to remain below its longer-run normal level, with about
tion. The range of projections for PCE inflation in 2015 half of all participants projecting the federal funds rate
narrowed, albeit mostly on the basis of the lowering of at that time to be more than ½ percentage point lower
just one projection; otherwise, the ranges of participants’ than their estimates of its longer-run value. Participants
projections for both headline and core PCE inflation provided a number of reasons why they thought it would
were nearly identical to what was reported in March. be appropriate for the federal funds rate to remain below
its longer-run normal level for some time after inflation
Appropriate Monetary Policy
and the unemployment rate were near mandate-
Participants judged that it would be appropriate to begin
consistent levels. These reasons included the expecta-
normalization of monetary policy as labor market indi-
tion that headwinds that have been holding back the re-
cators and inflation moved to or toward values the Com-
covery would continue to exert some restraint on eco-
mittee regards as consistent with the attainment of its
nomic activity, that weak real activity abroad and the re-
mandated objectives of maximum employment and
cent appreciation of the dollar were likely to persist and
price stability. As shown in figure 2, all but two partici-
temper spending and production in the United States,
pants anticipated that it would be appropriate to begin
that residual slack in the labor market would still be evi-
raising the target range for the federal funds rate during
dent in some measures of labor utilization other than the
2015. However, a sizable majority projected that the ap-
unemployment rate, and that the risks to the economic
propriate level of the federal funds rate would remain
outlook were asymmetric in part because of the con-
below their individual estimates of its longer-run normal
straints on monetary policy associated with the effective
level through 2017.
lower bound on the federal funds rate.
All but a few participants projected that the unemploy-
Relative to the March SEP, participants made at most
ment rate would be at or somewhat above their estimates
modest adjustments to their estimates of the longer-run
of its longer-run normal level at the end of the year in
level of the federal funds rate. These changes left the
which they judged the initial increase in the target range
median estimate of the longer-run normal federal funds
for the federal funds rate would be warranted, and all
rate unchanged from March at 3.75 percent; the central
participants projected that unemployment would decline
tendency for the federal funds rate in the longer run was
further after the commencement of normalization. All
3.5 to 3.75 percent, also the same as in March.
participants projected that inflation would be below the
Committee’s 2 percent objective that year, but they also Participants’ views of the appropriate path for monetary
saw inflation rising notably closer to 2 percent in the fol- policy were informed by their judgments about the state
lowing year. of the economy, including their estimates of the values
of the unemployment rate and other labor market indi-
Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’
cators that would be consistent with maximum employ-
judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target
ment, the extent to which labor market conditions were
federal funds rate at the end of each calendar year from
currently perceived to be falling short of maximum em-
2015 to 2017 and over the longer run. Relative to their
ployment, and the prospects for inflation to return to the
March projections, most participants considered a lower
Committee’s longer-term objective of 2 percent over the
level of the federal funds rate to be appropriate over
medium term. Also noted by participants were the im-
some part of the projection period. The median projec-
plications of international developments for the domes-
tion for the federal funds rate at the end of 2015 was

--- Page 20 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2015–17andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2015
June projections 18
March projections
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_6_–_1_7_, _2_0_1_5______________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2015–17
Number of participants
2015
June projections
March projections 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 22 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’judgmentsofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfunds
rateortheappropriatetargetlevelforthefederalfundsrate,2015–17andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2015
June projections 18
March projections
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Note: Themidpointsofthetargetrangesforthefederalfundsrateandthetargetlevelsforthefederalfundsrate
aremeasuredattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun.

--- Page 23 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_6_–_1_7_, _2_0_1_5_____________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges GDP growth and the unemployment rate as broadly
Percentage points similar to the norms of the previous 20 years (figure 4).2
Variable 2015 2016 2017
As in March, most participants saw the risks to their out-
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . ±1.4 ±2.0 ±2.1
looks for real GDP growth as broadly balanced, al-
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . ±0.4 ±1.2 ±1.8 though some participants again viewed the risks to real
GDP growth as weighted to the downside. Those par-
Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.8 ±1.0 ±1.0
ticipants who viewed the risks as weighted to the down-
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the
root mean squared error of projections for 1995 through 2014 that side cited, for example, concern about the limited ability
were released in the summer by various private and government fore- of monetary policy to respond to negative shocks to the
casters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain
economy when the federal funds rate is at its effective
assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual out-
comes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in lower bound, a fragile foreign economic outlook, and
ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the weak readings on productivity growth. A large majority
past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip
(2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from His- of participants judged the risks to the outlook for the
torical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series unemployment rate to be broadly balanced.
2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, November), available at www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/ Participants generally agreed that the levels of uncer-
2007/200760/200760abs.html; and Board of Governors of the Fed-
tainty associated with their inflation forecasts were
eral Reserve System, Division of Research and Statistics (2014), “Up-
dated Historical Forecast Errors,” memorandum, April 9, www.fed- broadly similar to historical norms. A few policymakers
eralreserve.gov/foia/files/20140409-historical-forecast-errors.pdf. indicated that their confidence in the likelihood of infla-
1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
tion moving toward the policy objective of 2 percent in-
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
that has been most widely used in government and private economic flation had increased. In all, 11 participants viewed the
forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous
risks to their inflation forecast as balanced, up from 8 in
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.
the March SEP. The risks were still seen as tilted to the
tic economy, the uncertainty regarding the reaction by
downside by 5 participants who cited the possibility that
economic decisionmakers to the beginning of policy
the effects of the high exchange value of the dollar on
normalization after a lengthy period with the federal
domestic inflation could persist for longer than antici-
funds rate at the effective lower bound, the economic
pated, that longer-term inflation expectations might co-
benefits of limiting any associated disruptions in finan-
alesce on a lower level of inflation than assumed, or that,
cial markets, and a general desire to practice risk man-
in current circumstances, it could be difficult for the
agement in setting monetary policy. In addition, some
Committee to respond effectively to low-inflation out-
participants mentioned the prescriptions of various
comes. Conversely, 1 participant saw risks to inflation
monetary policy rules as factors they considered in judg-
as weighted to the upside, citing uncertainty about the
ing the appropriate path for the federal funds rate.
timing and efficacy of the Committee’s withdrawal of
Uncertainty and Risks monetary policy accommodation.
A large majority of participants continued to judge the
levels of uncertainty attending their projections for real
2 Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for the
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con-
sumer price inflation over the period from 1995 through 2014.
At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty”
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess
the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projec-
tions.

--- Page 24 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4. Uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth Risks to GDP growth
June projections June projections
18 18
March projections March projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation Risks to PCE inflation
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation Risks to core PCE inflation
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”Defini-
tionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 25 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_6_–_1_7_, _2_0_1_5_____________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the current year, 1.0 to 5.0 percent in the second
members of the Board of Governors and the year, and 0.9 to 5.1 percent in the third year. The
presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals
discussions of monetary policy among policy- for overall inflation would be 1.2 to 2.8 percent
makers and can aid public understanding of the in the current year and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the
basis for policy actions. Considerable uncer- second and third years.
tainty attends these projections, however. The Because current conditions may differ from
economic and statistical models and relation- those that prevailed, on average, over history,
ships used to help produce economic forecasts participants provide judgments as to whether
are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the the uncertainty attached to their projections of
real world, and the future path of the economy each variable is greater than, smaller than, or
can be affected by myriad unforeseen develop- broadly similar to typical levels of forecast un-
ments and events. Thus, in setting the stance certainty in the past, as shown in table 2. Partic-
of monetary policy, participants consider not ipants also provide judgments as to whether the
only what appears to be the most likely eco- risks to their projections are weighted to the up-
nomic outcome as embodied in their projec- side, are weighted to the downside, or are
tions, but also the range of alternative possibil- broadly balanced. That is, participants judge
ities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the whether each variable is more likely to be above
potential costs to the economy should they oc- or below their projections of the most likely out-
cur. come. These judgments about the uncertainty
Table 2 summarizes the average historical and the risks attending each participant’s projec-
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including tions are distinct from the diversity of partici-
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports pants’ views about the most likely outcomes.
and those prepared by the Federal Reserve Forecast uncertainty is concerned with the risks
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the associated with a particular projection rather
Federal Open Market Committee. The projec- than with divergences across a number of differ-
tion error ranges shown in the table illustrate ent projections.
the considerable uncertainty associated with As with real activity and inflation, the out-
economic forecasts. For example, suppose a look for the future path of the federal funds rate
participant projects that real gross domestic is subject to considerable uncertainty. This un-
product (GDP) and total consumer prices will certainty arises primarily because each partici-
rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, pant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of
3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- monetary policy depends importantly on the
tending those projections is similar to that ex- evolution of real activity and inflation over time.
perienced in the past and the risks around the If economic conditions evolve in an unexpected
projections are broadly balanced, the numbers manner, then assessments of the appropriate
reported in table 2 would imply a probability of setting of the federal funds rate would change
about 70 percent that actual GDP would ex- from that point forward.
pand within a range of 1.6 to 4.4 percent in the

# Tables

## Page_2_Table_1


| In a joint session of the Federal Open Market Commit-        |
|--------------------------------------------------------------|
| tee (FOMC) and the Board of Governors of the Federal         |
| Reserve System, the manager of the System Open Mar-          |
| ket Account (SOMA) reported on developments in do-           |
| mestic and foreign financial markets. The manager also       |
| discussed System open market operations conducted by         |
| the Open Market Desk during the period since the Com-        |
| mittee met on April 28–29. The Desk’s overnight re-          |
| verse repurchase agreement (RRP) operations continued        |
| to provide a soft floor for money market interest rates.     |
| The manager updated the Committee on plans for term          |
| RRP operations at the end of the second quarter and          |
| noted that testing of the Federal Reserve’s Term Deposit     |
| Facility continued. The manager also reviewed the rein-      |
| vestment policy for maturing Treasury securities. Spe-       |
| cifically, at Treasury auctions, the Desk rolls over the     |
| maturing securities held in the SOMA into newly issued       |
| securities in proportion to the issue amounts of the new     |
| securities, and the Federal Reserve receives the interest    |
| rate determined competitively in the public auction of       |
| the newly issued securities.                                 |
| The manager updated the Committee on tentative plans         |
| to improve the calculation of the effective federal funds    |
| rate published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New            |
| York. The effective federal funds rate, currently defined    |
| as the volume-weighted mean of interest rates on federal     |
| funds transactions, would be redefined as the volume-        |
| weighted median. Staff analysis suggested that the           |
| volume-weighted median would usually differ little from      |
| the volume-weighted mean, but that the median would          |
| be a more robust statistic when some trades occur at in-     |
| terest rates that are unrepresentative of general market     |
| conditions or when there are data problems such as re-       |
| porting errors. The change in approach would be imple-       |
| mented next year in conjunction with the transition to       |
| the Report of Selected Money Market Rates (FR 2420)          |
| as the data source for the calculation of the effective fed- |
| eral funds rate. A volume-weighted median would also         |
| be used to construct a representative measure of condi-      |
| tions in the broader set of markets covered by the new       |


## Page_3_Table_1


| overnight bank funding rate.4 The manager noted that      |
|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| additional background information on these changes        |
| would be published by the Desk shortly following the      |
| release of the minutes from this meeting. Participants    |
| expressed no objections to the proposal.                  |
| The staff also provided an update to the Committee on     |
| a review of the current system of primary dealers and the |
| Desk’s overall framework for establishing, maintaining,   |
| and publishing information on the Federal Reserve’s       |
| counterparty relationships for operations in both do-     |
| mestic and foreign financial markets. While the current   |
| sets of counterparties were performing well and meeting   |
| the Desk’s needs, the staff noted that it would report    |
| back to the Committee in the future should potential en-  |
| hancements to the counterparty framework be identi-       |
| fied. The Desk anticipated that it would conduct regular  |
| reviews of the counterparty framework approximately       |
| every three years in the future.                          |
| By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Open        |
| Market Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeet-   |
| ing period. There were no intervention operations in      |
| foreign currencies for the System’s account over the in-  |
| termeeting period.                                        |
| The Board meeting concluded at the end of the discus-     |
| sion of developments in financial markets and the Fed-    |
| eral Reserve’s balance sheet.                             |


## Page_13_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |      |      |                                                     |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |      |      |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|-----------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|
| 2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | 2016 | 2017 | Longer run                                          | 2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    | 2016 | 2017 |
| 1.8 to 2.0 2.4 to 2.7 2.1 to 2.5
2.3 to 2.7 2.3 to 2.7 2.0 to 2.4
5.2 to 5.3 4.9 to 5.1 4.9 to 5.1
5.0 to 5.2 4.9 to 5.1 4.8 to 5.1
0.6 to 0.8 1.6 to 1.9 1.9 to 2.0
0.6 to 0.8 1.7 to 1.9 1.9 to 2.0
1.3 to 1.4 1.6 to 1.9 1.9 to 2.0
1.3 to 1.4 1.5 to 1.9 1.8 to 2.0 |      |      | 2.0 to 2.3
2.0 to 2.3
5.0 to 5.2
5.0 to 5.2
2.0
2.0 | 1.7 to 2.3 2.3 to 3.0 2.0 to 2.5
2.1 to 3.1 2.2 to 3.0 1.8 to 2.5
5.0 to 5.3 4.6 to 5.2 4.8 to 5.5
4.8 to 5.3 4.5 to 5.2 4.8 to 5.5
0.6 to 1.0 1.5 to 2.4 1.7 to 2.2
0.6 to 1.5 1.6 to 2.4 1.7 to 2.2
1.2 to 1.6 1.5 to 2.4 1.7 to 2.2
1.2 to 1.6 1.5 to 2.4 1.7 to 2.2 |      |      |