# 20150318_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:37:52*
*Pages: 25, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
March 17–18, 2015
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on
James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of
Tuesday, March 17, 2015, at 10:30 a.m. and continued
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
on Wednesday, March 18, 2015, at 9:00 a.m.
William B. English, Senior Special Adviser to the
PRESENT: Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
Governors
Janet L. Yellen, Chair
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Andrew Figura, David Reifschneider, and Stacey
Lael Brainard Tevlin, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of
Charles L. Evans Board Members, Board of Governors
Stanley Fischer
Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office
Jeffrey M. Lacker
of Board Members, Board of Governors
Dennis P. Lockhart
Jerome H. Powell Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Daniel K. Tarullo Board Members, Board of Governors
John C. Williams
David E. Lebow and Michael G. Palumbo, Senior
Associate Directors, Division of Research and
James Bullard, Christine Cumming, Esther L. George,
Statistics, Board of Governors
Loretta J. Mester, and Eric Rosengren, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Michael T. Kiley, Senior Adviser, Division of Research
and Statistics, and Senior Associate Director,
Narayana Kocherlakota, President of the Federal
Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research,
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Board of Governors
Helen E. Holcomb and Blake Prichard, First Vice
Ellen E. Meade and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers,
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Philadelphia, respectively
Fabio M. Natalucci2 and Gretchen C. Weinbach,1
Thomas Laubach, Secretary and Economist
Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary
Board of Governors
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Jane E. Ihrig and David López-Salido, Deputy
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Board of Governors; John J. Stevens, Deputy
Steven B. Kamin, Economist Associate Director, Division of Research and
David W. Wilcox, Economist Statistics, Board of Governors
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy,
William R. Nelson, Glenn D. Rudebusch, Daniel
G. Sullivan, William Wascher, and John A.
Weinberg, Associate Economists
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account
Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open ________________
Market Account 1 Attended the joint session of the Federal Open Market
Committee and the Board of Governors.
Robert deV. Frierson,1 Secretary of the Board, Office
2 Attended the portion of the meeting following the joint
of the Secretary, Board of Governors
session of the Federal Open Market Committee and the
Board of Governors.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Glenn Follette, Assistant Director, Division of level as in the largest operation conducted in prior test-
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; ing. The term RRP operations were executed as a series
Elizabeth Klee, Assistant Director, Division of of four one-week operations and conducted away from
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors quarter-end; take-up primarily represented substitution
away from ON RRP operations. The combination of
Penelope A. Beattie,1 Assistant to the Secretary, Office
these term and ON RRP test operations continued to
of the Secretary, Board of Governors
provide a soft floor for money market rates over the in-
Dana L. Burnett and Don Kim, Section Chiefs, termeeting period.
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Open
Katie Ross,1 Manager, Office of the Secretary, Board of Market Desk’s domestic transactions over the
Governors intermeeting period. There were no intervention
operations in foreign currencies for the System’s account
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of
over the intermeeting period.
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Normalization Tools
Zeynep Senyuz, Economist, Division of Monetary
A staff briefing provided background on options for set-
Affairs, Board of Governors
ting the aggregate capacity of the ON RRP facility in the
Kenneth C. Montgomery, First Vice President, Federal early stages of the normalization process. Two options
Reserve Bank of Boston were discussed: initially setting a temporarily elevated
aggregate cap or suspending the aggregate cap for a
Ron Feldman, Executive Vice President, Federal Re-
time. The briefing noted that, as the balance sheet nor-
serve Bank of Minneapolis
malizes and reserve balances decline, usage of the ON
Michael Dotsey, Craig S. Hakkio, Evan F. Koenig, and RRP facility should diminish, allowing the facility to be
Paolo A. Pesenti, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal phased out over time. In addition, the briefing outlined
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Kansas City, Dallas, strategies for actively reducing take-up at the ON RRP
and New York, respectively facility after policy normalization is under way, while
maintaining an appropriate degree of monetary control,
David Andolfatto, Todd E. Clark, Antoine Martin, Joe
if take-up is larger than the FOMC desires. These strat-
Peek, and Douglas Tillett, Vice Presidents, Federal
egies included adjusting the values of the interest on ex-
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Cleveland, New York,
cess reserves (IOER) and ON RRP rates associated with
Boston, and Chicago, respectively
a given target range for the federal funds rate, relying on
tools such as term RRPs and the TDF to broaden arbi-
trage opportunities and to drain reserve balances, and
selling shorter-term Treasury securities to reduce the size
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed- of the balance sheet at a faster pace. In addition, the
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet briefing presented some information on specific calibra-
In a joint session of the Federal Open Market Commit- tions of policy tools that could be used during the early
tee (FOMC) and the Board of Governors of the Federal stages of policy normalization.
Reserve System, the manager of the System Open Mar-
In their discussion of the options and strategies sur-
ket Account (SOMA) reported on developments in do-
rounding the use of tools at liftoff and the potential sub-
mestic and foreign financial markets. The deputy man-
sequent reduction in aggregate ON RRP capacity, par-
ager followed with a review of System open market op-
ticipants emphasized that during the early stages of pol-
erations conducted during the period since the Commit-
icy normalization, it will be a priority to ensure appropri-
tee met on January 27–28, 2015. The deputy manager
ate control over the federal funds rate and other short-
also discussed the outcomes of recent tests of supple-
term interest rates. Against this backdrop, participants
mentary normalization tools—namely, the Term De-
generally saw some advantages to a temporarily elevated
posit Facility (TDF) and term and overnight reverse re-
aggregate cap or a temporary suspension of the cap to
purchase agreement operations (term RRP operations
ensure that the facility would have sufficient capacity to
and ON RRP operations, respectively). The TDF oper-
support policy implementation at the time of liftoff, but
ations were executed as three overlapping 21-day term
they also indicated that they expected that it would be
operations with same-day settlement; the total amount
appropriate to reduce ON RRP capacity fairly soon after
of term deposits outstanding peaked at roughly the same

--- Page 3 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 1_7_–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_5________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
the Committee begins firming the stance of policy. A Participants also discussed whether to communicate to
couple of participants stated their view that the risks to the public additional details regarding the approach they
financial stability that might arise from a temporarily el- intend to take when it becomes appropriate to begin the
evated aggregate ON RRP capacity were likely to be normalization process, including the width of the target
small, and it was noted that there might be little potential range for the federal funds rate, the settings of the IOER
for a temporarily large Federal Reserve presence in and ON RRP rates, and the use of supplementary tools.
money markets to affect the structure of those markets A couple of participants suggested communicating a
if plans for reducing the facility’s capacity were clearly specific commitment to reducing ON RRP capacity
communicated and well understood. However, a couple soon after liftoff. However, a number of participants
of participants expressed financial stability concerns, and emphasized that maintaining control of short-term in-
one stressed that more planning was needed to address terest rates would be paramount in the initial stages of
the potential risks before the Committee decides on the policy normalization, and that it was difficult to know in
appropriate level of ON RRP capacity at the time of lift- advance when a reduction would be appropriate. They
off. therefore desired to retain some flexibility over the tim-
ing of any reduction. That said, many participants
In their discussion regarding strategies for reducing ON
agreed that an elevated aggregate capacity for the facility
RRP usage, should it become undesirably large during
would likely be appropriate only for a short period after
the early stages of normalization, most participants
liftoff.
viewed raising the IOER rate, thereby widening the
spread between the IOER and ON RRP rates, as an ap- At the conclusion of their discussion, all participants
propriate initial step. A majority of participants thought agreed to augment the Committee’s Policy Normaliza-
term reserve draining tools could be useful in reducing tion Principles and Plans by providing the following ad-
ON RRP usage, although a couple of participants ques- ditional details regarding the operational approach the
tioned their effectiveness in placing upward pressure on FOMC intends to use when it becomes appropriate to
market interest rates, and a few did not see term RRPs begin normalizing the stance of monetary policy.3
as reducing the Federal Reserve’s presence in money
When economic conditions warrant the commencement
markets, arguing that investors view term and overnight
of policy firming, the Federal Reserve intends to:
RRPs as close substitutes. Many participants mentioned
that selling assets that will mature in a relatively short  Continue to target a range for the federal funds rate
time could be considered at some stage, if necessary to that is 25 basis points wide.
reduce ON RRP usage. However, a number of partici-  Set the IOER rate equal to the top of the target
pants noted that it could be difficult to communicate the range for the federal funds rate and set the offering
reason for such sales to the public, and, in particular, that rate associated with an ON RRP facility equal to the
the announcement of such sales would risk an outsized bottom of the target range for the federal funds rate.
market reaction, as the public could view the sales as a
 Allow aggregate capacity of the ON RRP facility to
signal of a tighter overall stance of monetary policy than
be temporarily elevated to support policy implemen-
they had anticipated or as an indication that the Com-
tation; adjust the IOER rate and the parameters of
mittee might be more willing than had been thought to
the ON RRP facility, and use other tools such as
sell longer-term assets. Some participants pointed out
term operations, as necessary for appropriate mon-
that an earlier end to reinvestments of principal on ma-
etary control, based on policymakers’ assessments
turing or prepaying securities would help reduce the level
of the efficacy and costs of their tools. The Com-
of reserve balances, thereby increasing the effectiveness
mittee expects that it will be appropriate to reduce
of the IOER rate and allowing a more rapid reduction in
the capacity of the facility fairly soon after it com-
the size of the ON RRP facility. A number of partici-
mences policy firming.
pants suggested that it would be useful to consider spe-
cific plans for these and other details of policy normali- A staff briefing outlined some options for further testing
zation under a range of post-liftoff scenarios. of term RRP operations over future quarter-ends. While
the tests of term RRPs to date had been informative, the
staff suggested that if the Committee envisioned using
3 The statement titled Policy Normalization Principles and
Plans is available on the Board’s website at www.federalre-
serve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20140917c.htm.

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
term RRPs as part of its strategy at liftoff, or potentially of the operations. These operations shall be
at some other point during normalization, continued conducted in addition to the authorized over-
testing may be useful. Participants discussed whether a night reverse repurchase agreements, which re-
resolution that authorized term RRP test operations at main subject to a separate overall size limit au-
quarter-ends through the end of 2015 might reduce the thorized by the FOMC.”
probability that market participants mistakenly interpret
Mr. Lacker dissented in the vote on the resolution be-
future decisions about testing term RRPs over quarter-
cause the March end-of-quarter testing had not yet been
ends as containing information about the likely timing of
completed and he felt that there was no need to author-
liftoff. It was noted that such a resolution would be
ize additional testing before then.
more efficient from an administrative and communica-
tions standpoint, as it would simply allow a continuation The Board meeting concluded at the end of the discus-
of recent quarter-end testing of term RRPs. Moreover, sion of normalization tools.
the resolution would not convey any information regard-
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
ing either the timing of the start of policy normalization
The information reviewed for the March 17‒18 meeting
or whether term RRP operations might be employed at
suggested that real gross domestic product (GDP)
the time of liftoff and, if so, for how long.
growth moderated in the first quarter and that labor mar-
Following the discussion of the testing of term RRP ket conditions improved further. Consumer price infla-
operations, the Committee approved the following tion was restrained significantly by declines in energy
resolution on term RRP testing over quarter-ends prices and continued to run below the FOMC’s longer-
through January 29, 2016: run objective of 2 percent. Market-based measures of
inflation compensation were still low, while survey
“During each of the periods of June 18 to 29,
measures of longer-run inflation expectations remained
2015; September 18 to 29, 2015; and December
stable.
17 to 30, 2015, the Federal Open Market Com-
mittee (FOMC) authorizes the Federal Reserve Nonfarm payroll employment continued to expand
Bank of New York to conduct a series of term strongly in January and February. The unemployment
reverse repurchase operations involving U.S. rate declined to 5.5 percent in February. Both the labor
government securities. Such operations shall: force participation rate and the employment-to-
(i) mature no later than July 8, 2015, October 7, population ratio rose slightly over the first two months
2015, and January 8, 2016, respectively; (ii) be of the year, and the share of workers employed part time
subject to an overall size limit of $300 billion for economic reasons edged down. The rate of private-
outstanding at any one time; (iii) be subject to a sector job openings moved up in January and was at an
maximum bid rate of five basis points above the elevated level; the rate of quits remained the same as in
ON RRP offering rate in effect on the day of the fourth quarter, but the rate of hiring stepped down.
the operation; (iv) be awarded to all submitters:
Industrial production decreased a little, on net, in Janu-
(A) at the highest submitted rate if the sum of
ary and February, as declines in the output of the manu-
the bids received is less than or equal to the pre-
facturing and mining sectors more than offset an in-
announced size of the operation, or (B) at the
crease in utilities production. Some indicators of mining
stop-out rate, determined by evaluating bids in
activity, such as counts of drilling rigs in operation,
ascending order by submitted rate up to the
dropped further. However, automakers’ assembly
point at which the total quantity of bids equals
schedules and broader indicators of manufacturing pro-
the preannounced size of the operation, with all
duction, such as the readings on new orders from na-
bids below this rate awarded in full at the stop-
tional and regional manufacturing surveys, generally
out rate and all bids at the stop-out rate awarded
pointed to modest gains in factory output in coming
on a pro rata basis, if the sum of the counter-
months.
party offers received is greater than the prean-
nounced size of the operation. Such operations Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) ap-
may be for forward settlement. The System peared to decelerate somewhat going into the first quar-
Open Market Account manager will inform the ter after rising markedly in the fourth quarter. The com-
FOMC in advance of the terms of the planned ponents of the nominal retail sales data used by the Bu-
operations. The Chair must approve the terms reau of Economic Analysis to construct its estimate of
of, timing of the announcement of, and timing PCE declined slightly in January and February, and light

--- Page 5 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 1_7_–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_5________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
motor vehicle sales stepped down; unusually severe Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE
weather in some regions in February may have ac- price index, edged up only ¼ percent over the
counted for a small part of the slowing in consumer 12 months ending in January, as energy prices declined
spending in that month. Recent information about key significantly. The core PCE price index, which excludes
factors that influence household spending pointed to- food and energy prices, rose 1¼ percent over the same
ward a pickup in PCE in the coming months. The pur- 12-month period. Measures of expected long-run infla-
chasing power of households’ income continued to be tion from a variety of surveys, including the Michigan
supported by low energy prices, and real disposable in- survey, the Blue Chip Economic Indicators, the Survey of
come rose briskly in January. Moreover, households’ net Professional Forecasters, and the Desk’s Survey of Pri-
worth likely increased as equity prices and home values mary Dealers, remained stable. Market-based measures
advanced further, and consumer sentiment in the Uni- of inflation compensation were still low. Measures of
versity of Michigan Surveys of Consumers was still near labor compensation continued to increase at a modest
its highest level since prior to the most recent recession. pace, although faster than consumer prices. Both com-
pensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector and
The pace of activity in the housing sector remained slow.
the employment cost index rose 2¼ percent over the
Both starts and building permits for new single-family
year ending in the fourth quarter. Average hourly earn-
homes declined over January and February. Starts of
ings for all employees increased 2 percent over the
multifamily units also decreased, on net, over the past
12 months ending in February.
two months. Sales of new and existing homes moved
down in January, although pending home sales increased Foreign real GDP appeared to expand at a moderate
somewhat. pace in the fourth quarter. While GDP growth stepped
down in several economies, including Canada and China,
Real private expenditures for business equipment and in-
it picked up in the euro area, Japan, and Mexico. Indi-
tellectual property products appeared to be expanding in
cators for the first quarter suggested continued firming
the first quarter at about the same modest pace as in the
in the euro area and further slowing in China and Can-
previous quarter. Both nominal orders and shipments
ada. Consumer prices in many foreign economies de-
of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft rose in
clined further in the first months of this year, reflecting
January. New orders for these capital goods remained
the falls in energy prices as well as decreases in food
above the level of shipments, indicating that shipments
prices in some emerging market economies. Many cen-
may increase in subsequent months. Other forward-
tral banks took steps to ease monetary policy during the
looking indicators, such as national and regional surveys
period, including the European Central Bank (ECB),
of business conditions, were generally consistent with
which began purchasing sovereign bonds under its pub-
modest increases in business equipment spending in the
lic sector purchase program (PSPP), and the People’s
near term. Firms’ nominal spending for nonresidential
Bank of China, which lowered required reserve ratios for
structures moved down in January after rising in the
banks. A number of other central banks in advanced
fourth quarter.
and emerging market economies cut policy interest rates.
Federal spending data for January and February pointed
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
toward a further decline in real federal government pur-
Movements in asset prices over the intermeeting period
chases in the first quarter. Real state and local govern-
largely seemed to reflect receding concerns about down-
ment purchases appeared to be rising modestly in the
side risks to the global economic outlook. Two strong
first quarter as their payrolls increased in recent months,
U.S. employment reports and the January consumer
although their construction expenditures decreased a lit-
price index release, all of which were above market ex-
tle in January.
pectations; the start of sovereign bond purchases by the
The U.S. international trade deficit widened substantially ECB; and the somewhat more encouraging economic
in December before narrowing somewhat in January. news from Europe all appeared to contribute to the im-
Exports declined in both December and January, reflect- proved sentiment in financial markets. Equity prices
ing weak agricultural goods exports, the lower price of were higher, on net, although they declined later in the
petroleum products, and falling or flat exports of most period.
other categories of goods. Imports rose in December,
Federal Reserve communications over the intermeeting
with an increased volume of petroleum imports, but de-
period, including the minutes of the January FOMC
clined in January, driven by lower prices and volumes for
petroleum.

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
meeting, reportedly were perceived as slightly more ac- Credit conditions faced by large nonfinancial firms re-
commodative than expected on balance. Market com- mained generally accommodative. Corporate bond issu-
mentary also highlighted Chair Yellen’s statement at the ance increased in February, mostly reflecting activity by
Monetary Policy Report testimony that the eventual removal investment-grade firms. Commercial and industrial
of the language in the policy statement noting that “the loans on banks’ books continued to expand strongly, re-
Committee judges that it can be patient in beginning to portedly in part to fund increased merger and acquisition
normalize the stance of monetary policy” should not be activity. Institutional leveraged loan issuance during Jan-
viewed as indicating that the federal funds rate would uary and February was supported by strong issuance of
necessarily be increased within a couple of meetings. new money loans, while refinancing activity effectively
However, the effects of these communications on the came to a stop, likely reflecting elevated loan spreads.
expected path for the federal funds rate were more than On net, issuance of collateralized loan obligations was
offset by reactions to stronger-than-expected data for only modestly below the strong pace registered in the
the labor market and consumer inflation, along with per- fourth quarter of 2014.
ceptions of receding downside risks to the foreign eco-
Financing for the commercial real estate (CRE) sector
nomic outlook. On net, the expected path for the fed-
stayed broadly available over the intermeeting period.
eral funds rate implied by financial market quotes shifted
Growth of CRE loans on banks’ books remained solid,
up over the period.
in part supported by loans to finance construction activ-
Yields on nominal Treasury securities increased across ity. The issuance of commercial mortgage-backed secu-
the maturity spectrum, and the Treasury yield curve rities (CMBS) was still robust so far this year, and
steepened. Measures of inflation compensation based spreads continued to be low. After taking into account
on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities increased deals in the pipeline for March, issuance in the first quar-
early in the intermeeting period amid rising oil prices but ter of 2015 was expected to be the strongest since the
ended the period little changed, on net, after oil prices financial crisis. According to the March Senior Credit
dropped back. Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms,
dealers’ willingness to provide warehouse financing for
Broad U.S. equity price indexes moved up, on balance,
loans intended for inclusion in CMBS increased since
over the intermeeting period, and one-month option-
the beginning of 2014. In addition, demand for funding
implied volatility on the S&P 500 index moved down on
of CMBS by hedge funds and real estate investment
net. Spreads of 10-year corporate bond yields over those
trusts reportedly rose over the same period.
on comparable-maturity Treasury securities for both
BBB-rated and speculative-grade issuers narrowed nota- Credit conditions for mortgages remained tight for risk-
bly, likely reflecting increased appetite for riskier invest- ier borrowers, with relatively few mortgages originated
ments. While the tightening of spreads was broad based, to borrowers in the lower portion of the credit score dis-
the declines in short- and intermediate-term spreads for tribution. For borrowers who qualify for a mortgage,
speculative-grade energy firms were particularly pro- the cost of credit stayed low by historical standards.
nounced, retracing most of their strong run-up ap-
Consumer credit rose further over the intermeeting pe-
proaching the end of last year.
riod. Auto and student loan balances continued to ex-
Results from the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and pand robustly through January, while credit card bal-
Survey of Market Participants for March indicated that ances decelerated slightly. Issuance of consumer asset-
the respondents attached the greatest probabilities to the backed securities remained robust.
first increase in the target range for the federal funds rate
The dollar appreciated against most other currencies
occurring at either the June or September FOMC meet-
over the intermeeting period, as policymakers in the euro
ing; those probabilities were marked up relative to the
area, Sweden, Denmark, and many emerging market
January survey. In addition, survey respondents widely
economies eased monetary policy even as market partic-
expected the “patient” language to be removed from the
ipants anticipated monetary policy tightening in the
FOMC statement following the March meeting. Condi-
United States. Central bank policymakers in Sweden and
tional on this change in the statement, respondents as-
Denmark lowered the rates on their respective deposit
signed a roughly 40 percent probability, on average, to
facilities further below zero. In addition, in Sweden, the
liftoff occurring two meetings ahead and assigned most
benchmark repurchase agreement (or repo) rate was re-
of the remaining probability to later dates.
duced in February to below zero for the first time, and a
further cut was announced in March. Equity prices rose

--- Page 7 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 1_7_–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_5________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
in most of the advanced foreign economies, with euro- in the 12-month change in total PCE prices in the first
area stocks rallying both before and after the early March half of this year. The staff’s forecast for inflation in 2016
commencement of sovereign bond purchases by the and 2017 was unchanged, as energy prices and non-oil
ECB under its PSPP. Stock market performance in the import prices were still expected to bottom out and
emerging market economies was more varied, with net begin rising later this year; inflation was projected to
losses in some and net gains in others. Yields on Ger- move closer to, but remain below, the Committee’s
man government securities declined, with negative yields longer-run objective of 2 percent over those years. In-
extending to longer maturities than at the time of the flation was anticipated to move back to 2 percent there-
January meeting, likely in reaction to the PSPP, and yield after, with inflation expectations in the longer run as-
spreads of most other euro-area sovereign bonds over sumed to be consistent with the Committee’s objective
German bonds narrowed. The main exception was and slack in labor and product markets projected to have
Greek bonds, spreads on which widened, on net, amid waned.
heightened volatility as negotiations between Greece and
The staff viewed the extent of uncertainty around its
its official creditors over support for the country’s public
March projections for real GDP growth, the unemploy-
finances continued. Yields on the long-term sovereign
ment rate, and inflation as similar to the average over the
bonds of many other countries, including Japan and the
past 20 years. The risks to the forecasts for real GDP
United Kingdom, rose during the period.
growth and inflation were viewed as tilted a little to the
Staff Economic Outlook downside, reflecting the staff’s assessment that neither
In the U.S. economic forecast prepared by the staff for monetary policy nor fiscal policy was well positioned to
the March FOMC meeting, projected real GDP growth help the economy withstand adverse shocks. At the
in the first half of this year was lower than in the forecast same time, the staff viewed the risks around its outlook
prepared for the January meeting, largely reflecting for the unemployment rate as roughly balanced.
downward revisions to the near-term forecasts for
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
household spending, net exports, and residential invest-
Economic Outlook
ment. The staff’s medium-term forecast for real GDP
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of
growth also was revised down, mostly because of the ef-
the Board of Governors and participating Federal Re-
fects of a higher projected path for the foreign exchange
serve Bank presidents submitted their projections of the
value of the dollar. Nonetheless, the staff continued to
most likely outcomes for real GDP growth, the unem-
forecast that real GDP would expand at a faster pace
ployment rate, inflation, and the federal funds rate for
than potential output in 2015 and 2016, supported by
each year from 2015 through 2017 and over the longer
increases in consumer and business confidence and a
run, conditional on each participant’s judgment of ap-
small pickup in foreign economic growth, even as the
propriate monetary policy.4 The longer-run projections
normalization of monetary policy was assumed to begin.
represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to
In 2017, real GDP growth was projected to slow toward,
which each variable would be expected to converge, over
but to remain above, the rate of potential output growth.
time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the ab-
The expansion in economic activity over the medium
sence of further shocks to the economy. These eco-
term was anticipated to gradually reduce resource slack;
nomic projections and policy assessments are described
the unemployment rate was expected to decline slowly
in the Summary of Economic Projections, which is at-
and to temporarily move a little below the staff’s esti-
tached as an addendum to these minutes.
mate of its longer-run natural rate. In its medium-term
and longer-run projections, the staff slightly lowered its In their discussion of the economic situation and the
assumptions for potential GDP growth and real equilib- outlook, meeting participants regarded the information
rium interest rates. received over the intermeeting period as indicating that
the pace of economic activity had moderated somewhat.
The staff’s forecast for inflation in the near term was lit-
Labor market conditions continued to improve, with
tle changed, with the large declines in energy prices since
strong job gains and a lower unemployment rate, and
last June still anticipated to lead to a temporary decrease
4 The president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas did and Blake Prichard, First Vice Presidents of the Federal Re-
not participate in this FOMC meeting, and the incoming serve Banks of Dallas and Philadelphia, respectively, submit-
president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia is ted economic projections.
scheduled to assume office on July 1. Helen E. Holcomb

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
participants judged that underutilization of labor re- Coast ports that temporarily disrupted some supply
sources was continuing to diminish. A number of par- chains. In several parts of the country, persistently low
ticipants noted that slow growth of productivity or the oil prices had resulted in declines in drilling and delays
labor force could reconcile the moderation in economic in planned capital expenditures in the energy sector, and
growth with the solid performance of some labor market had negatively affected state government revenues.
indicators. Participants expected that, over the medium Manufacturing contacts in a couple of regions reported
term, real economic activity would expand at a moderate a softening in export sales. In contrast, service-sector
pace and there would be additional improvements in la- activity had been reasonably strong in several parts of
bor market conditions. Participants generally regarded the country, as had auto sales, and the increase in house-
the net effect of declines in energy prices as likely to be hold purchasing power from lower gasoline prices was
positive for economic activity and employment in the expected to boost retail sales. Labor market conditions
United States, although a couple noted that physical lim- continued to improve in most regions, with wage pres-
its on the accumulation of stocks of crude oil could re- sures generally reported to be modest.
sult in further downward pressure on prices and reduce
In their discussion of the foreign economic outlook, sev-
U.S. oil and gas production and investment. Inflation
eral participants noted that the dollar’s further apprecia-
had declined further below the Committee’s longer-run
tion over the intermeeting period was likely to restrain
objective, largely reflecting declines in energy prices, and
U.S. net exports and economic growth for a time. A few
was expected to stay near its recent low level in the near
participants suggested that accommodative policy ac-
term. Market-based measures of inflation compensation
tions by a number of foreign central banks could lead to
5 to 10 years ahead remained low, while survey-based
a further appreciation of the dollar, but another noted
measures of longer-term inflation expectations had re-
that such actions had also strengthened the outlook for
mained stable. Participants generally anticipated that in-
growth abroad, which would bolster U.S. exports. Par-
flation would rise gradually toward the Committee’s
ticipants pointed to a number of risks to the interna-
2 percent objective as the labor market improved further
tional economic outlook, including the slowdown in
and the transitory effects of energy price declines and
growth in China, fiscal and financial problems in Greece,
other factors dissipated. While almost all participants
and geopolitical tensions.
noted potential risks to the economic outlook resulting
from foreign economic and financial developments, Participants saw broad-based improvement in labor
most saw the risks to the outlook for economic growth market conditions over the intermeeting period, includ-
and the labor market as nearly balanced. ing strong gains in payroll employment and a further re-
duction in the unemployment rate. Several participants
Household spending appeared to have slowed some-
judged, based on the improvement in a variety of labor
what over the intermeeting period, with some partici-
market indicators, that the economy was making further
pants suggesting that the recent softness in spending in-
progress toward the Committee’s goal of maximum em-
dicators was likely due in part to transitory factors, such
ployment. Nonetheless, many judged that some degree
as unseasonably cold winter weather in parts of the
of labor market slack remained, as evidenced by the low
country. Some participants expressed the view that
rate of labor force participation, still-elevated involun-
growth in consumer spending over the medium term
tary part-time employment, or subdued growth in wages.
would be supported by the strong labor market and ris-
A few of them noted that continued modest wage
ing income, increases in wealth and improvements in
growth could prompt them to reduce their estimates of
household balance sheets, lower gasoline prices, and
the longer-run normal rate of unemployment. A few
gains in consumer confidence. Although activity in the
participants observed that the absence of a notable
housing sector remained sluggish, a few participants
pickup in wages might not be a useful yardstick for eval-
were cautiously optimistic that recent higher rates of
uating the degree of remaining slack because of the long
household formation, together with low mortgage rates,
lags between declines in unemployment and the re-
would enable a faster pace of recovery.
sponse of wages or uncertainty about trend productivity
Business contacts in many parts of the country contin- growth. One participant, however, saw some evidence
ued to express optimism about prospects for future sales of rising wage growth and suggested that compositional
or investment. However, there were widespread reports changes in the labor force could be masking underlying
of a slowdown in growth during the first quarter across wage pressures, particularly as measured by average
a range of industries, partly reflecting severe winter hourly earnings.
weather in some regions as well as labor disputes at West

--- Page 9 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 1_7_–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_5________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
Many participants judged that the inflation data received the considerable progress achieved toward the Commit-
over the intermeeting period had been about in line with tee’s objective of maximum employment, and that such
their expectations that inflation would move temporarily a change would not indicate that the Committee had de-
further below the Committee’s goal, largely reflecting cided on the timing of the initial increase in the target
declines in energy prices and lower prices of non-oil im- range for the federal funds rate. Participants generally
ports. They continued to expect that inflation would judged that the appropriate timing of liftoff would de-
move up toward the Committee’s 2 percent objective pend on their assessment of improvement in the labor
over the medium term as the effects of these transitory market and their degree of confidence that inflation
factors waned and conditions in the labor market im- would move back to the Committee’s 2 percent objec-
proved further. Survey-based measures of inflation ex- tive over the medium term, and that it would be helpful
pectations had remained stable, and market-based to convey to the public this data-dependent approach to
measures of inflation compensation over the longer monetary policy. A few participants emphasized that the
term were about unchanged from the time of the January decision regarding the appropriate timing of liftoff
meeting, although they had exhibited some volatility should take account of the risks that could be associated
over the intermeeting period. It was noted that the with departing from the effective lower bound later and
market-based measures had tracked quite closely the those that could be associated with departing earlier.
movements in crude oil prices over the period, first ris- One participant did not favor the change to the forward
ing and then falling back. Participants offered various guidance because, with inflation well below the Commit-
explanations for this correlation, including that market- tee’s 2 percent longer-run target, the announcement of a
based measures of inflation compensation were re- meeting-by-meeting approach to policy could lead to a
sponding to the same global developments as oil prices, tightening of financial conditions that would slow pro-
that these measures were capturing changes in risk or li- gress toward the Committee’s objectives.
quidity premiums, or that inflation-indexed securities
Participants expressed a range of views about how they
were subject to mispricing. A couple of participants
would assess the outlook for inflation and when they
pointed out that the movements in crude oil prices and
might deem it appropriate to begin removing policy ac-
market-based inflation compensation measures had not
commodation. It was noted that there were no simple
been particularly well aligned over a longer historical pe-
criteria for such a judgment, and, in particular, that, in a
riod, or that information gleaned from inflation deriva-
context of progress toward maximum employment and
tives suggested a substantial increase in the probability
reasonable confidence that inflation will move back to 2
that inflation would remain well below the Committee’s
percent over the medium term, the normalization pro-
target over the next decade. One of them judged that
cess could be initiated prior to seeing increases in core
the low level of inflation compensation could reflect in-
price inflation or wage inflation. Further improvement
creased concern on the part of investors about adverse
in the labor market, a stabilization of energy prices, and
outcomes in which low inflation was accompanied by
a leveling out of the foreign exchange value of the dollar
weak economic activity, and that it was important not to
were all seen as helpful in establishing confidence that
dismiss this possible interpretation.
inflation would turn up. Several participants judged that
In their discussion of communications regarding the the economic data and outlook were likely to warrant
path of the federal funds rate over the medium term, al- beginning normalization at the June meeting. However,
most all participants favored removing from the forward others anticipated that the effects of energy price de-
guidance in the Committee’s postmeeting statement the clines and the dollar’s appreciation would continue to
indication that the Committee would be patient in be- weigh on inflation in the near term, suggesting that con-
ginning to normalize the stance of monetary policy. ditions likely would not be appropriate to begin raising
These participants continued to think that an increase in rates until later in the year, and a couple of participants
the target range for the federal funds rate was unlikely in suggested that the economic outlook likely would not
April. But, with continued improvement in economic call for liftoff until 2016. With regard to communica-
conditions, they preferred language that would provide tions about the timing of the first increase in the target
the Committee with the flexibility to subsequently adjust range for the federal funds rate, two participants thought
the target range for the federal funds rate on a meeting- that the Committee should seek to signal its policy in-
by-meeting basis. It was noted that eliminating the ref- tentions at the meeting before liftoff appeared likely, but
erence to being patient would be appropriate in light of two others judged that doing so would be inconsistent

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
with a meeting-by-meeting approach. Finally, many par- as the Committee had anticipated, and members agreed
ticipants commented that it would be desirable to pro- to update the statement to reflect their judgment that in-
vide additional information to the public about the flation was likely to remain near its recent low level in
Committee’s strategy for policy after the beginning of the near term. Members also judged that it was appro-
normalization. Some participants emphasized that the priate to note that market-based measures of inflation
stance of policy would remain highly accommodative compensation remained near levels registered at the time
even after the first increase in the target range for the of the January FOMC meeting.
federal funds rate, and several noted that they expected
The Committee agreed to maintain the target range for
economic developments would call for a fairly gradual
the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and to reaffirm
pace of normalization or that a data-dependent ap-
in the statement that the Committee’s decision about
proach would not necessarily dictate increases in the tar-
how long to maintain the current target range for the
get range at every meeting.
federal funds rate would depend on its assessment of ac-
Committee Policy Action tual and expected progress toward its objectives of max-
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period imum employment and 2 percent inflation. Members
ahead, members judged that information received since continued to judge that this assessment of progress
the FOMC met in January indicated that economic would take into account a wide range of information, in-
growth had moderated somewhat. Labor market condi- cluding measures of labor market conditions, indicators
tions had improved further, with strong job gains and a of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and
lower unemployment rate; a variety of labor market in- readings on financial and international developments. In
dicators suggested that the underutilization of labor re- light of the considerable progress to date toward the
sources continued to diminish. Household spending Committee’s maximum-employment objective and the
was rising moderately, with declines in energy prices implications of that progress for the outlook for infla-
boosting household purchasing power. Business fixed tion, members agreed to remove from the forward guid-
investment was advancing, although the recovery in the ance in the postmeeting statement the indication that the
housing sector remained slow and export growth had Committee judges that it can be patient in beginning to
weakened. Inflation had declined further below the normalize the stance of monetary policy and to indicate
Committee’s longer-run objective, largely reflecting the instead that the Committee anticipates that it will be ap-
declines in energy prices. Market-based measures of in- propriate to raise the target range for the federal funds
flation compensation remained low; survey-based rate when it has seen further improvement in the labor
measures of longer-term inflation expectations had been market and is reasonably confident that inflation will
stable. The Committee expected that, with appropriate move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium
monetary policy accommodation, economic activity term. Members viewed the new guidance as consistent
would expand at a moderate pace and labor market indi- with the outlook for policy that the Committee had ex-
cators would continue to move toward levels the Com- pressed in January, and they agreed that the postmeeting
mittee judges consistent with its dual mandate. The statement should note that an increase in the target range
Committee also expected that inflation would remain for the federal funds rate remained unlikely at the April
near its recent low level in the near term but rise gradu- FOMC meeting; in addition, they generally saw the new
ally toward 2 percent over the medium term as the labor language as providing the Committee with the flexibility
market improves further and the transitory effects of en- to begin raising the target range for the federal funds rate
ergy price declines and other factors dissipate. In light in June or at a subsequent meeting. Members noted that
of the uncertainties attending the outlook for inflation, the timing of the first increase would depend on the evo-
the Committee agreed that it should continue to monitor lution of economic conditions and the outlook, and that
inflation developments closely. the change in the forward guidance was not intended to
indicate that the Committee had decided on the timing
In their discussion of language for the postmeeting state-
of the initial increase in the target range for the federal
ment, the Committee agreed that the data received over
funds rate.
the intermeeting period suggested that economic growth
had moderated somewhat. One factor behind that mod- The Committee also decided to maintain its policy of re-
eration was a slowdown in the growth of exports, and investing principal payments from agency debt and
members decided that the statement should explicitly agency mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-
note that factor. In addition, data received over the in- backed securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury
termeeting period indicated that inflation had declined,

--- Page 11 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 1_7_–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_5_______________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
securities at auction. This policy, by keeping the Com- spending is rising moderately; declines in energy
mittee’s holdings of longer-term securities at sizable lev- prices have boosted household purchasing
els, should help maintain accommodative financial con- power. Business fixed investment is advancing,
ditions. The Committee agreed to reiterate its expecta- while the recovery in the housing sector remains
tion that, even after employment and inflation are near slow and export growth has weakened. Infla-
mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, tion has declined further below the Commit-
for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds tee’s longer-run objective, largely reflecting de-
rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the clines in energy prices. Market-based measures
longer run. of inflation compensation remain low; survey-
based measures of longer-term inflation expec-
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
tations have remained stable.
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with mittee seeks to foster maximum employment
the following domestic policy directive: and price stability. The Committee expects that,
with appropriate policy accommodation, eco-
“Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
nomic activity will expand at a moderate pace,
Federal Open Market Committee seeks
with labor market indicators continuing to
monetary and financial conditions that will foster
move toward levels the Committee judges con-
maximum employment and price stability. In
sistent with its dual mandate. The Committee
particular, the Committee seeks conditions in
continues to see the risks to the outlook for eco-
reserve markets consistent with federal funds
nomic activity and the labor market as nearly
trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The
balanced. Inflation is anticipated to remain near
Committee directs the Desk to undertake open
its recent low level in the near term, but the
market operations as necessary to maintain such
Committee expects inflation to rise gradually to-
conditions. The Committee directs the Desk to
ward 2 percent over the medium term as the la-
maintain its policy of rolling over maturing
bor market improves further and the transitory
Treasury securities into new issues and its policy
effects of energy price declines and other fac-
of reinvesting principal payments on all agency
tors dissipate. The Committee continues to
debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in
monitor inflation developments closely.
agency mortgage-backed securities. The
Committee also directs the Desk to engage in To support continued progress toward maxi-
dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as mum employment and price stability, the Com-
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal mittee today reaffirmed its view that the current
Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds
transactions. The System Open Market Account rate remains appropriate. In determining how
manager and the secretary will keep the long to maintain this target range, the Commit-
Committee informed of ongoing developments tee will assess progress—both realized and ex-
regarding the System’s balance sheet that could pected—toward its objectives of maximum em-
affect the attainment over time of the ployment and 2 percent inflation. This assess-
Committee’s objectives of maximum ment will take into account a wide range of in-
employment and price stability.” formation, including measures of labor market
conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and
The vote encompassed approval of the statement below
inflation expectations, and readings on financial
to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
and international developments. Consistent
“Information received since the Federal Open with its previous statement, the Committee
Market Committee met in January suggests that judges that an increase in the target range for the
economic growth has moderated somewhat. federal funds rate remains unlikely at the April
Labor market conditions have improved fur- FOMC meeting. The Committee anticipates
ther, with strong job gains and a lower unem- that it will be appropriate to raise the target
ployment rate. A range of labor market indica- range for the federal funds rate when it has seen
tors suggests that underutilization of labor re- further improvement in the labor market and is
sources continues to diminish. Household reasonably confident that inflation will move

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
back to its 2 percent objective over the medium Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C. Dud-
term. This change in the forward guidance does ley, Lael Brainard, Charles L. Evans, Stanley Fischer, Jef-
not indicate that the Committee has decided on frey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, Jerome H. Powell,
the timing of the initial increase in the target Daniel K. Tarullo, and John C. Williams.
range.
Voting against this action: None.
The Committee is maintaining its existing policy
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
of reinvesting principal payments from its hold-
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, April 28–29,
ings of agency debt and agency mortgage-
2015. The meeting adjourned at 10:45 a.m. on March
backed securities in agency mortgage-backed se-
18, 2015.
curities and of rolling over maturing Treasury
securities at auction. This policy, by keeping the Notation Vote
Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
By notation vote completed on February 17, 2015, the
at sizable levels, should help maintain accom-
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
modative financial conditions.
Committee meeting held on January 27–28, 2015.
When the Committee decides to begin to re-
move policy accommodation, it will take a bal-
anced approach consistent with its longer-run
goals of maximum employment and inflation of
2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates
that, even after employment and inflation are _____________________________
near mandate-consistent levels, economic con-
Thomas Laubach
ditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the
Secretary
target federal funds rate below levels the
Committee views as normal in the longer run.”

--- Page 13 ---

____ ____________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- All FOMC participants but one expected that economic
tee (FOMC) meeting held on March 17–18, 2015, meet- growth under appropriate policy would be somewhat
ing participants submitted their projections of the most faster in 2015 and in 2016 than their individual estimates
likely outcomes for real output growth, the unemploy- of the U.S. economy’s longer-run normal growth rate
ment rate, inflation, and the federal funds rate for each and at or near its longer-run rate in 2017 (table 1 and
year from 2015 to 2017 and over the longer run.1 Each figure 1). Most participants projected that the unem-
participant’s projection was based on information avail- ployment rate would continue to decline in 2015 and
able at the time of the meeting plus his or her assessment 2016, and all participants projected that the unemploy-
of appropriate monetary policy and assumptions about ment rate would be at or below their individual judg-
the factors likely to affect economic outcomes. The ments of its longer-run normal level by the end of 2017.
longer-run projections represent each participant’s as- Participants saw inflation, as measured by the four-
sessment of the value to which each variable would be quarter change in the price index for personal consump-
expected to converge, over time, under appropriate tion expenditures (PCE), slowing this year but picking
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to up notably next year; almost all of the participants pro-
the economy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined jected that inflation would be at or close to the Commit-
as the future path of policy that each participant deems tee’s 2 percent longer-run objective in 2017.
most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity and
As shown in figure 2, all but two participants anticipated
inflation that best satisfy his or her individual interpreta-
that it would be appropriate to begin raising the target
tion of the Federal Reserve’s objectives of maximum
range for the federal funds rate in 2015. Most expected
employment and stable prices.
that it would be appropriate to raise the target federal
funds rate fairly gradually over the projection period as
________________
labor market conditions and inflation move toward val-
1 The president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas did not
ues the Committee judges consistent with the attainment
participate in this FOMC meeting, and the incoming president
of its mandated objectives of maximum employment
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia is scheduled to
and stable prices. Most participants continued to expect
assume office on July 1. Helen E. Holcomb and Blake Prich-
ard, First Vice Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dal- that it would be appropriate for the federal funds rate to
las and Philadelphia, respectively, submitted economic projec- stay appreciably below its longer-run level after inflation
tions. and unemployment are near mandate-consistent levels,
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents, March 2015*
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2015 2016 2017 Longer run 2015 2016 2017 Longer run
Change in real GDP . . . . . 2.3 to 2.7 2.3 to 2.7 2.0 to 2.4 2.0 to 2.3 2.1 to 3.1 2.2 to 3.0 1.8 to 2.5 1.8 to 2.5
December projection . . 2.6 to 3.0 2.5 to 3.0 2.3 to 2.5 2.0 to 2.3 2.1 to 3.2 2.1 to 3.0 2.0 to 2.7 1.8 to 2.7
Unemployment rate . . . . . 5.0 to 5.2 4.9 to 5.1 4.8 to 5.1 5.0 to 5.2 4.8 to 5.3 4.5 to 5.2 4.8 to 5.5 4.9 to 5.8
December projection . . 5.2 to 5.3 5.0 to 5.2 4.9 to 5.3 5.2 to 5.5 5.0 to 5.5 4.9 to 5.4 4.7 to 5.7 5.0 to 5.8
PCE inflation . . . . . . . . . . . 0.6 to 0.8 1.7 to 1.9 1.9 to 2.0 2.0 0.6 to 1.5 1.6 to 2.4 1.7 to 2.2 2.0
December projection . . 1.0 to 1.6 1.7 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 2.0 1.0 to 2.2 1.6 to 2.1 1.8 to 2.2 2.0
Core PCE inflation3 . . . . . 1.3 to 1.4 1.5 to 1.9 1.8 to 2.0 1.2 to 1.6 1.5 to 2.4 1.7 to 2.2
December projection . . 1.5 to 1.8 1.7 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.2 1.6 to 2.1 1.8 to 2.2
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and projections for both measures of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal
consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian
unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy.
Longer-run projections represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy
and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. The December projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
on December 16–17, 2014.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.
* The lower end of the central tendency for longer-run unemployment from the December projections was corrected on April 8, 2015. The error only affected
the PDF version of the March Summary of Economic Projections.

--- Page 14 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure1. Centraltendenciesandrangesofeconomicprojections,2015–17andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
Central tendency of projections 4
Range of projections
3
2
Actual 1
+
0
-
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesofthevariablesare
annual.

--- Page 15 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_15______________P_a_g_e_ _3
Figure2. OverviewofFOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy
Number of participants
Appropriate timing of policy firming
15
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
2
1
2015 2016
Percent
Appropriate pace of policy firming: Midpoint of target range or target level for the federal funds rate
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
2015 2016 2017 Longer run
Note: Intheupperpanel,theheightofeachbardenotesthenumberofFOMCparticipantswhojudgethat,under
appropriate monetary policy, the first increase in the target range for the federal funds rate from its current range of
0 to 1/4 percent will occur in the specified calendar year. In December 2014, the numbers of FOMC participants who
judgedthatthefirstincreaseinthetargetfederalfundsratewouldoccurin2015,and2016were,respectively,15,and2.
Inthelowerpanel,eachshadedcircleindicatesthevalue(roundedtothenearest1/8percentagepoint)ofanindividual
participant’s judgment of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds rate or the appropriate
targetlevelforthefederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun.

--- Page 16 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
reflecting the effects of remaining headwinds holding 4.8 to 5.1 percent in 2017. Compared with the Decem-
back the recovery, along with other factors. ber SEP, participants’ projected paths for the unemploy-
ment rate generally shifted down slightly through 2017.
Most participants viewed the uncertainty associated with
Many participants noted that recent data pointing to
their outlooks for economic growth and the unemploy-
faster-than-expected improvement in labor market con-
ment rate as broadly similar to the average level of the
ditions were an important factor underlying the down-
past 20 years. Most participants also judged the level of
ward revisions to their unemployment rate forecasts.
uncertainty about inflation to be broadly similar to the
More than half of the participants revised down their es-
average level of the past 20 years, although several par-
timates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment;
ticipants viewed it as higher. In addition, most partici-
as a result, the central tendency of these estimates shifted
pants continued to see the risks to the outlook for eco-
down to 5.0 to 5.2 percent. Several participants noted
nomic growth and for the unemployment rate as broadly
that still-subdued wage and price inflation despite the
balanced, though some viewed the risks to economic
stronger-than-expected momentum in the labor market
growth as weighted to the downside. Equal numbers of
suggested a lower level of the longer-run normal unem-
participants saw the risks to inflation as balanced or as
ployment rate than they had thought previously, and a
weighted to the downside, while one judged these risks
couple mentioned research indicating that demographic
as tilted to the upside.
groups with lower average unemployment rates have
The Outlook for Economic Activity accounted for an increasing fraction of the labor force.
Participants generally projected that, conditional on their
Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distribution of partici-
individual assumptions about appropriate monetary pol-
pants’ views regarding the likely outcomes for real GDP
icy, real gross domestic product (GDP) would grow in
growth and the unemployment rate through 2017. Some
2015 and 2016 at a pace somewhat faster than their esti-
of the diversity of views reflected participants’ individual
mates of its longer-run normal rate and at or near its
assessments of the effects of lower oil prices on con-
longer-run rate in 2017. Participants pointed to a num-
sumer spending and business investment, of the extent
ber of factors that they expected would contribute to
to which dollar appreciation would affect real activity, of
solid real output growth over the next few years, includ-
the rate at which the forces that have been restraining
ing improving labor market conditions, strengthened
the pace of the economic recovery would continue to
household and business balance sheets, the boost to
abate, of the trajectory for growth in consumption as
consumer spending from low energy prices, diminishing
labor market slack diminishes, and of the appropriate
restraint from fiscal policy, and still-accommodative
path of monetary policy. Relative to the December SEP,
monetary policy.
the dispersion of participants’ projections for real GDP
Compared with their Summary of Economic Projections growth was a bit narrower from 2015 through 2017,
(SEP) contributions in December, all but a couple of while for the unemployment rate, the dispersion was
participants revised down their projections of real GDP roughly unchanged.
growth over the forecast period. A number of partici-
The Outlook for Inflation
pants cited the further appreciation of the dollar and re-
Compared with the December SEP, all participants
cent weakness in spending and production data as rea-
marked down their projections for PCE inflation this
sons for their revision. The central tendencies of partic-
year, noting that inflation had been running below their
ipants’ current projections for real GDP growth were
earlier projections and that significant declines in energy
2.3 to 2.7 percent in 2015 and in 2016, and 2.0 to
prices and import prices were putting temporary down-
2.4 percent in 2017. The central tendency of the projec-
ward pressure on inflation. All participants saw PCE in-
tions of real GDP growth over the longer run was 2.0 to
flation picking up in 2016, and almost all saw inflation at
2.3 percent, unchanged from December.
or close to the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objec-
Most participants projected that the unemployment rate tive in 2017. All of the participants also marked down
would continue to decline through 2016, and all pro- their projections for core PCE inflation this year, and
jected that by the fourth quarter of 2017 the unemploy- nearly half revised down their projections for core PCE
ment rate would be at or below their individual judg- inflation in 2016 by 0.2 percentage point or more, with
ments of its longer-run normal level. The central many noting that core inflation had run below their ear-
tendencies of participants’ forecasts for the unemploy- lier projections in recent months and several citing de-
ment rate in the fourth quarter of each year were 5.0 to clines in non-oil import prices and pass-through of de-
5.2 percent in 2015, 4.9 to 5.1 percent in 2016, and

--- Page 17 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_15______________P_a_g_e_ _5
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2015–17andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2015
March projections 18
December projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 8 2. 0 2. 2 2. 4 2. 6 2. 8 3. 0 3. 2
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 8 2. 0 2. 2 2. 4 2. 6 2. 8 3. 0 3. 2
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 8 2. 0 2. 2 2. 4 2. 6 2. 8 3. 0 3. 2
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 8 2. 0 2. 2 2. 4 2. 6 2. 8 3. 0 3. 2
1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 18 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2015–17andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2015
March projections 18
December projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0 5. 2 5. 4 5. 6 5. 8
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 19 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_15______________P_a_g_e_ _7
clines in energy prices. Almost all expected core infla- federal funds rate at the end of each calendar year from
tion to rise gradually over the projection period and to 2015 to 2017 and over the longer run. The median val-
reach a level at or near 2 percent in 2017. The central ues of the federal funds rate at the end of 2015, 2016,
tendencies for PCE inflation were 0.6 to 0.8 percent in and 2017 decreased 50, 62, and 50 basis points, respec-
2015, 1.7 to 1.9 percent in 2016, and 1.9 to 2.0 percent tively, relative to December, to 0.63, 1.88, and 3.13 per-
in 2017, and the central tendencies for core PCE infla- cent, while the mean values for those years declined
tion were 1.3 to 1.4 percent in 2015, 1.5 to 1.9 percent 35, 52, and 32 basis points, respectively, to 0.78, 2.03,
in 2016, and 1.8 to 2.0 percent in 2017. Factors cited by and 3.19 percent. Compared with December, the dis-
participants as likely to contribute to a rise of inflation persion of the projections for the appropriate level of
toward 2 percent included stable longer-term inflation the federal funds rate was a bit narrower over the pro-
expectations, steadily diminishing resource slack, a jection period.
pickup in wage growth, the waning effects of declines in
Most participants judged that it would be appropriate for
energy prices, and still-accommodative monetary policy.
the federal funds rate in 2017 to remain below its longer-
Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri- run normal level, with nearly half of them projecting the
bution of participants’ views about the outlook for infla- federal funds rate in 2017 to be more than ½ percentage
tion. The range of participants’ projections for PCE in- point lower than their estimates of its longer-run value.
flation in 2015 narrowed somewhat compared with De- Participants provided a number of reasons why they
cember. The range for PCE inflation in 2016 widened thought it would be appropriate for the federal funds
slightly, likely reflecting in part differences in partici- rate to remain below its longer-run normal level for
pants’ assessments of the effects of the declines in en- some time after inflation and the unemployment rate
ergy and import prices on the outlook for inflation. Sim- were near mandate-consistent levels. These reasons in-
ilarly, the ranges for core PCE inflation narrowed in cluded an assessment that the headwinds that have been
2015 and widened slightly in 2016. The range for both holding back the recovery will continue to exert some
measures in 2017 was relatively little changed and con- restraint on economic activity at that time, that weak real
tinued to show a very substantial concentration near the activity abroad and the recent appreciation of the dollar
Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective by that time. are likely to continue to restrain U.S. net exports for
some time, that residual slack in the labor market will
Appropriate Monetary Policy
still be evident in measures of labor utilization other than
Participants judged that it would be appropriate to raise
the unemployment rate, and that the risks to the eco-
the target range for the federal funds rate over the pro-
nomic outlook are asymmetric as a result of the con-
jection period as labor market conditions and inflation
straints on monetary policy associated with the effective
move toward values the Committee judges consistent
lower bound on the federal funds rate.
with the attainment of its mandated objectives of maxi-
mum employment and price stability. As shown in fig- Relative to the December SEP, almost half of the partic-
ure 2, all but two participants anticipated that it would ipants revised down their estimates of the longer-run
be appropriate to begin raising the target range for the level of the federal funds rate, typically by ¼ percentage
federal funds rate during 2015. However, a large major- point, with a lower assessment of the economy’s longer-
ity projected that the appropriate level of the federal run potential growth rate generally cited as a contrib-
funds rate would remain below their individual estimates uting factor for those revisions. Though the median es-
of its longer-run normal level through 2017. timate of the longer-run normal federal funds rate was
unchanged from December, the central tendency nar-
Most participants projected that the unemployment rate
rowed to 3.5 to 3.75 percent from 3.5 to 4.0 percent in
would be at or somewhat above their estimates of its
December, and the range moved down a bit to 3.0 to
longer-run normal level at the end of the year in which
4.25 percent from 3.25 to 4.25 percent in December. All
they judged the initial increase in the target range for the
participants judged that inflation in the longer run would
federal funds rate would be warranted. Almost all par-
be equal to the Committee’s inflation objective of 2 per-
ticipants projected that inflation would be below the
cent, implying that their individual judgments regarding
Committee’s 2 percent objective that year, but they also
the appropriate longer-run level of the real federal funds
saw inflation rising substantially closer to 2 percent in
rate in the absence of further shocks to the economy
the following year.
ranged from 1.0 to 2.25 percent.
Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’
judgments regarding the appropriate level of the target

--- Page 20 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2015–17andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2015
March projections 18
December projections
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_15______________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2015–17
Number of participants
2015
March projections
December projections 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 22 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure 3.E. Distribution of participants’ judgments of the midpoint of the appropriate target range for the federal funds
rate or the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate, 2015–17 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2015
March projections 18
December projections
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
2016
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
2017
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.0 0 0.3 8 0.6 3 0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
0.37 0.62 0.87 1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Note: Themidpointsofthetargetrangesforthefederalfundsrateandthetargetlevelsforthefederalfundsrate
aremeasuredattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun.

--- Page 23 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_15_____________P__ag_e_ _1_1
the prescriptions of various monetary policy rules as fac-
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
tors they considered in judging the appropriate path for
Percentage points
the federal funds rate.
Variable 2015 2016 2017
Uncertainty and Risks
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . ±1.6 ±2.1 ±2.0 Nearly all participants continued to judge the levels of
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . ±0.5 ±1.2 ±1.7 uncertainty attending their projections for real GDP
growth and the unemployment rate as broadly similar to
Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.9 ±1.0 ±1.0
the norms during the previous 20 years (figure 4).2 Most
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the participants continued to see the risks to their outlooks
root mean squared error of projections for 1995 through 2014 that
for real GDP growth as broadly balanced, though some
were released in the winter by various private and government fore-
casters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain participants viewed the risks to real GDP growth as
assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual out- weighted to the downside. Those participants who
comes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in
ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the viewed the risks as weighted to the downside cited, for
past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip example, concern about the limited ability of monetary
(2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from His-
policy at the effective lower bound to respond to further
torical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series
2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve negative shocks to the economy or about the trajectory
System, November), available at www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/ for economic growth abroad. Nearly all participants
feds/ 2007/200760/200760abs.html; and Board of Governors of the
again judged the risks to the outlook for the unemploy-
Federal Reserve System, Division of Research and Statistics (2014),
“Updated Historical Forecast Errors,” memorandum, April 9, ment rate to be broadly balanced.
www.federalreserve.gov/foia/files/20140409-historical-forecast-er-
rors.pdf. As in the December SEP, participants generally agreed
1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
that the levels of uncertainty associated with their infla-
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
that has been most widely used in government and private economic tion forecasts were broadly similar to historical norms.
forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous Almost half of participants viewed the risks to their in-
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.
flation forecast as balanced. However, the risks were
seen as tilted to the downside by an equal number of
participants, an increase since the December SEP.
Participants’ views of the appropriate path for monetary
These participants cited the possibility that the recent
policy were informed by their judgments about the state
low levels of inflation could prove more persistent than
of the economy, including the values of the unemploy-
anticipated or that the upward pressure on prices from
ment rate and other labor market indicators that would
inflation expectations might be weaker than assumed, or
be consistent with maximum employment, the extent to
the judgment that, in current circumstances, it would be
which the economy was currently falling short of maxi-
difficult for the Committee to respond effectively to
mum employment, the prospects for inflation to return
low-inflation outcomes. Conversely, one participant saw
to the Committee’s longer-term objective of 2 percent,
upside risks to inflation, citing uncertainty about the tim-
the implications of international developments for the
ing and efficacy of the Committee’s withdrawal of mon-
domestic economy, the desire to minimize potential dis-
etary policy accommodation.
ruptions in financial markets, and the balance of risks
around the outlook. Some participants also mentioned
2 Table 2 provides estimates of the forecast uncertainty for the discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con- economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess
sumer price inflation over the period from 1995 through 2014. the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projec-
At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” tions.

--- Page 24 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4. Uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth Risks to GDP growth
March projections March projections
18 18
December projections December projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation Risks to PCE inflation
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation Risks to core PCE inflation
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”Defini-
tionsofvariablesareinthegeneralnotetotable1.

--- Page 25 ---

_ __________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_15_____________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by 4.6 percent in the current year, 0.9 to 5.1 per-
the members of the Board of Governors and cent in the second year, and 1.0 to 5.0 percent
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks in the third year. The corresponding 70 percent
inform discussions of monetary policy among confidence intervals for overall inflation would
policymakers and can aid public understand- be 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the current year and 1.0
ing of the basis for policy actions. Consider- to 3.0 percent in the second and third years.
able uncertainty attends these projections, Because current conditions may differ
however. The economic and statistical models from those that prevailed, on average, over his-
and relationships used to help produce eco- tory, participants provide judgments as to
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de- whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
scriptions of the real world, and the future jections of each variable is greater than, smaller
path of the economy can be affected by myr- than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
iad unforeseen developments and events. forecast uncertainty in the past, as shown in
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
participants consider not only what appears to to whether the risks to their projections are
be the most likely economic outcome as em- weighted to the upside, are weighted to the
bodied in their projections, but also the range downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of participants judge whether each variable is
their occurring, and the potential costs to the more likely to be above or below their projec-
economy should they occur. tions of the most likely outcome. These judg-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical ments about the uncertainty and the risks at-
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including tending each participant’s projections are dis-
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports tinct from the diversity of participants’ views
and those prepared by the Federal Reserve about the most likely outcomes. Forecast un-
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the certainty is concerned with the risks associated
Federal Open Market Committee. The pro- with a particular projection rather than with
jection error ranges shown in the table il- divergences across a number of different pro-
lustrate the considerable uncertainty associat- jections.
ed with economic forecasts. For example, As with real activity and inflation, the out-
suppose a participant projects that real gross look for the future path of the federal funds
domestic product (GDP) and total consumer rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. This
prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, re- uncertainty arises primarily because each partic-
spectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the ipant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of
uncertainty attending those projections is simi- monetary policy depends importantly on the
lar to that experienced in the past and the risks evolution of real activity and inflation over
around the projections are broadly balanced, time. If economic conditions evolve in an un-
the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a expected manner, then assessments of the ap-
probability of about 70 percent that actual propriate setting of the federal funds rate
GDP would expand within a range of 1.4 to would change from that point forward.

# Tables

## Page_13_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |      |      |            |      |      |      |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|------------|------|------|------|
| 2015                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        | 2016 | 2017 | Longer run | 2015 | 2016 | 2017 |
| 2.3 to 2.7 2.3 to 2.7 2.0 to 2.4 2.0 to 2.3
2.6 to 3.0 2.5 to 3.0 2.3 to 2.5 2.0 to 2.3
5.0 to 5.2 4.9 to 5.1 4.8 to 5.1 5.0 to 5.2
5.2 to 5.3 5.0 to 5.2 4.9 to 5.3 5.2 to 5.5
0.6 to 0.8 1.7 to 1.9 1.9 to 2.0 2.0
1.0 to 1.6 1.7 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 2.0
1.3 to 1.4 1.5 to 1.9 1.8 to 2.0
1.5 to 1.8 1.7 to 2.0 1.8 to 2.0 |      |      |            |      |      |      |