# 20150729_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:37:42*
*Pages: 12, Tables: 0*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
July 28–29, 2015
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Robert deV. Frierson,1 Secretary of the Board, Office
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the of the Secretary, Board of Governors
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on
Tuesday, July 28, 2015, at 10:30 a.m. and continued on Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking
Wednesday, July 29, 2015, at 9:00 a.m. Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors
PRESENT: Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability
Janet L. Yellen, Chair Policy and Research, Board of Governors
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman
Lael Brainard James A. Clouse and Stephen A. Meyer, Deputy
Charles L. Evans Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Stanley Fischer Governors
Jeffrey M. Lacker
Dennis P. Lockhart Andreas Lehnert, Deputy Director, Office of Financial
Jerome H. Powell Stability Policy and Research, Board of Governors
Daniel K. Tarullo
John C. Williams Andrew Figura, David Reifschneider, and Stacey
Tevlin, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of
James Bullard, Esther L. George, Loretta J. Mester, Board Members, Board of Governors
Eric Rosengren, and Michael Strine, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office
of Board Members, Board of Governors
Patrick Harker and Narayana Kocherlakota, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Minneapolis, respectively Board Members, Board of Governors
Helen E. Holcomb, First Vice President, Federal David E. Lebow, Senior Associate Director, Division
Reserve Bank of Dallas of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Brian F. Madigan, Secretary Michael T. Kiley, Senior Adviser, Division of Research
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary and Statistics, and Senior Associate Director,
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research,
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Board of Governors
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Ellen E. Meade2 and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers,
Steven B. Kamin, Economist Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors;
Thomas Laubach, Economist Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of
David W. Wilcox, Economist Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Michael P. Leahy, Fabio M. Natalucci,3 Associate Director, Division of
William R. Nelson, Daniel G. Sullivan, and William Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Wascher, Associate Economists
________________
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account 1 Attended the joint session of the Federal Open Market
Committee and the Board of Governors.
Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open 2 Attended through the discussion on potential enhancements
to the Summary of Economic Projections.
Market Account
3 Attended the discussion of the economic and financial
situation through the close of the meeting.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Jane E. Ihrig,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division of Robert L. Hetzel and Carlo Rosa, Senior Economists,
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and New
York, respectively
Glenn Follette and Steven A. Sharpe, Assistant
Directors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors; Elizabeth Klee, Assistant In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that Mi-
Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of chael Strine had been elected an alternate member of the
Governors Federal Open Market Committee and that he had exe-
cuted his oath of office.
Burcu Duygan-Bump, Adviser, Division of Monetary
Developments in Financial Markets, Open Market
Affairs, Board of Governors
Operations, and Policy Normalization
In a joint session of the Federal Open Market
Penelope A. Beattie,1 Assistant to the Secretary, Office
Committee (FOMC) and the Board of Governors of the
of the Secretary, Board of Governors
Federal Reserve System, the manager of the System
Open Market Account (SOMA) reported on
Dana L. Burnett, Section Chief, Division of Monetary
developments in domestic and foreign financial markets.
Affairs, Board of Governors
The deputy manager followed with a discussion of
System open market operations conducted by the Open
Katie Ross,1 Manager, Office of the Secretary, Board of
Market Desk during the period since the Committee met
Governors
on June 16–17. The Desk’s overnight reverse
repurchase agreement (ON RRP) operations continued
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of
to provide a soft floor for money market interest rates.
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
The deputy manager also updated the Committee on
plans for tests of the Term Deposit Facility in August
Etienne Gagnon, Senior Economist, Division of
and of term RRPs at the end of the third quarter.
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
The staff next summarized some of the recent steps the
Marie Gooding, First Vice President, Federal Reserve System had taken to prepare further for the process of
Bank of Atlanta normalization of monetary policy. The staff also
proposed that future changes in the FOMC’s target
Jeff Fuhrer, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve federal funds rate range as well as associated changes in
Bank of Boston related administered interest rates—including the
interest rates on excess and required reserves, the ON
Troy Davig, Michael Dotsey, Evan F. Koenig, Julie RRP rate, and the primary credit rate—all be effective
Ann Remache, Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl, and Ellis on the day after the Committee’s policy decision.
W. Tallman, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Re- Making all such rate changes effective on the same day
serve Banks of Kansas City, Philadelphia, Dallas, would enhance the clarity of Federal Reserve
New York, Minneapolis, and Cleveland, respec- communications. It would also help promote federal
tively funds trading within the new target range, partly by
enabling the Desk to conduct ON RRP operations at the
Todd E. Clark,2 Ayşegül Şahin, Mark Spiegel, and Ste- new rate specified by the Committee on the same day
phen Williamson, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve that the new target range becomes effective. Participants
Banks of Cleveland, New York, San Francisco, and supported the staff proposal.
St. Louis, respectively
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.
Matthew Nemeth,4 Assistant Vice President, Federal
There were no intervention operations in foreign
Reserve Bank of New York
currencies for the System’s account over the
intermeeting period.
________________ The Board meeting concluded at the end of the
4 Attended through the discussion on System Open Market discussion of financial markets, open market operations,
Account reinvestment policy. and policy normalization issues.

--- Page 3 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f _J_u_ly_ 2_8_–_2_9_,_ 2_0_1_5_________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
System Open Market Account Reinvestment Policy Potential Enhancements to the Summary of
In the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans Economic Projections
adopted at its September 16–17, 2014 meeting, the Next, participants considered a proposal by the
Committee indicated that it expects to cease or subcommittee on communications for a few modest
commence phasing out reinvestments of principal on modifications to the Summary of Economic Projections
securities held in the SOMA after it begins increasing the (SEP) that could provide further information to the
target range for the federal funds rate; the timing of this public. A staff briefing reviewed the subcommittee’s
decision will depend on how economic and financial proposal for publishing median values of the projections
conditions and the economic outlook evolve. A staff starting at the time of the September meeting, noting
briefing at this meeting provided background on that public commentary frequently focuses on the
alternative strategies the Committee could employ with midpoint of the central tendency of the projections and
respect to reinvestments. These strategies included that medians would provide a more robust summary
either characterizing qualitatively or specifying measure of the distribution of participants’ views. The
numerically the economic conditions under which subcommittee also proposed the removal of the
reinvestments would cease, or establishing a date or time histogram depicting participants’ preferred year of liftoff
interval following the initial firming of the federal funds from the SEP exhibits at the time that the Committee
rate for the new policy on reinvestments to begin. The decides to commence the normalization process or in
briefing also noted that the Committee could phase out the first SEP thereafter. In their comments, participants
reinvestments gradually or end reinvestments all at once. noted that the inclusion of medians would provide an
additional useful summary statistic of participants’
In their discussion, most participants expressed a
perspectives; however, they also emphasized that the
preference that the timing of the cessation of
medians would not represent a collective view or
reinvestments be based on a qualitative assessment of
Committee forecast. Participants unanimously
economic conditions and the outlook. Participants
supported the addition of medians for all variables—
generally favored continuing reinvestments during the
economic growth, the unemployment rate, total and
early stages of normalization, initially using only
core inflation, and individual assessments of the
increases in the target range for the federal funds rate to
projected appropriate federal funds rate—to the
reduce monetary policy accommodation. This approach
September SEP and the removal of the histogram of
was viewed as consistent with the Committee’s plans to
preferred liftoff years following the commencement of
rely on changes in the target range for the federal funds
normalization. The briefing also raised the possibility of
rate as the primary indicator of the stance of monetary
eventually including graphs in the SEP that would
policy. Most participants thought that it might be best
illustrate the uncertainty that attends participants’
either to wind down reinvestments or to manage them
macroeconomic projections, but noted that further work
in a manner that would smooth the decline in the
was needed before a specific proposal could be
balance sheet in a predictable way. However, some
presented to the Committee. The Chair asked the
participants supported ceasing reinvestments all at once
subcommittee on communications to continue to
at the appropriate time. Participants indicated a range of
investigate the possibility of incorporating a graphical
views on various issues specific to agency mortgage-
depiction of uncertainty into the SEP.
backed securities (MBS) and Treasury markets. Using
the same strategy for both agency MBS and Treasury Staff Review of the Economic Situation
maturities was viewed as simpler to communicate, but a The information reviewed for the July 28–29 meeting
number of market-specific considerations might suggest suggested that real gross domestic product (GDP) rose
employing different strategies for each asset class. No moderately in the second quarter after edging down in
decisions regarding the Committee’s strategy for ceasing the first quarter, and that labor market conditions con-
or phasing out reinvestments were made at this meeting. tinued to improve. Consumer price inflation continued
Participants requested additional analysis from the staff to run below the FOMC’s longer-run objective of 2 per-
related to alternative approaches to halting or phasing cent, restrained by earlier declines in energy prices and
out reinvestments, including consideration of the further decreases in non-energy import prices. Survey
possible market effects, and agreed that it would be measures of longer-term inflation expectations remained
helpful to continue to discuss these issues at upcoming stable, while market-based measures of inflation com-
meetings. pensation were still low.

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Total nonfarm payroll employment continued to expand home sales increased and pending home sales were at a
at a solid pace in June. The unemployment rate declined level consistent with little change in closed sales over the
to 5.3 percent, its lowest reading so far this year, and the next couple of months.
share of workers employed part time edged lower; how-
Real private expenditures for business equipment and in-
ever, the labor force participation rate and the employ-
tellectual property products appeared to rise at a modest
ment-to-population ratio both moved down. The rate
rate in the second quarter. Nominal shipments of non-
of private-sector job openings was unchanged in May at
defense capital goods excluding aircraft were little
a high level, and the rates of hiring and quits were also
changed in June. Forward-looking indicators, such as
little changed. On balance, labor market indicators sug-
new orders for these capital goods along with national
gested that underutilization of labor resources had di-
and regional surveys of business conditions, pointed to
minished since early this year.
further modest increases in business equipment spend-
After declining for five consecutive months, industrial ing in the near term. Real spending for nonresidential
production rose in June, partly reflecting an increase in structures excluding drilling and mining appeared to rise
the output of mines. Nonetheless, for the second quar- solidly in the second quarter, as firms’ nominal outlays
ter as a whole, mining output contracted sharply and for such structures increased at a robust pace again in
manufacturing production rose only modestly; both sec- May. In contrast, real business spending for drilling and
tors were weak over the first half of the year, likely re- mining structures likely fell sharply last quarter, con-
flecting the continuing effects of earlier increases in the sistent with the drop in the number of oil rigs in opera-
foreign exchange value of the dollar and lower crude oil tion. However, the rig count appeared to be bottoming
prices. Automakers’ assembly schedules pointed to a out in recent weeks.
solid gain in light motor vehicle production in the third
Nominal federal spending data through June indicated
quarter, but broader indicators of manufacturing pro-
that real federal government purchases likely decreased
duction, including readings on new orders from national
in the second quarter. However, real state and local gov-
and regional manufacturing surveys, generally suggested
ernment purchases appeared to have risen last quarter,
only modest increases in factory output in the coming
as nominal construction spending rebounded following
months.
a decline in the first quarter and payrolls for these gov-
Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) ap- ernments were little changed.
peared to have risen at a solid pace in the second quarter.
After narrowing in April, the U.S. international trade
The components of the nominal retail sales data used by
deficit widened in May, as exports decreased more than
the Bureau of Economic Analysis to construct its esti-
imports. The decrease in exports largely reflected a fall
mate of PCE edged down in June, but the decline for
in aircraft shipments. The decline in imports was driven
that group of components followed a strong reading in
by reductions in imports of capital goods, particularly
May. Similarly, light vehicle sales in June partly reversed
computers and oilfield equipment. By contrast, imports
a large increase in May but remained robust. Among the
of automotive products increased to a record level.
factors that influence household spending, real disposa-
While real net exports made a large negative contribu-
ble income rose in May and gains in households’ net
tion to the change in real GDP in the first quarter of
worth were supported by further advances in home val-
2015, the available trade data indicated that the drag on
ues. Moreover, consumer sentiment in the University of
GDP growth exerted by net exports in the second quar-
Michigan Surveys of Consumers in early July remained
ter was considerably smaller.
near its highest level since before the most recent reces-
sion. Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE
price index, only edged up over the 12 months ending in
Activity in the housing sector improved somewhat in re-
May, held down primarily by earlier large declines in en-
cent months but remained slow. Starts of new single-
ergy prices. Core PCE inflation, which excludes food
family houses declined in June but rose for the quarter
and energy prices, was 1¼ percent over the same period,
as a whole, and the level of permit issuance pointed to
restrained in part by declines in the prices of non-energy
increases in starts in subsequent months. In the multi-
imports. Over the 12 months ending in June, total con-
family sector, starts and permits increased sharply in
sumer prices as measured by the consumer price index
June, likely reflecting in large part a pull-forward of ac-
(CPI) were little changed, while the core CPI increased
tivity due to an expiring tax credit in New York City.
1¾ percent. Measures of expected longer-run inflation
Sales of new homes declined in June; in contrast, existing
from a variety of surveys, including the Michigan survey

--- Page 5 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f _J_u_ly_ 2_8_–_2_9_,_ 2_0_1_5_________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
and the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers, remained sta- nominal Treasury securities fell somewhat on net.
ble. However, market-based measures of inflation com- Market-based measures of inflation compensation over
pensation were still low, although they were somewhat the next 5 years moved lower amid a decline in oil prices,
higher than early in the year. Over the 12 months ending whereas inflation compensation 5 to 10 years ahead was
in June, nominal average hourly earnings for all employ- relatively stable.
ees increased 2 percent.
On balance, broad U.S. equity price indexes were little
Foreign economic growth appeared to remain subdued changed over the intermeeting period. Option-implied
in the second quarter. In Canada, indicators suggested volatility on the S&P 500 index over the next month in-
that low oil prices weighed on investment in the energy creased for a time in response to foreign developments
sector, and energy production in April was curtailed by before falling back to the lower end of its range over re-
wildfires and maintenance shutdowns. Economic activ- cent years. Based on reports from about 40 percent of
ity also weakened in some Latin American countries. By firms in the S&P 500 index, earnings per share in the
contrast, second-quarter economic growth was strong in second quarter were about unchanged or slightly higher
China and in the United Kingdom, and euro-area indi- than their first-quarter levels. Spreads on 10-year triple-
cators were consistent with continued moderate eco- B-rated and speculative-grade corporate bonds over
nomic expansion. Headline foreign inflation remained comparable-maturity Treasury securities widened some-
low, importantly reflecting past oil price declines. what over the period.
Staff Review of the Financial Situation Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms continued
Financial conditions were affected by developments to be accommodative. Corporate bond issuance re-
abroad over the intermeeting period but were little mained strong in the second quarter; issuance of institu-
changed on balance. Federal Reserve communications tional leveraged loans picked up noticeably, likely due in
and economic data releases, including the June employ- part to tighter loan spreads as compared with the begin-
ment report and retail sales data, put some downward ning of the year. Commercial and industrial loans on
pressure on the path of expected future short-term in- banks’ balance sheets continued to expand.
terest rates. On net, 5-year and 10-year Treasury yields
Financing for commercial real estate (CRE) remained
were somewhat lower, measures of inflation compensa-
broadly available. CRE loans on banks’ books expanded
tion over the next 5 years based on Treasury Inflation-
in the second quarter, consistent with stronger loan de-
Protected Securities declined, equity prices were little
mand reported in the July Senior Loan Officer Opinion
changed, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar
Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS). Issuance
rose modestly.
of commercial mortgage-backed securities continued to
The expected path of the federal funds rate moved down be robust.
following the June FOMC statement and the Chair’s
According to available measures, residential mortgage
postmeeting press conference. Market participants re-
lending conditions stayed accommodative for many con-
portedly saw as notable the downward revisions in the
sumers. However, credit conditions remained tight for
June SEP to FOMC participants’ projections of the ap-
riskier borrowers, such as those with low credit scores,
propriate level of the federal funds rate at the end of
undocumented income, or high debt-to-income ratios.
2015. Results from the Desk’s July Survey of Primary
Interest rates on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages were little
Dealers and Survey of Market Participants indicated that
changed, in line with MBS yields and other longer-term
a majority of respondents to both surveys continued to
interest rates.
view the September 2015 meeting as the most likely time
for the first increase in the target range for the federal Outstanding balances of auto and student loans contin-
funds rate; however, respondents to both surveys con- ued to expand at a robust pace through May. Banks in-
tinued to place significant probability on scenarios in dicated in the July SLOOS that their lending standards
which the first increase in the target range occurred at for credit card loans had eased somewhat relative to the
subsequent meetings. As in the June survey, after the past few years. However, a number of indicators sug-
initial increase, respondents expected the target range for gested that terms on credit card loans remained tight, es-
the federal funds rate to rise only gradually. pecially for subprime borrowers.
Over the intermeeting period, market yields fluctuated Credit conditions in municipal bond markets were stable
in response to news about developments abroad, includ- over the intermeeting period. Despite the announce-
ing Greek debt negotiations. Yields on 5- and 10-year ment that Puerto Rico might seek to restructure at least

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
part of its debt, spreads on an index of 20-year general potential output in 2016 and 2017, even as the normali-
obligation municipal bonds over comparable-maturity zation of the stance of monetary policy was assumed to
Treasury securities changed little, and the pace of issu- proceed. However, real GDP growth over the medium
ance of long-term municipal bonds remained robust. term was revised down a small amount, in part because
of a slightly stronger forecast for the exchange value of
After having widened amid concerns about the difficult
the dollar. The staff also made two small adjustments to
negotiations between Greece and its creditors, Greek
its supply-side assumptions. First, the projected rates of
and other peripheral euro-area sovereign spreads nar-
productivity gains and potential output growth over the
rowed, on net, over the intermeeting period as news
medium term were trimmed. With actual and potential
emerged of progress toward an agreement. In China,
GDP growth both a bit weaker, the projected narrowing
stock prices fell substantially, prompting a number of
of the output gap over the medium term was little re-
policy and regulatory actions by Chinese officials to sup-
vised. Second, the staff lowered slightly its estimate of
port the stock market. While these developments at-
the longer-run natural rate of unemployment. The un-
tracted investor attention, reaction in asset markets out-
employment rate was expected to decline gradually to
side Greece and China was limited on balance.
this revised estimate.
Sovereign bond yields and monetary policy expectations
The staff’s forecast for inflation was revised down, par-
in the United Kingdom changed little, on net, over the
ticularly in the near term, as the decline in crude oil
intermeeting period. By contrast, yields in Canada, New
prices over the intermeeting period was expected to re-
Zealand, Norway, and Sweden decreased following
sult in lower consumer energy prices. Although energy
weaker-than-expected macroeconomic data releases and
prices and non-oil import prices were expected to begin
additional monetary policy accommodation. The for-
rising steadily next year, the staff continued to project
eign exchange value of the U.S. dollar increased during
that inflation would be below the Committee’s longer-
the intermeeting period against the currencies of major
run objective of 2 percent over 2016 and 2017. Inflation
U.S. trading partners. Stock markets in most advanced
was anticipated to move up gradually to 2 percent there-
foreign economies ended the period higher. Equity
after, with inflation expectations in the longer run as-
prices in emerging market economies, however, gener-
sumed to be consistent with the Committee’s objective
ally moved lower on net.
and slack in labor and product markets projected to have
The staff provided its latest report on potential risks to waned.
financial stability. The strong capital position of the U.S.
The staff viewed the uncertainty around its July projec-
banking sector, low to moderate use of leverage else-
tions for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and
where in the financial system, stability in the level of ma-
inflation as similar to the average of the past 20 years.
turity transformation by financial institutions, and still-
The risks to the forecast for real GDP and inflation were
moderate rates of borrowing by the private nonfinancial
seen as tilted to the downside, reflecting the staff’s as-
sector were seen as factors supporting overall financial
sessment that neither monetary nor fiscal policy was well
stability. However, rising debt burdens for riskier busi-
positioned to help the economy withstand substantial
nesses as well as somewhat elevated valuations and loos-
adverse shocks. At the same time, the staff viewed the
ening lending standards for many asset classes pointed
risks around its outlook for the unemployment rate as
to some increasing concerns. The effect of financial
roughly balanced.
stresses related to Greece and China on the largest U.S.
financial firms was limited to date, perhaps reflecting the Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
relatively strong financial positions and low direct expo- Economic Outlook
sures among such firms and a view among market par- In their discussion of the economic situation and the
ticipants that foreign authorities would take actions to outlook, meeting participants viewed the information re-
stem spillovers. ceived over the intermeeting period as suggesting that
economic activity had been expanding moderately in re-
Staff Economic Outlook
cent months. The pace of job gains had been solid and
The U.S. economic forecast prepared by the staff for the
the unemployment rate had declined, with a range of la-
July FOMC meeting was broadly similar to that prepared
bor market indicators suggesting that underutilization of
for the June FOMC meeting. Real GDP was again ex-
labor resources had continued to diminish. Participants
pected to increase faster in the second half of this year
generally viewed the incoming data as confirming their
than in the first half and to expand more rapidly than
earlier assessment that the weak report on real GDP in

--- Page 7 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f _J_u_ly_ 2_8_–_2_9_,_ 2_0_1_5_________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
the first quarter reflected transitory factors and expected fixed investment remained soft even as the drag from
that real economic activity would continue to expand at the sharp contraction in drilling rigs over the first half of
a moderate pace over the balance of the year, leading to this year appeared to be fading. Although investment
further improvement in labor market conditions. How- spending was expected to pick up over the second half
ever, a few participants observed that although GDP of this year, a few participants were concerned that the
growth appeared to have picked up in recent months rel- further decline in oil prices that had occurred in recent
ative to the first-quarter pace, the level of GDP re- weeks might continue to hold down energy-related in-
mained lower than had been projected earlier in the year. vestment. In addition, government spending was ex-
Inflation continued to run below the Committee’s 2 per- pected to add very little to growth in aggregate spending
cent longer-run objective, partly reflecting earlier de- this year. Participants also expected net exports to con-
clines in energy prices and further decreases in prices of tinue to subtract from GDP growth over the second half
non-energy imports. Market-based measures of infla- of the year, reflecting in part the damping influence of
tion compensation remained low, while survey-based the dollar’s earlier appreciation.
measures of longer-term inflation expectations remained
Industry contacts pointed to generally solid business
stable. Participants generally anticipated that inflation
conditions, with firms in many parts of the country con-
would rise gradually toward 2 percent as the labor mar-
tinuing to report positive assessments of current activity
ket improved further and the transitory effects of earlier
and optimism about future sales. Manufacturing activity
declines in energy and import prices dissipated. Alt-
had slowed somewhat over the intermeeting period, but
hough many continued to see some downside risks aris-
conditions were mixed across different industries.
ing from economic and financial developments abroad,
Those firms connected to the auto, aerospace, and con-
participants generally viewed the risks to the outlook for
struction industries, for example, reported strong de-
domestic economic activity and the labor market as
mand. However, businesses particularly exposed to the
nearly balanced.
appreciation of the dollar or falling commodity prices—
With respect to consumer spending, the incoming data including those in the heavy equipment and steel, oil and
had been uneven but participants cited reports from gas extraction, and petrochemical industries—reported
contacts suggesting a pickup since the first quarter. Par- slower activity. The service sector reports were mostly
ticipants generally expected consumer spending to rise positive. Overall, most contacts viewed the recent slow-
moderately over the near term. Continued gains in em- down in manufacturing as likely to prove temporary and
ployment and income, high household net worth, and remained optimistic about future demand, even though
low gasoline prices were viewed as factors that should the recent decreases in oil prices and the possibility of
support consumer spending in coming months. Con- adverse spillovers from slower economic growth in
sumer credit conditions were also seen as favorable, with China raised some concerns. Regarding the agricultural
business contacts pointing to steady loan growth, espe- sector, a very wet spring had significantly reduced the
cially for auto loans and credit cards. However, a couple percentage of crops in good condition, and declining
of participants were concerned about the outlook for commodity prices had further reduced expectations for
consumer spending, noting that spending had been dis- farm income.
appointing in recent months even though real income
In their discussion of the foreign economic outlook, par-
had already been boosted by the lower gasoline prices
ticipants generally viewed the risks from the fiscal and
and the improved labor market.
financial problems in Greece as having diminished
Participants viewed the recent data on housing starts and somewhat, although it was observed that Greece still
permits as well as the higher levels of sales and prices as faced many challenges and that Greek economic pro-
indicative of continued recovery in the housing sector. gress was likely to be limited over the near term. While
The easing of lending standards for residential mort- the recent Chinese stock market decline seemed to have
gages evidenced in the most recent SLOOS was cited as had limited implications to date for the growth outlook
a factor likely to support further progress. However, a in China, several participants noted that a material slow-
couple of participants noted that they did not expect this down in Chinese economic activity could pose risks to
sector to be a major contributor to economic growth the U.S. economic outlook. Some participants also dis-
over the remainder of the year. cussed the risk that a possible divergence in interest rates
in the United States and abroad might lead to further
Participants also observed that activity in other sectors
of the economy continued to be subdued. Business

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
appreciation of the dollar, extending the downward pres- up over recent months. Some participants cited down-
sure on commodity prices and the weakness in net ex- side risks to inflation, pointing to the absence of any no-
ports. ticeable response of inflation to the reduction in re-
source slack over the past several years, risks of further
Participants agreed that labor market conditions had im-
declines in oil and commodity prices, and the possibility
proved further, citing increases in payroll employment
of further appreciation in the dollar. Although most
and job openings, the decrease in the unemployment
readings on longer-term inflation expectations were little
rate, and some further reduction in broader measures of
changed recently, participants discussed how to interpret
labor market underutilization. Although the labor force
downward movements in some survey and market-
participation rate declined in June and the national hiring
based measures of inflation expectations over the past
and quits rates were little changed in May, several partic-
few years. Most participants still expected that the
ipants noted that reports from business contacts in their
downward pressure on inflation from the previous de-
Districts pointed to continued job gains and relatively
clines in energy prices and the effects of past dollar ap-
strong labor markets. They cited anecdotal reports of
preciation would prove to be temporary. Participants
firms having concerns about retaining workers and fac-
generally continued to anticipate that, with appropriate
ing difficulties in filling even medium- and lower-skilled
monetary policy, inflation would move up to the Com-
jobs. However, several participants contended that, de-
mittee’s objective over the medium term, reflecting the
spite the progress over the past few years, some notice-
anticipated tightening of product and labor markets and
able margins of slack remained, citing as evidence the
stable longer-term inflation expectations.
high number of workers not actively searching for jobs
but available and interested in work as well as the high Participants discussed a range of topics associated with
share of employees working part time for economic rea- financial market developments and financial stability.
sons compared with pre-recession levels. They commented on issues related to the deterioration
in bond market liquidity reported by market participants,
The ongoing rise in labor demand still appeared not to
the potential migration of leveraged loan underwriting to
have led to a broad-based firming of wage increases.
the nonbank sector in light of current supervisory guid-
While business contacts in a number of Districts contin-
ance, and the assessment of valuation risks when term
ued to report that the pace of wage increases had picked
premiums were narrow while most other risk premiums
up, recent national readings on hourly compensation and
were not. In addition, it was observed that Puerto Rico
average hourly earnings of employees had remained sub-
faced significant challenges servicing its debts, though
dued. The most recent employment cost index, released
the risks of contagion to other U.S. financial markets
in April, had suggested an increase in wage gains. How-
were judged to be low. Participants also noted the chal-
ever, questions were raised about how to interpret this
lenges associated with identifying newly emerging risks
reading because the pickup was concentrated in the
as well as the implications for monetary policy of a hy-
Northeast and might have resulted from particular fac-
pothetical future situation in which financial imbalances
tors that were not associated solely with a general tight-
were increasing.
ening of labor market conditions, such as minimum
wage adjustments and market conditions in certain oc- During their discussion of economic conditions and
cupations. In addition, it was noted that considerable monetary policy, participants mentioned a number of
uncertainty remained about when wages might begin to considerations associated with the timing and pace of
accelerate and whether that development might translate policy normalization. Most judged that the conditions
into increased price inflation. for policy firming had not yet been achieved, but they
noted that conditions were approaching that point. Par-
Participants discussed how recent developments influ-
ticipants observed that the labor market had improved
enced their expectations for reaching the FOMC’s 2 per-
notably since early this year, but many saw scope for
cent inflation objective over the medium term. Total
some further improvement. Many participants indicated
PCE inflation continued to run below the Committee’s
that their outlook for sustained economic growth and
longer-run objective. Core PCE price inflation, as meas-
further improvement in labor markets was key in sup-
ured on a 12-month change basis, also remained low, but
porting their expectation that inflation would move up
other measures, such as the trimmed mean PCE and me-
to the Committee’s 2 percent objective, and that they
dian CPI, continued to run at higher levels than core
would be looking for evidence that the economic out-
PCE inflation. Moreover, core CPI inflation had picked
look was evolving as they anticipated. However, some

--- Page 9 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f _J_u_ly_ 2_8_–_2_9_,_ 2_0_1_5_________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
participants expressed the view that the incoming infor- rate gradually after the first increase to help ensure that
mation had not yet provided grounds for reasonable the economy would be able to absorb higher interest
confidence that inflation would move back to 2 percent rates and that inflation was moving toward the Commit-
over the medium term and that the inflation outlook tee’s objective.
thus might not soon meet one of the conditions estab-
Committee Policy Action
lished by the Committee for initiating a firming of policy.
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
Several of these participants cited evidence that the re-
ahead, members judged that information received since
sponse of inflation to the elimination of resource slack
the FOMC met in June indicated that economic activity
might be attenuated and expressed concern about risks
had been expanding moderately in recent months. The
of further downward pressure on inflation from interna-
labor market had also continued to improve, with solid
tional developments. Another concern related to the
job gains and declining unemployment. A range of labor
risk of premature policy tightening was the limited ability
market indicators, on balance, suggested that underutili-
of monetary policy to offset downside shocks to infla-
zation of labor resources had diminished since early this
tion and economic activity when the federal funds rate
year. Members generally viewed these developments, to-
was near its effective lower bound.
gether with appropriate monetary policy accommoda-
Some participants, however, emphasized that the econ- tion, as supporting their expectations for moderate eco-
omy had made significant progress over the past few nomic growth in the medium term and for further im-
years and viewed the economic conditions for beginning provement in labor market conditions. They also con-
to increase the target range for the federal funds rate as tinued to see the risks to the outlook for economic ac-
having been met or were confident that they would be tivity and the labor market as nearly balanced. Inflation
met shortly. A few of these participants judged that the had continued to run below the Committee’s longer-run
stance of monetary policy, including the extraordinarily objective, but members expected it to rise gradually to-
low level of the federal funds rate and the current size of ward 2 percent over the medium term as the labor mar-
the Federal Reserve balance sheet, was very accommo- ket improved further and the transitory effects of earlier
dative. A couple of others thought that an appreciable declines in energy and import prices dissipated.
delay in beginning the process of normalization might
In assessing whether economic conditions had im-
result in an undesirable increase in inflation or have ad-
proved sufficiently to initiate a firming in the stance of
verse consequences for financial stability. Some partici-
monetary policy, the Committee noted that, on balance,
pants advised that progress toward the Committee’s ob-
a range of labor market indicators suggested that un-
jectives should be viewed in light of the cumulative gains
derutilization of labor resources had diminished further.
made to date without overemphasizing month-to-
Most members saw room for some additional progress
month changes in incoming data. It was also noted that
in reducing labor market slack, although several viewed
a prompt start to normalization would likely convey the
current labor market conditions as at or very close to
Committee’s confidence in prospects for the economy.
those consistent with maximum employment. Many
In their discussion of the appropriate path for the federal members thought that labor market underutilization
funds rate and associated communications at and after would be largely eliminated in the near term if economic
the time of the first increase in the target range, partici- activity evolved as they expected. However, several were
pants expressed support for emphasizing that the course concerned that labor market conditions consistent with
of policy would remain conditional on the Committee’s maximum employment could take longer to achieve,
assessment of economic developments and the outlook noting, for example, the lack of convincing signs of ac-
relative to its objectives. It was also noted that the Com- celerating wages, which might be signaling that the nat-
mittee’s communications around the time of the first ural rate of unemployment could currently be lower than
rate increase should emphasize that the expected path they previously thought.
for policy, not the initial increase, would be the most im-
In considering the Committee’s criteria with respect to
portant determinant of financial conditions and should
inflation for beginning policy normalization, most mem-
acknowledge that policy would continue to be accom-
bers viewed the incoming data as reinforcing their earlier
modative to support progress toward the Committee’s
assessment that, although inflation continued to run be-
dual objectives. While monetary policy adjustments ul-
low the Committee’s objective, the downward pressure
timately would be data dependent, some participants ex-
on inflation from the previous decreases in energy prices
pressed the view that, in light of their current outlook, it
and the effects of past dollar appreciation would abate.
likely would be appropriate to adjust the federal funds

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
However, core inflation on a year-over-year basis also in the statement that the Committee’s decision about
was still below 2 percent. Moreover, some members how long to maintain the current target range for the
continued to see downside risks to inflation from the federal funds rate would depend on its assessment of ac-
possibility of further dollar appreciation and declines in tual and expected progress toward its objectives of max-
commodity prices. In addition, several members noted imum employment and 2 percent inflation. Members
that higher rates of resource utilization appeared to have also agreed that their evaluation of progress on their ob-
had only very limited effects to date on wages and prices, jectives would take into account a wide range of infor-
and underscored the uncertainty surrounding the infla- mation, including measures of labor market conditions,
tion process as well as the role and dynamics of inflation indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expecta-
expectations. The Committee agreed to continue to tions, and readings on financial and international devel-
monitor inflation developments closely, with almost all opments. To further reflect the Committee’s assessment
members indicating that they would need to see more that economic conditions had continued to progress to-
evidence that economic growth was sufficiently strong ward its objectives, the Committee slightly altered its
and labor markets conditions had firmed enough for characterization of when it anticipates that it will be ap-
them to feel reasonably confident that inflation would propriate to begin the process of policy normalization.
return to the Committee’s longer-run objective over the Specifically, members agreed to indicate the Commit-
medium term. tee’s anticipation that it would be appropriate to raise the
target range for the federal funds rate when it has seen
The Committee concluded that, although it had seen fur-
some further improvement in the labor market and is
ther progress, the economic conditions warranting an in-
reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its
crease in the target range for the federal funds rate had
2 percent objective over the medium term.
not yet been met. Members generally agreed that addi-
tional information on the outlook would be necessary The Committee also maintained its policy of reinvesting
before deciding to implement an increase in the target principal payments from agency debt and agency
range. One member, however, indicated a readiness to mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
take that step at this meeting but was willing to wait for securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securi-
additional data to confirm a judgment to raise the target ties at auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s
range. holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels,
should help maintain accommodative financial condi-
In their discussion of language for the postmeeting state-
tions. The Committee reiterated its expectation that,
ment, members agreed that the wording should reflect
even after employment and inflation are near mandate-
their assessment that economic conditions showed con-
consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some
tinued progress toward the Committee’s objectives. The
time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below
Committee updated the statement to indicate that eco-
levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run.
nomic activity had been expanding moderately in recent
months and that it had seen further improvement in la- At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
bor market conditions over the intermeeting period, voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
pointing specifically to solid job gains and declining un- of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to
employment. In addition, the Committee agreed to state execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with
that a range of labor market indicators suggested that the following domestic policy directive:
underutilization of labor resources had diminished since
“Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
early this year, acknowledging the cumulative progress
Federal Open Market Committee seeks
that had been made in the labor market. The Committee
monetary and financial conditions that will
also modified the discussion of inflation developments
foster maximum employment and price
slightly to recognize the more recent declines in energy
stability. In particular, the Committee seeks
prices while restating the expectation that inflation
conditions in reserve markets consistent with
would rise gradually toward 2 percent over the medium
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to
term as the labor market improved further and the tran-
¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk
sitory effects of earlier declines in energy and import
to undertake open market operations as
prices dissipated.
necessary to maintain such conditions. The
The Committee agreed to maintain the target range for Committee directs the Desk to maintain its
the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and to reaffirm policy of rolling over maturing Treasury

--- Page 11 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f _J_u_ly_ 2_8_–_2_9_,_ 2_0_1_5________________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
securities into new issues and its policy of level in the near term, but the Committee ex-
reinvesting principal payments on all agency pects inflation to rise gradually toward 2 per-
debt and agency mortgage-backed securities cent over the medium term as the labor mar-
in agency mortgage-backed securities. The ket improves further and the transitory effects
Committee also directs the Desk to engage in of earlier declines in energy and import prices
dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as dissipate. The Committee continues to mon-
necessary to facilitate settlement of the itor inflation developments closely.
Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed
To support continued progress toward maxi-
securities transactions. The System Open
mum employment and price stability, the
Market Account manager and the secretary
Committee today reaffirmed its view that the
will keep the Committee informed of ongoing
current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the
developments regarding the System’s balance
federal funds rate remains appropriate. In de-
sheet that could affect the attainment over
termining how long to maintain this target
time of the Committee’s objectives of
range, the Committee will assess progress—
maximum employment and price stability.”
both realized and expected—toward its objec-
The vote encompassed approval of the statement below tives of maximum employment and 2 percent
to be released at 2:00 p.m.: inflation. This assessment will take into ac-
count a wide range of information, including
“Information received since the Federal Open
measures of labor market conditions, indica-
Market Committee met in June indicates that
tors of inflation pressures and inflation expec-
economic activity has been expanding moder-
tations, and readings on financial and interna-
ately in recent months. Growth in household
tional developments. The Committee antici-
spending has been moderate and the housing
pates that it will be appropriate to raise the
sector has shown additional improvement;
target range for the federal funds rate when it
however, business fixed investment and net
has seen some further improvement in the la-
exports stayed soft. The labor market contin-
bor market and is reasonably confident that
ued to improve, with solid job gains and de-
inflation will move back to its 2 percent ob-
clining unemployment. On balance, a range
jective over the medium term.
of labor market indicators suggests that un-
derutilization of labor resources has dimin- The Committee is maintaining its existing pol-
ished since early this year. Inflation continued icy of reinvesting principal payments from its
to run below the Committee’s longer-run ob- holdings of agency debt and agency mortgage-
jective, partly reflecting earlier declines in en- backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
ergy prices and decreasing prices of non-en- securities and of rolling over maturing Treas-
ergy imports. Market-based measures of in- ury securities at auction. This policy, by keep-
flation compensation remain low; survey- ing the Committee’s holdings of longer-term
based measures of longer-term inflation ex- securities at sizable levels, should help main-
pectations have remained stable. tain accommodative financial conditions.
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the When the Committee decides to begin to re-
Committee seeks to foster maximum employ- move policy accommodation, it will take a bal-
ment and price stability. The Committee ex- anced approach consistent with its longer-run
pects that, with appropriate policy accommo- goals of maximum employment and inflation
dation, economic activity will expand at a of 2 percent. The Committee currently antic-
moderate pace, with labor market indicators ipates that, even after employment and infla-
continuing to move toward levels the Com- tion are near mandate-consistent levels, eco-
mittee judges consistent with its dual man- nomic conditions may, for some time, warrant
date. The Committee continues to see the keeping the target federal funds rate below
risks to the outlook for economic activity and levels the Committee views as normal in the
the labor market as nearly balanced. Inflation longer run.”
is anticipated to remain near its recent low

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C. fect monetary policy implementation, and the long-run
Dudley, Lael Brainard, Charles L. Evans, Stanley Fischer, structure of the Federal Reserve’s assets and liabilities
Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, Jerome H. Pow- that best supports the System’s macroeconomic objec-
ell, Daniel K. Tarullo, and John C. Williams. tives and financial stability. In discussing the range of
issues contemplated for study under this project, it was
Voting against this action: None.
noted that the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans
Long-Run Monetary Policy Implementation reflect the Committee’s intention that, in the longer run,
Framework the Federal Reserve will hold no more securities than
At the conclusion of the meeting, the Chair noted that necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and
the staff would soon begin an extended effort to evaluate effectively and that the Federal Reserve will hold primar-
potential long-run monetary policy implementation ily Treasury securities.
frameworks. In view of the likely time frames for nor-
Policymakers agreed that it would be important to draw
malization of the stance of monetary policy and the Sys-
on the perspectives of staff across the Federal Reserve
tem’s balance sheet, the Committee probably would not
System and to consult widely with other central banks,
need to reach any final decisions regarding such a frame-
academics, and other experts on markets, financial insti-
work for several years. Moreover, the process of nor-
tutions, and monetary policy. The project was expected
malization will likely provide a great deal of information
to run through the end of 2016. Policymakers will re-
about money markets and the Federal Reserve’s policy
view progress and provide input as the work proceeds.
tools that will help inform the Committee’s judgment
about a long-run implementation framework. Nonethe- It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
less, because the analysis will likely address a wide range would be held on Wednesday–Thursday, September
of topics, it seemed appropriate to begin now to organ- 16–17, 2015. The meeting adjourned at 10:45 a.m. on
ize and undertake the work. July 29, 2015.
Previous staff work on implementation frameworks was Notation Vote
presented to the Committee in April 2008 and focused By notation vote completed on July 7, 2015, the
largely on alternative frameworks that could be used to Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
target the federal funds rate. Those topics would be an Committee meeting held on June 16–17, 2015.
important part of the current undertaking as well. How-
ever, in light of experience over recent years, policymak-
ers agreed that a number of related issues warranted at-
tention, including topics such as the effectiveness of al-
_____________________________
ternative implementation frameworks in scenarios that
Brian F. Madigan
could require a return to the zero lower bound, regula-
Secretary
tory and other structural developments that could affect
financial institutions and markets in ways that would af-