# 20151028_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:37:50*
*Pages: 12, Tables: 0*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
October 27–28, 2015
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Robert deV. Frierson,1 Secretary of the Board, Office
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of of the Secretary, Board of Governors
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, October 27, 2015, at Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Banking
10:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, October 28, Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors
2015, at 9:00 a.m.
Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability
PRESENT:
Policy and Research, Board of Governors
Janet L. Yellen, Chair
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Margaret Shanks,2 Deputy Secretary, Office of the
Lael Brainard Secretary, Board of Governors
Charles L. Evans
Stanley Fischer James A. Clouse and Stephen A. Meyer, Deputy
Jeffrey M. Lacker Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Dennis P. Lockhart Governors
Jerome H. Powell
Daniel K. Tarullo Andreas Lehnert, Deputy Director, Office of Financial
John C. Williams Stability Policy and Research, Board of Governors
James Bullard, Esther L. George, Loretta J. Mester, William B. English, Senior Special Adviser to the
Eric Rosengren, and Michael Strine, Alternate Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Governors
Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Narayana Andrew Figura and Stacey Tevlin, Special Advisers to
Kocherlakota, Presidents of the Federal Reserve the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, Governors
respectively
Trevor A. Reeve, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office
Brian F. Madigan, Secretary of Board Members, Board of Governors
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Board Members, Board of Governors
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel
Steven B. Kamin, Economist David E. Lebow, Senior Associate Director, Division
Thomas Laubach, Economist of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
David W. Wilcox, Economist
Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of Research
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Eric M. Engen, and Statistics, Board of Governors; Joyce K.
Michael P. Leahy, William R. Nelson, Glenn D. Zickler, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary
Rudebusch, Daniel G. Sullivan, and William Affairs, Board of Governors
Wascher, Associate Economists
Fabio M. Natalucci, Associate Director, Division of
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
________________
Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open ¹ Attended Tuesday morning’s discussion of equilibrium real
Market Account interest rates and Wednesday’s session.
2 Attended Tuesday’s session following the discussion of
equilibrium real interest rates.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Joseph W. Gruber,3 Deputy Associate Director, Andreas L. Hornstein, Senior Advisor, Federal Reserve
Division of International Finance, Board of Bank of Richmond
Governors; Jane E. Ihrig4 and David López-
Salido,5 Deputy Associate Directors, Division of Jing Zhang,5 Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors of Chicago
________________
Glenn Follette and John M. Roberts, Assistant 3 Attended Tuesday’s session only.
Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, 4 Attended through the discussion of financial developments
Board of Governors; Christopher J. Gust, and open market operations.
5 Attended through the discussion of equilibrium real interest
Assistant Director, Division of Monetary Affairs,
rates.
Board of Governors
Robert J. Tetlow, Adviser, Division of Monetary
Equilibrium Real Interest Rates
Affairs, Board of Governors
The staff presented several briefings regarding the con-
cept of an equilibrium real interest rate—sometimes la-
Penelope A. Beattie,3 Assistant to the Secretary, Office
beled the “neutral” or “natural” real interest rate, or
of the Secretary, Board of Governors
“r*”—that can serve as a benchmark to help gauge the
stance of monetary policy. Various concepts of r* were
Dana L. Burnett, Section Chief, Division of Monetary
discussed. According to one definition, short-run r* is
Affairs, Board of Governors; Andrea Raffo,5
the level of the real short-term interest rate that, if ob-
Section Chief, Division of International Finance,
tained currently, would result in the economy operating
Board of Governors
at full employment or, in some simple models of the
economy, at full employment and price stability. The
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of
staff summarized the behavior of estimates of the short-
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
run equilibrium real rate over recent business cycles as
well as longer-run trends in real interest rates and key
Yuriy Kitsul, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary
factors that influence those trends. Estimates derived
Affairs, Board of Governors
using a variety of empirical models of the U.S. economy
and a range of econometric techniques indicated that
Benjamin K. Johannsen,5 Economist, Division of
short-run r* fell sharply with the onset of the 2008–09
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
financial crisis and recession, quite likely to negative lev-
els. Short-run r* was estimated to have recovered only
David Sapenaro, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
partially and to be close to zero currently, still well below
Bank of St. Louis
levels that prevailed during recent economic expansions
when the unemployment rate was close to estimates of
Jeff Fuhrer, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve
its longer-run normal level.
Bank of Boston
With respect to longer-run trends, the staff noted that
Kei-Mu Yi, Special Policy Advisor to the President, multiyear averages of short-term real interest rates had
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis been declining not only in the United States, but also in
many other large economies for the past quarter-century
Michael Dotsey, Michael Held, Evan F. Koenig, and and stood near zero in most of those economies. More-
Christopher J. Waller, Senior Vice Presidents, Fed- over, economic theory indicates that the equilibrium
eral Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, New York, level of short-term real interest rates would likely remain
Dallas, and St. Louis, respectively low relative to estimates of its level before the financial
crisis if trend growth of total factor productivity does
Edward S. Knotek II and George A. Kahn, Vice Presi- not pick up and if demographic projections for slow
dents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland and growth in working-age populations are borne out. Fi-
Kansas City, respectively nally, the staff discussed the implications of uncertainty
Robert Rich and Andrea Tambalotti,5 Assistant Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of New York

--- Page 3 ---

____________________________M__in__ut_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ O__c_to_b_e_r_ 2_7_–_2_8_, _2_0_1_5_______________________P_a_g_e_ _3
about the level of the equilibrium real rate for using es- money market interest rates over the offered rate on
timates of short-run r* as a guideline for appropriate such operations. Total take-up of overnight and term
monetary policy. reverse repurchase agreements at the end of the third
quarter was also elevated. The deputy manager briefed
In their comments on the briefings and in their discus-
the Committee on plans for the upcoming quarterly test
sion of the potential use of r* in monetary policy delib-
of the Term Deposit Facility in December and for term
erations, policymakers made a number of observations.
reverse repurchase agreement operations to be con-
The unemployment rate has declined gradually in recent
ducted ahead of year-end. In addition, an update was
years, indicating that real gross domestic product (GDP)
provided on a data collection that will allow the calcula-
growth has, on average, exceeded growth of potential
tion of the federal funds effective rate and a new over-
GDP, but not by a substantial margin. This outcome, in
night bank funding rate based on transaction-level data
turn, suggested that the actual level of short-term real
reported by depository institutions that are active in
interest rates has been below but not substantially below
overnight bank funding markets; as previously reported,
the equilibrium real rate, consistent with estimates that
the Federal Reserve expects to begin publication of the
r* currently is close to zero, notably below its historical
rates based on these data in the first few months of 2016.
average.
A staff presentation reviewed issues that could arise if
A number of participants indicated that they expected
the Treasury was temporarily unable to meet its obliga-
short-run r* to rise as the economic expansion contin-
tions because of constraints associated with the statutory
ued, but probably only gradually. Moreover, it was
federal debt limit. Following the presentation, policy-
noted that the longer-run downward trend in real inter-
makers indicated that, if such issues arose, it remained
est rates suggested that short-run r* would likely remain
appropriate to follow the strategy for open market oper-
below levels that were normal during previous business
ations, the discount window, and other System respon-
cycle expansions, and that the longer-run normal level to
sibilities that was discussed at the Committee’s video-
which the nominal federal funds rate might be expected
conference meeting of October 16, 2013, and summa-
to converge in the absence of further shocks to the econ-
rized in the minutes of that meeting.
omy—that is, the level that would be consistent, in the
long run, with maximum employment and 2 percent in- By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
flation—would likely be lower than was the case in pre- domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.
vious decades. A lower long-run level of r* would also There were no intervention operations in foreign curren-
imply that the gap between the actual level of the federal cies for the System’s account over the intermeeting pe-
funds rate and its near-zero effective lower bound would riod.
be smaller on average. A smaller gap might increase the
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
frequency of episodes in which policymakers would not
The information reviewed for the October 27–28 meet-
be able to reduce the federal funds rate enough to pro-
ing suggested that real GDP was increasing at a moder-
mote a strong economic recovery and rapid return to
ate pace, but that the improvement in labor market con-
maximum employment or to maintain price stability in
ditions had slowed somewhat in recent months. Infla-
the aftermath of negative shocks to aggregate demand.
tion continued to run below the FOMC’s longer-run ob-
Some participants noted that it would be prudent to have
jective of 2 percent, restrained in part by declines in en-
additional policy tools that could be used in such situa-
ergy prices and prices of non-energy imported goods.
tions.
Survey measures of longer-run inflation expectations re-
Developments in Financial Markets, Open Market mained stable; market-based measures of inflation com-
Operations, and Policy Normalization pensation moved slightly lower.
The deputy manager of the System Open Market Ac-
Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded at about
count (SOMA) reported on developments in domestic
the same rate in September as in August, although at a
and foreign financial markets, money markets, and Sys-
slower pace than earlier this year, and the unemployment
tem open market operations conducted by the Open
rate remained at 5.1 percent. Both the labor force par-
Market Desk during the period since the Federal Open
ticipation rate and the employment-to-population ratio
Market Committee (FOMC) met on September 16–17.
edged down. However, the share of workers employed
Take-up of the System’s overnight reverse repurchase
part time for economic reasons fell a little. The rate of
agreement operations increased during this period, evi-
private-sector job openings declined in August but was
dently reflecting a modest narrowing of the spread of

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
still at a high level, while the rates of hiring and quits Total real government purchases looked to have moved
were unchanged. sideways in the third quarter. Federal government pur-
chases likely declined a little, as defense spending
Industrial production decreased in September as the out-
stepped down further. In contrast, state and local gov-
put of both the manufacturing and mining sectors de-
ernment purchases appeared to have been rising; the
clined, likely reflecting the effects of the appreciation in
payrolls of these governments expanded further in Sep-
the foreign exchange value of the dollar and the fall in
tember, and their nominal construction spending in July
crude oil prices since the middle of last year. Automak-
and August was above its level in the second quarter.
ers’ assembly schedules, as well as broader indicators of
manufacturing production, such as the readings on new The U.S. international trade deficit widened in August as
orders from national and regional manufacturing sur- exports declined and imports rose. The fall in exports
veys, generally pointed to further decreases in factory was concentrated in industrial supplies, while consumer
output in coming months. Recent information on crude and capital goods accounted for much of the growth in
oil and natural gas extraction indicated further declines imports. Advance estimates for September indicated a
in mining output. narrower merchandise trade deficit, with a rebound in
exports and a decline in imports relative to August. Af-
Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) ap-
ter falling sharply early this year, real net exports were
peared to rise at a solid rate in the third quarter as a
little changed in the second quarter and appeared to have
whole. The components of the nominal retail sales data
stayed flat in the third quarter, with real exports remain-
used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis to construct
ing soft.
its estimate of PCE increased only slightly in September,
but the rate of sales of light motor vehicles rose to a new Total U.S. consumer prices in August, as measured by
high for the year. Real disposable income grew at a solid the PCE price index, were unchanged from 12 months
pace in July and August. Households’ net worth was earlier, reflecting large declines in consumer energy
boosted by recent gains in home values and the net in- prices. Core PCE inflation, which excludes changes in
crease in equity prices over the intermeeting period. food and energy prices, was 1¼ percent over the same
Moreover, consumer sentiment in the University of 12-month period, restrained in part by declines in the
Michigan Surveys of Consumers improved in early Oc- prices of non-energy goods imports. In September, total
tober. consumer prices as measured by the consumer price in-
dex (CPI) were unchanged from a year earlier, while the
Activity in the housing sector was mixed, but it generally
core CPI increased almost 2 percent. Measures of ex-
continued to recover slowly. Starts of new single-family
pected longer-run inflation from a number of surveys,
homes stepped down modestly, on net, over August and
including the Michigan survey, the Blue Chip Economic
September, although building permits increased slightly.
Indicators, and the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers,
Meanwhile, starts of multifamily units rose notably.
remained stable. However, market-based measures of
Sales of new and existing homes moved down somewhat
inflation compensation moved a little lower. Average
on balance.
hourly earnings for all employees increased 2¼ percent
Real private expenditures for business equipment and in- over the 12 months ending in September, a pace that was
tellectual property products appeared to increase at a faster than consumer price inflation.
solid pace in the third quarter. Nominal shipments of
Foreign economic growth appeared to have improved
nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft rose in Sep-
somewhat in the third quarter following two quarters of
tember. However, forward-looking indicators, such as
slow growth. Economic activity rebounded in Canada
new orders for these capital goods along with national
after disruptions to energy production earlier in the year,
and regional surveys of business conditions, pointed to
and real GDP growth jumped to 5 percent in South Ko-
more modest increases in business equipment spending
rea as the effects of the MERS (Middle East Respiratory
in the coming months. Firms’ nominal spending for
Syndrome) outbreak faded. Chinese real GDP growth
nonresidential structures excluding drilling and mining
remained around 7 percent on a four-quarter change ba-
rose in August, although available indicators of drilling
sis, and information on economic activity in the euro
activity, such as the number of oil and gas rigs in opera-
area and the United Kingdom was consistent with con-
tion, continued to fall. Real private inventory invest-
tinued expansion. However, indicators of economic ac-
ment appeared to have slowed markedly in the third
tivity in Japan and Brazil remained weak. Headline in-
quarter.
flation was low in many countries as a result of falling

--- Page 5 ---

____________________________M__in__ut_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ O__c_to_b_e_r_ 2_7_–_2_8_, _2_0_1_5_______________________P_a_g_e_ _5
energy prices. Inflation rates remained high in some aggregate corporate earnings per share in the third quar-
South American countries whose currencies had recently ter were expected to decrease slightly, with large declines
depreciated sharply. in the energy and materials sectors. Spreads on lever-
aged loans increased in August and moved up, on bal-
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
ance, over the intermeeting period.
Continued concerns about the global economic growth
outlook weighed on market sentiment in the United Overall, financing conditions for nonfinancial busi-
States and abroad early in the intermeeting period, but nesses were generally accommodative but tightened
sentiment improved somewhat in the weeks preceding somewhat for lower-rated firms. Corporate bond issu-
the October FOMC meeting. Following the weaker- ance rebounded in September after a slowdown in Au-
than-expected report on the U.S. employment situation gust. The expansion of commercial and industrial loans
in September, market participants’ expectations for the on banks’ books moderated slightly during the third
timing of the initial increase in the target range for the quarter, and lending standards were little changed, on
federal funds rate shifted out, and their expectation for net, after several years of easing, according to the Octo-
the subsequent path of the federal funds rate flattened. ber Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lend-
Financing conditions for most businesses and house- ing Practices (SLOOS). Financing conditions for small
holds remained accommodative but tightened somewhat businesses continued to improve, with loan originations
for businesses with lower credit quality. maintaining their upward trend, although indicators of
the optimism of small business owners declined in re-
Federal Reserve communications and economic data re-
cent months. Financing conditions for municipalities re-
leases over the intermeeting period appeared to have led
mained accommodative on balance. Even though news
investors to expect a later start date for monetary policy
reports on Puerto Rico’s public-sector debt situation
normalization and a more gradual path for the federal
garnered attention of market participants, credit default
funds rate thereafter. According to federal funds futures
swap spreads on Puerto Rico’s general obligation debt
quotes just before the October FOMC meeting, as well
were little changed over the intermeeting period.
as results from the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and
Survey of Market Participants, market participants saw a Spreads on commercial mortgage-backed securities
significantly lower chance of the initial increase in the (CMBS) widened over the intermeeting period, while re-
target range for the federal funds rate occurring before spondents in the SLOOS reported that standards on
year-end than they perceived just before the September commercial real estate (CRE) loans were little changed
meeting, while the likelihood of liftoff occurring at or in the third quarter. Overall, CRE financing appeared to
after the March 2016 meeting rose. The expected path remain broadly available. All major categories of CRE
for the federal funds rate implied by quotes on overnight loans on banks’ balance sheets expanded robustly
index swap rates flattened notably over the intermeeting through September, consistent with reports of stronger
period. demand for such loans in the SLOOS.
Nominal Treasury yields declined further, reflecting Credit conditions for residential mortgages eased mod-
FOMC communications, concerns about global eco- estly, on net, in the third quarter. A moderate net frac-
nomic growth, and generally weaker-than-expected U.S. tion of SLOOS respondents continued to ease standards
economic data releases. Measures of inflation compen- on loans eligible for purchase by the government-
sation based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities sponsored enterprises and on jumbo loans, but stan-
moved slightly lower on net. dards on government-backed loans tightened somewhat.
Interest rates on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages declined
Broad U.S. equity price indexes fell in the first few weeks
over the intermeeting period.
after the September FOMC meeting but subsequently
more than retraced those declines. Spreads of yields on Conditions in consumer credit markets remained ac-
triple-B-rated corporate bonds over comparable- commodative on balance. Outstanding credit card bal-
maturity Treasury securities changed little, on balance, ances expanded further in August, and a moderate net
and those on speculative-grade corporate bonds wid- fraction of banks in the SLOOS indicated that they eased
ened notably across sectors. Across the credit spectrum, standards on such loans during the third quarter. How-
spreads were generally near their highest levels in several ever, credit card limits remained mostly flat overall and
years and ended the period above their historical medi- were fairly tight for subprime borrowers. The growth of
ans. Based on available reports and analysts’ estimates, auto and student loans stayed robust.

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Continued concerns about the outlook for global eco- GDP growth was essentially unrevised from the previ-
nomic growth weighed on commodity and foreign eq- ous forecast. The staff continued to project that real
uity prices early in the intermeeting period. These de- GDP would expand at a somewhat faster pace than po-
clines subsequently were reversed, and foreign equity tential output from 2016 through 2018, supported pri-
price indexes ended the period higher, pushed up by ex- marily by increases in consumer spending. The unem-
pectations of additional monetary policy accommoda- ployment rate was expected to decline gradually and to
tion in major foreign economies and some favorable run a little below the staff’s estimate of its longer-run
economic indicators in China. natural rate over this period.
The broad nominal index of the dollar’s foreign ex- The staff’s forecast for inflation in the near term was re-
change value ended the period little changed on balance. vised up a little, reflecting recent data, and it was unre-
The dollar depreciated early in the period following the vised over the medium term. Energy prices and prices
weaker-than-expected U.S. employment report for Sep- of non-energy imported goods were expected to begin
tember and the subsequent downward shift of the ex- steadily rising next year. The staff projected that infla-
pected path for U.S. policy rates. But this decline was tion would increase gradually over the next several years
balanced by subsequent appreciation, in part as expecta- but would still be slightly below the Committee’s longer-
tions increased for greater monetary policy accommoda- run objective of 2 percent at the end of 2018. However,
tion abroad. These shifting expectations also contrib- inflation was anticipated to reach 2 percent thereafter,
uted to a decline in sovereign yields in the advanced for- with inflation expectations in the longer run assumed to
eign economies. be consistent with the Committee’s objective and slack
in labor and product markets projected to have waned.
The staff provided its latest report on potential risks to
financial stability. Since the previous report in July, fi- The staff viewed the uncertainty around its October pro-
nancial markets around the globe experienced a surge in jections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate,
volatility that peaked in late August amid concerns re- and inflation as similar to the average of the past
garding slowing economic growth in emerging market 20 years. The risks to the forecast for real GDP and
economies and potential implications for advanced inflation were seen as tilted to the downside, reflecting
economies. This volatility was accompanied by sizable the staff’s assessment that neither monetary nor fiscal
declines in the prices of some risky assets, and an in- policy was well positioned to help the economy with-
crease in risk aversion eased valuation pressures in the stand substantial adverse shocks. Consistent with this
corporate bond market. Issuance of speculative-grade downside risk to aggregate demand, the staff viewed the
corporate bonds and leveraged loans slowed from the risks to its outlook for the unemployment rate as tilted
rapid pace seen earlier this year. The U.S. financial sys- to the upside.
tem appeared to absorb the shocks without systemic
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
strains, supported by relatively high capital positions of
Economic Outlook
large banking organizations and insurance firms and by
In their discussion of the economic situation and the
restrained use of short-term wholesale funding across
outlook, meeting participants saw the information re-
the financial sector. Moreover, leverage in the nonfinan-
ceived over the intermeeting period as suggesting that
cial sector remained modest overall. However, leverage
economic activity had been expanding moderately.
of speculative-grade and unrated nonfinancial corpora-
Household spending and business fixed investment in-
tions stayed near record levels. Rising CRE prices, ac-
creased at solid rates in recent months, and the housing
companied by loosening underwriting standards in
sector improved further. However, net exports re-
CMBS markets, continued to suggest valuation pres-
mained soft. Participants noted that the pace of job
sures.
gains slowed while the unemployment rate held steady;
Staff Economic Outlook nonetheless, a range of labor market indicators, on bal-
In the economic forecast prepared by the staff for the ance, suggested that underutilization of labor resources
October FOMC meeting, real GDP growth in the sec- had diminished since early this year. With private do-
ond half of this year was a little lower, on balance, than mestic final demand expanding at a solid pace, partici-
in the projection for the September meeting, largely re- pants generally viewed the incoming data as confirming
flecting a downward revision to estimated inventory in- their assessment that economic activity would continue
vestment. The staff’s medium-term projection for real to expand at a moderate rate, leading to further improve-

--- Page 7 ---

____________________________M__in__ut_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ O__c_to_b_e_r_ 2_7_–_2_8_, _2_0_1_5_______________________P_a_g_e_ _7
ment in labor market conditions. However, some par- private domestic demand was anticipated to support
ticipants were concerned that the recent slowdown in economic growth going forward.
employment growth might prove more than temporary,
Manufacturing activity had slowed somewhat over the
and that improvement in labor market conditions might
intermeeting period in a number of regions, importantly
not continue. Most participants saw the downside risks
reflecting the weakness in exports, although the auto in-
arising from economic and financial developments
dustry remained a bright spot. Weakness in commodity
abroad as having diminished and judged the risks to the
prices also continued to weigh on activity in the energy
outlook for domestic economic activity and the labor
and agricultural sectors. Moreover, industry contacts re-
market to be nearly balanced. A few participants,
mained pessimistic about the outlook for the energy sec-
though, noted that downside risks from abroad were still
tor. The substantial global supply of crude oil seemed
significant. Inflation continued to run below the Com-
likely to weigh on energy prices for some time, contrib-
mittee’s 2 percent longer-run objective, partly reflecting
uting to an increase in restructurings and bankruptcies in
declines in energy prices and prices of non-energy im-
this sector. In contrast, service-sector reports were
ports. Market-based measures of inflation compensa-
mostly positive.
tion moved slightly lower; survey-based measures of
longer-term inflation expectations remained stable. Par- Although employment growth slowed and the unem-
ticipants generally anticipated that inflation would rise ployment rate held steady in September, participants
gradually toward 2 percent as the labor market improved agreed that underutilization of labor resources had been
further and the transitory effects of earlier declines in reduced since earlier in the year. A number of partici-
energy and import prices dissipated. pants expressed the view that further progress would be
necessary before labor market conditions were fully con-
Notwithstanding the disappointing retail sales data in
sistent with maximum employment, while some others
September, participants were encouraged by the solid
judged that there was little or no remaining underutiliza-
pace of consumption growth in the third quarter and
tion of labor resources. Several participants observed
generally expected consumer spending to rise moder-
that the recent employment reports had increased the
ately going forward. Gains in employment and income,
uncertainty about the outlook for the labor market.
low gasoline prices, and a high level of consumer confi-
They discussed whether the slowdown in job gains was
dence were viewed as factors that should support con-
merely transitory or indicative of a more persistent slow-
sumer spending. The available reports from District
down in which labor market conditions might no longer
contacts in the retail and auto industries indicated solid
improve. Some other indicators, such as the labor force
gains in consumer spending, and contacts were optimis-
participation rate and data on job openings, quits, and
tic about the near-term outlook.
hiring, had also been softer. Other participants viewed
Participants generally viewed the housing sector as con- a broad range of recent labor market data as indicating a
tinuing to recover, although a couple of participants further reduction in slack and stressed the importance of
noted that the pace of recovery was slow. Contacts in a assessing the cumulative improvement in the labor mar-
number of Districts were upbeat about the sector, citing ket since early in the year, which had been significant.
rising home prices and a healthy pace of construction Moreover, several participants indicated that they
and sales. viewed the pace of monthly job gains in September as
still above the rate consistent with stable or declining la-
Participants noted that business fixed investment ap-
bor market slack, and a few participants interpreted
peared to be increasing at a solid rate despite the sharp
slower increases in payrolls as evidence that labor mar-
contraction in energy-related investment. Nonresiden-
kets had tightened.
tial construction was reported to be expanding in a num-
ber of regions. A large decline in inventory investment The incoming information on wages and labor compen-
was expected to reduce the pace of GDP growth in the sation, including recent data on average hourly earnings
third quarter, but participants saw further outsized de- of employees, suggested that the pace of wage gains re-
clines in inventory accumulation as unlikely. Partici- mained subdued. A number of participants cited staff
pants expected net exports to continue to subtract from analysis indicating that the modest pace of labor com-
GDP growth in the second half of the year, reflecting pensation growth in recent years may have reflected
weak foreign activity as well as the earlier appreciation slower trend productivity growth that offset the upward
of the dollar. However, solid underlying momentum in pressure on wages from the narrowing of labor market

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
slack. However, other participants noted that the con- Puerto Rico continued to face significant challenges ser-
tinued subdued trend in wages was evidence of an ab- vicing its debts, although the associated systemic risks
sence of upward pressure on inflation from the current for U.S. financial markets were likely to be minimal.
level of resource utilization. A number of participants
During their discussion of economic conditions and
reported that some of their business contacts were expe-
monetary policy, participants focused on a number of
riencing increasing challenges in hiring, resulting in up-
issues associated with the timing and pace of policy nor-
ward pressure on wages in various occupations and in
malization. Some participants thought that the condi-
some geographic areas.
tions for beginning the policy normalization process had
Participants discussed how recent economic develop- already been met. Most participants anticipated that,
ments influenced their expectations for reaching the based on their assessment of the current economic situ-
FOMC’s 2 percent inflation objective over the medium ation and their outlook for economic activity, the labor
term. Total PCE price inflation, as measured on a market, and inflation, these conditions could well be met
12-month basis, continued to run below the Commit- by the time of the next meeting. Nonetheless, they em-
tee’s longer-run objective. Core PCE inflation also re- phasized that the actual decision would depend on the
mained low, but some other measures of inflation, such implications for the medium-term economic outlook of
as the trimmed mean PCE and trimmed mean CPI the data received over the upcoming intermeeting pe-
measures, continued to run at higher levels than core riod. Some others, however, judged it unlikely that the
PCE inflation and had recently moved up modestly. information available by the December meeting would
Moreover, a few participants noted that the September warrant raising the target range for the federal funds rate
CPI data appeared consistent with some firming in infla- at that meeting.
tion. Surveys continued to suggest that longer-run infla-
A number of participants pointed to various reasons
tion expectations remained stable. Participants still ex-
why the Committee should avoid a delay in policy firm-
pected that the downward pressure on inflation from the
ing. One concern was that such a delay, if the reasons
previous declines in energy prices and the effects of past
were not well understood by market participants, could
dollar appreciation would prove temporary. Several par-
increase uncertainty in financial markets and unduly
ticipants, however, cited downside risks to inflation,
magnify the perceived importance of the beginning of
pointing, for example, to declines in market-based
the policy normalization process. Another concern
measures of inflation compensation. Nonetheless, par-
mentioned was the increasing risk of a buildup of finan-
ticipants generally continued to anticipate that, with ap-
cial imbalances after a prolonged period of very low in-
propriate monetary policy, inflation would move toward
terest rates. It was also noted that a decision to defer
the Committee’s objective over the medium term, re-
policy firming could be interpreted as signaling lack of
flecting the anticipated tightening of product and labor
confidence in the strength of the U.S. economy or erode
markets, the waning of downward pressures from energy
the Committee’s credibility. Some participants empha-
and import prices, and stable inflation expectations.
sized that progress toward the Committee’s objectives
Participants also discussed a range of topics related to should be assessed in light of the cumulative gains made
financial market developments and financial stability. to date without placing excessive weight on month-to-
They noted that volatility in global financial markets had month changes in incoming data.
abated since the previous FOMC meeting, with equity
Several participants indicated that, despite lessening con-
prices in the United States largely retracing the declines
cerns about the implications of recent global economic
experienced late in the summer. The U.S. financial sys-
and financial developments for domestic economic ac-
tem appeared to have weathered the turbulence in global
tivity and inflation, appreciable downside risks to the
financial markets without any sign of systemic stress.
outlook remained. They were concerned about a poten-
Participants commented on issues related to financial
tial loss of momentum in the economy and the associ-
stability monitoring and the use of macroprudential
ated possibility that inflation might fail to increase as ex-
tools, the assessment of valuation risks in leveraged loan
pected. Such concerns might suggest that the initiation
and real estate markets, the widening of credit spreads
of the normalization process may not yet be warranted.
on corporate bonds, and potential risks to financial sta-
They also noted uncertainty about whether economic
bility stemming from interest rates remaining low for a
growth was robust enough to withstand potential ad-
prolonged period in an environment of a low neutral (or
verse shocks, given the limited ability of monetary policy
equilibrium) real rate. In addition, it was noted that
to offset such shocks when the federal funds rate is near

--- Page 9 ---

____________________________M__in__ut_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ O__c_to_b_e_r_ 2_7_–_2_8_, _2_0_1_5_______________________P_a_g_e_ _9
its effective lower bound, and concern that the begin- Committee Policy Action
ning of policy normalization might be associated with an In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
unwarranted tightening of financial conditions. They ahead, members judged that information received since
believed that in these circumstances, risk-management the FOMC met in September indicated that economic
considerations called for a cautious approach. They activity had been expanding at a moderate pace. Al-
judged it appropriate to wait for additional information though net exports had been soft and inventory accu-
providing evidence of further improvement in the labor mulation appeared to have slowed, major domestic com-
market and increasing their confidence that inflation was ponents of spending were increasing at solid rates. With
on a path to return to 2 percent over the medium term concerns about global economic and financial develop-
before raising the target range for the federal funds rate. ments having lessened, members continued to see the
In addition, a couple of participants cited concerns that risks to the outlook for economic activity as nearly bal-
a premature tightening might damage the credibility of anced, although they were still monitoring these devel-
the Committee’s inflation objective if inflation stayed be- opments. Members indicated that they expected that,
low 2 percent for a prolonged period. with appropriate policy accommodation, economic ac-
tivity would continue to expand at a moderate pace.
Several participants indicated that, in the current low in-
terest rate environment, it would be prudent for the Almost all members agreed that, even though the pace
Committee to consider options for providing additional of job gains had slowed and the unemployment rate had
monetary policy accommodation if the outlook for eco- held steady over the intermeeting period, labor market
nomic activity were to weaken to a degree that seemed indicators, on balance, showed that underutilization of
likely to undermine continued progress in labor market labor resources had diminished since early in the year.
conditions and impede the movement of inflation back Members anticipated that economic activity was likely to
to the Committee’s 2 percent objective over the medium expand at a pace sufficient for labor market indicators to
term. It was also noted that the Committee would need continue to move toward, or to remain at, levels the
to reformulate its communications regarding the near- Committee judged consistent with its dual mandate. In-
term outlook for monetary policy if the economic out- flation continued to run below the Committee’s longer-
look weakened significantly. run objective, held down in part by the effects of de-
clines in energy prices and in prices of non-energy im-
During their discussion of the likely path for the federal
ports. Survey-based measures of longer-term inflation
funds rate after the time of the first increase in the target
expectations had remained stable; market-based
range, participants generally agreed that it would proba-
measures of inflation compensation had moved slightly
bly be appropriate to remove policy accommodation
lower. While inflation was anticipated to remain near its
gradually. Participants also indicated that the expected
recent low level in the near term, reflecting the transitory
path of policy, rather than the timing of the initial in-
effects of declines in energy and import prices, members
crease, would be the more important influence on finan-
continued to expect inflation to rise gradually toward 2
cial conditions and thus on the outlook for the economy
percent over the medium term as the labor market im-
and inflation, and they noted the importance of under-
proved further and such transitory effects dissipated.
scoring this view at the time of liftoff. It was noted that
Nonetheless, they agreed to continue monitoring infla-
beginning the normalization process relatively soon
tion developments closely.
would make it more likely that the policy trajectory after
liftoff could be shallow. It was also emphasized that, In assessing whether economic conditions and the
while participants’ most recent economic projections medium-term economic outlook warranted beginning
suggested that a gradual increase in the target range for the process of policy normalization at this meeting,
the federal funds rate will likely be appropriate to sup- members noted a variety of indicators, including some
port progress toward the Committee’s dual objectives, weaker-than-expected readings on measures of labor
monetary policy adjustments ultimately would be de- market conditions, and almost all members agreed it was
pendent on economic and financial developments. appropriate to wait for additional information to clarify
These adjustments thus could be either more or less whether the recent deceleration in the pace of progress
gradual than the Committee currently anticipates, re- in the labor market was transitory or reflected more per-
sponding to the Committee’s assessment of the implica- sistent factors that might jeopardize further progress.
tions of incoming information for the medium-run out- They indicated that they would be assessing a range of
look. labor market indicators over the period ahead to confirm
further improvement in the labor market. Members,

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
however, expressed a range of views regarding the extent saw the updated language as leaving policy options open
of further progress in labor market indicators they would for the next meeting. However, a couple of members
need to see to judge it appropriate to raise the target expressed concern that this wording change could be
range for the federal funds rate in December. misinterpreted as signaling too strongly the expectation
that the target range for the federal funds rate would be
Members continued to anticipate that inflation would
increased at the Committee’s next meeting. While mem-
gradually return to the Committee’s 2 percent objective
bers differed in their assessment of the likelihood that
over the medium term, but most of them were not yet
incoming information will warrant an increase in the tar-
sufficiently confident of that outlook to begin the nor-
get range for the federal funds rate when the Committee
malization process. They generally agreed that their con-
meets in December, they agreed that, in making the de-
fidence would increase if, as anticipated, economic activ-
cision, the Committee will evaluate progress toward its
ity continued to expand at a pace sufficient to increase
objectives, taking into account a wide range of infor-
resource utilization. Other factors important to the in-
mation, including measures of labor market conditions,
flation outlook were the expectation that the influence
indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expecta-
of lower energy and commodities prices and the stronger
tions, and readings on financial and international devel-
dollar would subside, and that longer-term inflation ex-
opments. It was noted that the expected path of the fed-
pectations would remain stable. In this regard, a couple
eral funds rate, rather than the exact timing of the initial
of members expressed concern about the continued de-
increase, was most important in influencing financial
cline in market-based measures of inflation compensa-
conditions and thus in affecting the outlook for the
tion. Moreover, the risk was noted that downward pres-
economy and inflation. The Committee reiterated its ex-
sures on inflation from the appreciation of the dollar
pectation that, even after employment and inflation are
could persist.
near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions
After assessing the outlook for economic activity, the la- may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal
bor market, and inflation and weighing the uncertainties funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal
associated with the outlook, all but one member agreed in the longer run.
to leave the target range for the federal funds rate un-
The Committee also maintained its policy of reinvesting
changed at this meeting. Members generally agreed that,
principal payments from its agency debt and agency
in light of some weaker-than-expected readings on
mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage-backed
measures of labor market conditions and in the absence
securities and of rolling over maturing Treasury securi-
of greater confidence about the inflation outlook, it
ties at auction. This policy, by keeping the Committee’s
would be prudent to wait for additional information
holdings of longer-term securities at sizable levels,
bearing on the medium-term outlook before initiating
should help maintain accommodative financial condi-
the process of policy normalization. One member, how-
tions.
ever, preferred to raise the target range for the federal
funds rate by 25 basis points at this meeting. At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
In its postmeeting statement, rather than framing its
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to
near-term policy path in terms of how long to maintain
execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with
the current target range, the Committee decided to indi-
the following domestic policy directive:
cate that, in determining whether it would be appropri-
ate to raise the target range at its next meeting, it would “Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
assess both realized and expected progress toward its Federal Open Market Committee seeks
objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent in- monetary and financial conditions that will
flation. Members emphasized that this change was in- foster maximum employment and price
tended to convey the sense that, while no decision had stability. In particular, the Committee seeks
been made, it may well become appropriate to initiate conditions in reserve markets consistent with
the normalization process at the next meeting, provided federal funds trading in a range from 0 to
that unanticipated shocks do not adversely affect the ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
economic outlook and that incoming data support the undertake open market operations as necessary
expectation that labor market conditions will continue to to maintain such conditions. The Committee
improve and that inflation will return to the Committee’s directs the Desk to maintain its policy of rolling
2 percent objective over the medium term. Members over maturing Treasury securities into new

--- Page 11 ---

____________________________M__in__ut_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ O__c_to_b_e_r_ 2_7_–_2_8_, _2_0_1_5______________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
issues and its policy of reinvesting principal term as the labor market improves further and
payments on all agency debt and agency the transitory effects of declines in energy and
mortgage-backed securities in agency mortgage- import prices dissipate. The Committee contin-
backed securities. The Committee also directs ues to monitor inflation developments closely.
the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon
To support continued progress toward maxi-
swap transactions as necessary to facilitate
mum employment and price stability, the Com-
settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency
mittee today reaffirmed its view that the current
mortgage-backed securities transactions. The
0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds
System Open Market Account manager and the
rate remains appropriate. In determining
secretary will keep the Committee informed of
whether it will be appropriate to raise the target
ongoing developments regarding the System’s
range at its next meeting, the Committee will as-
balance sheet that could affect the attainment
sess progress—both realized and expected—to-
over time of the Committee’s objectives of
ward its objectives of maximum employment
maximum employment and price stability.”
and 2 percent inflation. This assessment will
The vote encompassed approval of the statement below take into account a wide range of information,
to be released at 2:00 p.m.: including measures of labor market conditions,
indicators of inflation pressures and inflation
“Information received since the Federal Open
expectations, and readings on financial and in-
Market Committee met in September suggests
ternational developments. The Committee an-
that economic activity has been expanding at a
ticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the
moderate pace. Household spending and busi-
target range for the federal funds rate when it
ness fixed investment have been increasing at
has seen some further improvement in the labor
solid rates in recent months, and the housing
market and is reasonably confident that infla-
sector has improved further; however, net ex-
tion will move back to its 2 percent objective
ports have been soft. The pace of job gains
over the medium term.
slowed and the unemployment rate held steady.
Nonetheless, labor market indicators, on bal- The Committee is maintaining its existing policy
ance, show that underutilization of labor re- of reinvesting principal payments from its hold-
sources has diminished since early this year. In- ings of agency debt and agency mortgage-
flation has continued to run below the Commit- backed securities in agency mortgage-backed se-
tee’s longer-run objective, partly reflecting de- curities and of rolling over maturing Treasury
clines in energy prices and in prices of non- securities at auction. This policy, by keeping the
energy imports. Market-based measures of in- Committee’s holdings of longer-term securities
flation compensation moved slightly lower; at sizable levels, should help maintain accom-
survey-based measures of longer-term inflation modative financial conditions.
expectations have remained stable.
When the Committee decides to begin to re-
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com- move policy accommodation, it will take a bal-
mittee seeks to foster maximum employment anced approach consistent with its longer-run
and price stability. The Committee expects that, goals of maximum employment and inflation of
with appropriate policy accommodation, eco- 2 percent. The Committee currently anticipates
nomic activity will expand at a moderate pace, that, even after employment and inflation are
with labor market indicators continuing to near mandate-consistent levels, economic con-
move toward levels the Committee judges con- ditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the
sistent with its dual mandate. The Committee target federal funds rate below levels the Com-
continues to see the risks to the outlook for eco- mittee views as normal in the longer run.”
nomic activity and the labor market as nearly
Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C.
balanced but is monitoring global economic and
Dudley, Lael Brainard, Charles L. Evans, Stanley Fischer,
financial developments. Inflation is anticipated
Dennis P. Lockhart, Jerome H. Powell, Daniel K. Ta-
to remain near its recent low level in the near
rullo, and John C. Williams.
term but the Committee expects inflation to rise
gradually toward 2 percent over the medium Voting against this action: Jeffrey M. Lacker.

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Mr. Lacker dissented because he continued to believe 16, 2015. The meeting adjourned at 11:40 a.m. on
that maintaining exceptionally low real interest rates was October 28, 2015.
not appropriate for an economy with persistently strong
Notation Vote
consumption growth and tightening labor markets.
Data received since the September FOMC meeting By notation vote completed on October 7, 2015, the
suggested that the global economic and financial Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
developments of late summer had little effect on the Committee meeting held on September 16–17, 2015.
medium-term outlook for U.S. growth and inflation. He
remained reasonably confident that inflation would
return to the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent goal once
temporary disinflationary impulses had passed.
_____________________________
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee Brian F. Madigan
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, December 15– Secretary