# 20080805_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:35:42*
*Pages: 8, Tables: 2*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Page 1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
August 5, 2008
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Staff Director for Management, Board of
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues- Governors
day, August 5, 2008 at 8:30 a.m.
Ms. Liang, Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher, As-
PRESENT: sociate Directors, Division of Research and
Mr. Bernanke, Chairman Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman
Ms. Duke Mr. Levin, Deputy Associate Director, Division of
Mr. Fisher Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Kohn
Mr. Kroszner Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary
Mr. Mishkin Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Pianalto
Mr. Plosser Mr. Luecke, Section Chief, Division of Monetary
Mr. Stern Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Warsh
Ms. Wei, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Messrs. Evans, Lacker, and Lockhart, and Ms. Board of Governors
Yellen, Alternate Members of the Federal
Open Market Committee Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-
sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Bullard, Hoenig, and Rosengren, Presi-
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Mr. Connolly, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively Bank of Boston
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Messrs. Fuhrer and Judd, Executive Vice Presi-
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary dents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary San Francisco, respectively
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel Messrs. Altig, Hakkio, Rasche, and Sullivan, Senior
Mr. Ashton, Assistant General Counsel Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of At-
Mr. Sheets, Economist lanta, Kansas City, St. Louis, and Chicago, re-
spectively
Messrs. Connors, English, Kamin, Sniderman, and
Wilcox, Associate Economists Messrs. Danzig and Duca, Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of New York and Dallas, re-
Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Ac- spectively
count
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Re-
Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of serve Bank of Minneapolis
Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve
Ms. Bailey, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Bank of Richmond
Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover-
nors Mr. Sill, Economic Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank
of Philadelphia

--- Page 2 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Mr. Del Negro, Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of duction of motor vehicles. The factory utilization rate
New York held steady in June at a rate below its long-run average
but was still well above its low rate from 2001 through
2002.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account
Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose
reported on recent developments in foreign exchange
modestly in the second quarter after posting weak gains
markets. There were no open market operations in
in the previous two quarters. However, real outlays for
foreign currencies for the System’s account in the pe-
goods other than motor vehicles dropped noticeably in
riod since the previous meeting. The Manager also
June after three months of robust gains. Sales of motor
reported on developments in domestic financial mar-
vehicles, which had begun to weaken earlier in the year,
kets and on System open market operations in gov-
fell sharply in June and again in July. Tax rebates pro-
ernment securities and federal agency obligations dur-
vided a notable, albeit temporary boost to income since
ing the period since the previous meeting. By unani-
the end of April, but real disposable income excluding
mous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
rebates was essentially flat in the second quarter. The
The information reviewed at the August meeting indi- ratio of wealth to income likely declined again in the
cated that the economy expanded at a moderate pace in second quarter, as equity prices declined, on balance,
the second quarter, but recent financial market devel- and house prices continued to fall. Consumer senti-
opments highlighted some of the stresses that the ment rose a bit in July but remained at a depressed
economy faced going forward. Both consumer and level.
business spending recorded gains in the second quarter,
Residential construction activity continued to descend
and net exports contributed importantly to the rise in
rapidly but at a somewhat slower pace than during the
real gross domestic product (GDP). However, residen-
second half of last year. Single-family housing starts
tial construction continued to fall sharply, the labor
fell further in June, leaving the pace of construction in
market weakened further, and industrial production
this sector well below its December reading. Starts of
declined. Core consumer price inflation remained rela-
multifamily homes jumped in June to a level well above
tively stable, while headline inflation was elevated as a
the range of readings seen over the past two years.
result of large increases in food and energy prices.
However, available information suggested that this in-
Labor demand continued to contract in July. Private crease could be traced to more-stringent building codes
nonfarm payroll employment fell in July at a pace only that took effect in New York City on July 1, which ap-
a bit less than the average monthly rate during the first parently led developers to move up some planned
six months of the year. By industry, the pattern of job apartment projects. Even though cuts in new construc-
losses was roughly similar to those earlier in the year, tion continued to trim the level of new home invento-
although July’s report showed a smaller decline in con- ries, the months’ supply of new homes remained quite
struction than earlier. Nonbusiness services, which in- high because of the ongoing reductions in the demand
clude health and education, remained the only notable for new houses. Sales of existing single-family homes
source of net additions to employment. Both the aver- fell in June. Tight conditions in the mortgage credit
age workweek and aggregate hours edged down in July. markets continued to restrain housing demand, particu-
The unemployment rate rose in July and was about 1 larly for borrowers seeking nonconforming mortgages.
percentage point above its level of a year earlier, while House prices remained on a downward trajectory.
the labor force participation rate was about unchanged.
In the business sector, real spending on equipment and
Industrial production declined in the second quarter software declined in the second quarter as outlays on
after having been flat over the previous two quarters. transportation equipment dropped sharply. Spending
Motor vehicle assemblies tumbled in the second quar- on computers and software rose at a moderate rate in
ter because of soft demand and the effects of strikes. the second quarter, while outlays on other equipment
Production of high-tech equipment continued to ex- improved a bit last quarter after having declined in the
pand at a moderate pace; however, the available indica- preceding two quarters. Data through June continued
tors of high-tech manufacturing activity pointed to to show a robust increase in nonresidential construc-
slower production in the current quarter. The output tion activity. However, vacancy rates for commercial
of other manufacturing industries contracted, on bal- properties ticked up in the first quarter, and the archi-
ance, in the second quarter, and indicators of near-term tectural billings index registered a string of weak read-
production generally pointed to further declines, in- ings from February to June.
cluding a sizable retrenchment in the scheduled pro-

--- Page 3 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A u g u s t 5 , 2 0 0 8 Page 3
Real nonfarm inventories excluding motor vehicles fell reflecting only moderate gains in worker compensation
sharply in the second quarter. The ratio of book-value and relatively strong productivity performance, with
inventories to sales (excluding motor vehicles) ticked little sign of higher overall inflation passing through to
down again in May. higher worker compensation.
The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in May, as At its June 24-25 meeting, the Federal Open Market
a large increase in exports of goods and services more Committee (FOMC) kept its target for the federal
than offset a moderate increase in imports. Most major funds rate at 2 percent. The Committee’s statement
categories of non-oil imports rose in May; imports of noted that recent information indicated that overall
consumer goods increased rapidly. In contrast, the economic activity continued to expand, partly because
value of petroleum imports fell back despite higher of some firming in household spending. However,
prices, and imports of automotive products also fell. labor markets softened further and financial markets
The increase in exports was supported by strong ex- remained under considerable stress. Tight credit condi-
ports of industrial supplies, particularly petroleum tions, the ongoing housing contraction, and the rise in
products, and services. energy prices were likely to weigh on economic growth
over the next few quarters. The Committee expected
Across the advanced foreign economies, information
inflation to moderate later this year and next. How-
received since the last meeting pointed to subdued
ever, in light of the continued increases in the prices of
growth in the second quarter and increasing inflation
energy and some other commodities and the elevated
pressures. Weak second-quarter data on industrial pro-
state of some indicators of inflation expectations, un-
duction and sentiment in the euro area as well as on
certainty about the inflation outlook remained high.
consumer expenditures and exports in Japan suggested
The Committee stated that the substantial easing of
that the first-quarter strength in output growth was not
monetary policy to date, combined with ongoing meas-
sustained. Conditions worsened considerably in the
ures to foster market liquidity, should help promote
United Kingdom, with a deepening slump in the hous-
moderate growth over time. Although downside risks
ing sector. In all the major advanced foreign econo-
to growth remained, they appeared to have diminished
mies, rising food and fuel prices continued to drive
somewhat, and the upside risks to inflation and infla-
overall inflation to recent highs, but core measures of
tion expectations increased. The Committee indicated
inflation generally rose only modestly. Recent indica-
that it would continue to monitor economic and finan-
tors for emerging market economies pointed to some
cial developments and would act as needed to promote
slowing of growth in the second quarter. Real GDP
sustainable economic growth and price stability.
growth in China moderated but remained strong. In-
coming data suggested further slowing elsewhere in The market’s expected path of monetary policy moved
emerging Asia, and second-quarter activity appeared to down following the announcement of the Committee’s
have remained sluggish in Mexico. Headline inflation decision at its June meeting to leave the target federal
rose further in much of the developing world, largely funds rate unchanged. Although the decision was
owing to higher food and energy prices, and several largely anticipated, the policy statement was reportedly
countries continued to face upward pressure on core viewed by investors as placing more emphasis on the
inflation as well. downside risks to growth than they had anticipated.
Subsequently, the semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the
Headline consumer price inflation in the United States
Congress and the accompanying testimony also led in-
stepped up in recent months, largely as a result of siz-
vestors to mark down the expected path for the federal
able increases in food and energy prices. Excluding
funds rate, as did intensifying concerns about the
these categories, core consumer price inflation was ele-
health of financial institutions and the outlook for the
vated in June but, on balance, was running this year at
housing-related government-sponsored enterprises
about the same rate as last year. Some survey-based
(GSEs). Consistent with the revision in policy expecta-
measures of year-ahead inflation expectations moved
tions, yields on short- and medium-term nominal
up sharply in recent months; longer-term inflation ex-
Treasury coupon securities fell over the intermeeting
pectations were little changed recently but remained
period. Yields on long-term Treasury securities de-
above their levels at the end of 2007. Excluding food
clined less than those on shorter-term instruments, and
and energy, sharp increases in the prices of products
the yield curve steepened. Measures of shorter-horizon
and services at earlier stages of processing continued to
inflation compensation derived from yields on infla-
put upward pressures on business costs and consumer
tion-indexed Treasury securities dropped over the in-
prices. Unit labor costs apparently continued to in-
termeeting period as energy prices reversed some of
crease at a restrained pace during the second quarter,

--- Page 4 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
their earlier rise, while measures of longer-term infla- securities moved higher. Offer rates on 30-year jumbo
tion compensation rose slightly. mortgages also rose, and credit for nonconforming
mortgages remained difficult to obtain. In the secon-
Functioning in the interbank funding markets remained
dary market, issuance of mortgage-backed securities by
strained over the intermeeting period. Spreads of the
GSEs appeared to have slowed in July from its strong
London interbank offered rate, or Libor, over compa-
second-quarter pace, while issuance of securities
rable-maturity overnight index swap rates were un-
backed by nonconforming loans and of commercial
changed to slightly higher, and spreads on lower-rated
mortgage-backed securities remained nil.
nonfinancial and asset-backed commercial paper re-
mained well above historical norms. Depository insti- Pressures in the money markets of many major foreign
tutions’ use of both overnight and term primary credit economies eased slightly over the intermeeting period.
borrowing continued to be strong during the intermeet- Yields on sovereign debt in the advanced foreign
ing period, peaking in late June amid quarter-end pres- economies fell, mainly because of declines in inflation
sures. However, new extensions of credit through the compensation. The trade-weighted index of the dollar
Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) were negligible against the currencies of major trading partners rose a
during July. On July 30, the Board of Governors and bit on net.
the FOMC announced enhancements to existing liquid-
M2 expanded at a moderate pace in July, reversing the
ity facilities, including extension of the PDCF and the
deceleration in May and June. The expansion was
Term Securities Lending Facility through January 30,
broad based, reflecting an acceleration in liquid depos-
2009. Conditions in the market for Treasury repur-
its as well as renewed inflows to retail money market
chase agreements were fairly stable, although there was
mutual funds and small time deposits.
some deterioration of conditions in the market for
agency collateral. In the forecast prepared for the meeting, the staff
marked down its forecast of real GDP growth in the
In longer-term credit markets, yields on both invest-
second half of 2008 and in 2009. Although the in-
ment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds rose over
crease in real GDP in the second quarter was a bit
the intermeeting period even though comparable-
faster than anticipated at the time of the June meeting,
maturity Treasury yields declined slightly, which re-
the labor market continued to weaken significantly,
sulted in a widening of already elevated spreads. Cor-
financial conditions remained unfavorable, consumer
porate bond issuance slowed further, as did lending by
and business confidence was downbeat, and manufac-
banks to businesses and households, and issuance of
turing activity was contracting. All told, the staff con-
leveraged loans remained very weak. Broad equity
tinued to expect that real GDP would rise at less than
price indexes were volatile and declined modestly, on
its potential rate through the first half of next year.
net, between the June and August FOMC meetings.
Nonetheless, real GDP growth was anticipated to re-
Stock prices of financial firms fell sharply in mid-July
turn to its potential rate in the second half of 2009 as
but subsequently recouped most of those losses. En-
housing activity leveled out and financial conditions
ergy sector stocks significantly underperformed the
became less restrictive. Core PCE price inflation was
broad indexes owing to recent declines in oil prices.
expected to pick up somewhat in the second half of
Uncertainties about the financial condition of Fannie this year, mostly as a result of the upward pressures
Mae and Freddie Mac added to market worries about from this year’s run-ups in prices of energy and im-
the potential consequences of financial strains for the ports. Core inflation was then expected to edge down
broader economy over the intermeeting period. On in 2009 as the impetus from prior increases in the
July 13, the Treasury Department proposed a plan to prices of imports, energy, and other commodities
support the liquidity and solvency of the two GSEs, abated and the margin of slack in resource use widened.
and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
System announced that the Federal Reserve Bank of
look, many FOMC participants noted that recent de-
New York was authorized to lend to the two institu-
velopments suggested that economic activity was likely
tions if necessary, reducing somewhat market concerns
to remain damped for several quarters. Although eco-
about the GSEs. Concerns eased further as Congress
nomic growth in the second quarter had apparently
passed legislation, which was subsequently signed by
been boosted by fiscal stimulus, resilience in consump-
the President, authorizing the Treasury to provide li-
tion spending even before tax rebates were distributed,
quidity and capital to the GSEs. Over the intermeeting
and robust gains in exports, recent indicators pointed
period, spreads of rates on conforming residential
to a near-term deceleration in household spending and
mortgages over those on comparable-maturity Treasury

--- Page 5 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A u g u s t 5 , 2 0 0 8 Page 5
to softer export demand. Moreover, increasing con- duction, and closing several plants. Lower equity prices
cerns about financial institutions had contributed to a and the ongoing deterioration in house prices had re-
widening of some risk spreads and a further tightening duced household wealth significantly, while real in-
of credit to households and businesses. Growth in comes had been diminished by earlier increases in the
overall economic activity was generally expected to be prices of food and energy. All of these factors—in
weak during the remainder of 2008 before recovering conjunction with tightened access to auto loans, home
modestly next year, and nearly all meeting participants equity lines of credit, and other consumer loans—were
saw continuing downside risks to growth. Recent read- viewed as pointing towards weak growth in personal
ings on inflation had been high, but growth in unit la- consumption expenditures during the second half of
bor costs had remained subdued and commodity prices 2008.
had declined of late. Accordingly, most participants
The weaker outlook for consumer demand, along with
anticipated that inflation would moderate in coming
tighter credit conditions for businesses, was expected
quarters. However, participants also expressed signifi-
to weigh on business spending going forward. More-
cant concerns about the upside risks to inflation, par-
over, some signs of weakness in the commercial real
ticularly the risk that longer-term inflation expectations
estate sector were seen as suggesting a slower pace of
could become unmoored.
investment in nonresidential structures over coming
Many participants referred to the adverse financial sec- quarters, although that deceleration might be gradual
tor developments that had occurred over the intermeet- due to the lags in the planning and execution of such
ing period. Heightened investor apprehension about projects. However, the elevated level of energy prices
the viability of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac had eased was boosting investment in the oil-producing industry.
following legislative action, but pressures on these
Growth in exports had provided substantial impetus to
firms continued. Reflecting these strains, interest rates
overall demand in the second quarter. However, many
on residential mortgages had moved upward, a devel-
participants observed that decelerating activity in some
opment that was seen as potentially exacerbating the
foreign economies would tend to dampen export gains
contraction in the housing sector. Commercial banks
going forward. Indeed, recent indications of a slowing
had reported that terms and standards had been tight-
global economy may have contributed to the marked
ened on nearly all categories of loans. Declining mort-
declines in the prices of oil and some other commodi-
gage asset values increased capital pressures on lenders
ties over the intermeeting period.
exposed to real estate markets. While some financial
institutions had strengthened their balance sheets with Participants pointed to potential interactions between
new capital issues, raising new capital had become in- financial stresses and the housing market contraction as
creasingly difficult. Moreover, broad equity price in- the primary source of continuing downside risks to
dexes had declined and borrowing costs for nonfinan- growth. Many participants noted that the financial sys-
cial firms had increased, including a recent rise in cor- tem remained fragile, with some expressing continued
porate bond yields across most risk categories. Many concern about the possibility of an adverse feedback
participants believed that these developments were loop in which tighter conditions in the mortgage mar-
likely to restrain aggregate demand and economic ket would contribute to further declines in the housing
growth. Others, however, thought that the extent of sector and additional losses for lenders, leading to fur-
such adverse effects was likely to be limited, noting that ther tightening of lending terms and standards. In con-
bank lending had continued to grow at a moderate pace trast, several other participants suggested that risks to
and that consumption and business capital spending the financial system had receded, partly as a result of
had increased in the second quarter despite the tighten- the implementation by the Federal Reserve of special
ing of credit terms. liquidity facilities, and that prevailing credit conditions
were broadly consistent with the typical patterns ob-
While consumer spending had been bolstered tempo-
served during periods of weak growth or recession.
rarily by the effects of the tax rebates, retail sales had
weakened during late spring and auto sales had Headline inflation was generally expected to moderate
dropped sharply in both June and July. The unem- in coming quarters, reflecting importantly an antici-
ployment rate jumped during the intermeeting period, pated leveling-out of prices for energy and other com-
and participants generally anticipated that payroll em- modities. Although measures of core inflation might
ployment would decline further in coming months. well edge up later this year, given the pass-through to
For example, automotive parts suppliers in one District final goods prices of earlier increases in the prices of
had reported plans for laying off workers, idling pro- energy and other inputs, most participants anticipated

--- Page 6 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
that core inflation would edge back down during 2009. the federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting was
Some participants reported that firms were increasingly appropriate and would most effectively promote pro-
using various pricing strategies—such as escalation gress toward the Committee’s dual objectives of maxi-
clauses or the imposition of fuel surcharges—to pass mum employment and price stability. Most members
higher costs on to their customers, who were appar- did not see the current stance of policy as particularly
ently becoming less resistant to such price adjustments. accommodative, given that many households and busi-
However, one participant mentioned the difficult pric- nesses were facing elevated borrowing costs and re-
ing decisions of manufacturers who face a combination duced credit availability due to the effects of financial
of elevated input costs along with weakening demand market strains as well as macroeconomic risks. Al-
for their products. And a number of participants noted though members generally anticipated that the next
that the outlook for slack in resource utilization should policy move would likely be a tightening, the timing
tend to limit the extent of pass-through, contain the and extent of any change in policy stance would de-
degree of inflation spillover to goods and services pend on evolving economic and financial developments
without high commodity content, and reinforce the and the implications for the outlook for economic
anticipated moderation in inflation. growth and inflation.
Participants expressed significant concerns about the At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
upside risks to inflation, especially the risk that persis- voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
tently high headline inflation could result in an un- of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
mooring of long-run inflation expectations. Some cute transactions in the System Account in accordance
viewed the upside risks to inflation as having dimin- with the following domestic policy directive:
ished modestly over the intermeeting period, mainly as
a result of the drop in the prices of oil and some other “The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
commodities as well as the greater likelihood of persis- monetary and financial conditions that will fos-
tent economic slack. However, others viewed these ter price stability and promote sustainable
risks as having increased, particularly in light of contin- growth in output. To further its long-run objec-
ued elevated readings on headline inflation, the low tives, the Committee in the immediate future
level of the real federal funds rate, anecdotal informa- seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
tion suggesting that firms were having more success in with maintaining the federal funds rate at an av-
passing higher costs on to their customers, and some erage of around 2 percent.”
signs of an upward drift over recent months in inves-
tors’ expectations and uncertainty regarding inflation The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
over the longer run; moreover, the recent decline in low to be released at 2:15 p.m.:
energy prices might well be reversed in coming months.
A number of participants worried about the possibility “The Federal Open Market Committee decided
that core inflation might fail to moderate next year today to keep its target for the federal funds rate
unless the stance of monetary policy was tightened at 2 percent.
sooner than currently anticipated by financial markets.
Economic activity expanded in the second quar-
In the Committee’s discussion of monetary policy for ter, partly reflecting growth in consumer spend-
the intermeeting period, members agreed that labor ing and exports. However, labor markets have
markets had softened further, that financial markets softened further and financial markets remain
remained under considerable stress, and that these fac- under considerable stress. Tight credit condi-
tors—in conjunction with still-elevated energy prices tions, the ongoing housing contraction, and ele-
and the ongoing housing contraction—would likely vated energy prices are likely to weigh on eco-
weigh on economic growth in coming quarters. In ad- nomic growth over the next few quarters. Over
dition, members saw continuing downside risks to this time, the substantial easing of monetary policy,
outlook, particularly reflecting possible further deterio- combined with ongoing measures to foster mar-
ration in financial conditions. Members generally an- ket liquidity, should help to promote moderate
ticipated that inflation would moderate; however, they economic growth.
emphasized the risks to the inflation outlook posed by
Inflation has been high, spurred by the earlier
persistent high readings on headline inflation and a
increases in the prices of energy and some other
possible unmooring of inflation expectations. Against
commodities, and some indicators of inflation
this backdrop, nearly all members judged that leaving
expectations have been elevated. The Commit-

--- Page 7 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A u g u s t 5 , 2 0 0 8 Page 7
tee expects inflation to moderate later this year PDCF past the year-end, a topic that had been dis-
and next year, but the inflation outlook remains cussed on a preliminary basis at the joint
highly uncertain. Board/FOMC meeting on June 25, 2008.
Although downside risks to growth remain, the In the discussion, meeting participants exchanged views
upside risks to inflation are also of significant on issues entailed in administering the TAF and term
concern to the Committee. The Committee will primary discount window credit. Issues regarding
continue to monitor economic and financial de- credit risk and collateral requirements received particu-
velopments and will act as needed to promote lar attention.
sustainable economic growth and price stability.”
Some participants raised questions about the net bene-
fit of approving and announcing the proposed changes
Votes for this action: Messrs. Bernanke and Geith-
at this time, asking, for example, whether such an an-
ner, Ms. Duke, Messrs. Kohn, Kroszner, and Mishkin,
nouncement could suggest that the Federal Reserve
Ms. Pianalto, Messrs. Plosser, Stern, and Warsh.
saw financial markets as more fragile than expected or
whether adjustments to the liquidity facilities could
Votes against this action: Mr. Fisher.
cause market analysts to infer that the System intended
to keep the facilities in place permanently. Most par-
Mr. Fisher dissented because he favored an increase in
ticipants expressed general support for the proposals as
the target federal funds rate to help restrain inflation
improving the System’s tools for supporting market
and inflation expectations, which were at risk of drift-
liquidity. However, there was considerable sentiment
ing higher. While the financial system remained fragile
for altering the TAF proposal to allow for both 28- and
and economic growth was sluggish and could weaken
84-day credits, and the Chairman directed the staff to
further, he saw a greater risk to the economy from up-
confer, to consult further with policymakers, and to
ward pressures on inflation. In his view, businesses
revise the proposal accordingly for notation votes in
had become more inclined to raise prices to pass on the
the near future by the Board and the FOMC.
higher costs of imported goods and higher energy
costs, the latter of which were well above their levels of At this meeting, the Committee unanimously approved
late 2007. Accordingly, he supported a policy tighten- the following resolution:
ing at this meeting.
TSLF Extension Authorization
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee The FOMC extends until January 30, 2009, its
would be held on Tuesday, September 16, 2008. authorizations for the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York to engage in transactions with pri-
The meeting adjourned at 1:50 p.m.
mary dealers through the Term Securities Lend-
ing Facility, subject to the same collateral, inter-
Conference Call
est rate and other conditions previously estab-
On July 24, 2008, the Federal Open Market Committee
lished by the Committee.
met in a joint session with the Board of Governors to
consider several proposals to extend or enhance Fed- With Mr. Plosser dissenting, the Committee voted to
eral Reserve System liquidity facilities. In light of con- approve the resolution below. Mr. Plosser dissented
tinued significant stresses in financial markets and the because he viewed the net benefit of the TSLF options
experience to date with the Term Auction Facility as being insufficient to justify adding them to the sup-
(TAF), the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF), port already being provided to market liquidity.
and the Primary Dealer Lending Facility (PDCF), the
TSLF Options Authorization
staff proposed modifications to these programs. The
In addition to the current authorizations granted
modifications included auctioning options on up to an
to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to
additional $50 billion of TSLF loans and lengthening
engage in term securities lending transactions,
the term to maturity of all loans made under the TAF
the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes
to 84 days. Contingent upon Board approval of the
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to offer
change to TAF loans, the Committee was asked to
options on up to $50 billion in additional draws
consider an expansion of the existing currency swap
on the Facility, subject to the other terms and
arrangement with the European Central Bank to facili-
conditions previously established for the Facility.
tate a similar change in the term of dollar credits auc-
tioned by the ECB. Finally, policymakers were asked Mr. Lockhart voted as alternate member at this meet-
to vote on extending the availability of the TSLF and ing.

--- Page 8 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Notation Votes not to exceed $55 billion. Within that aggregate
By notation vote completed on July 14, 2008, the limit, draws of up to $25 billion are hereby au-
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the thorized. The swap arrangement continues to be
FOMC meeting held on June 24-25, 2008. authorized through January 30, 2009, unless ex-
tended by the Federal Open Market Committee.
By notation vote completed on July 29, 2008, the
Committee unanimously approved the following reso-
lution:
Swap Authorization
The Federal Open Market Committee directs the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to increase
the amount available from the System Open
_____________________________
Market Account under the existing reciprocal
Brian F. Madigan
currency arrangement ("swap" arrangement)
Secretary
with the European Central Bank to an amount

# Tables

## Page_6_Table_1


| “The Federal Open Market Committee decided          |
|-----------------------------------------------------|
| today to keep its target for the federal funds rate |
| at 2 percent.                                       |
| Economic activity expanded in the second quar-      |
| ter, partly reflecting growth in consumer spend-    |
| ing and exports. However, labor markets have        |
| softened further and financial markets remain       |
| under considerable stress. Tight credit condi-      |
| tions, the ongoing housing contraction, and ele-    |
| vated energy prices are likely to weigh on eco-     |
| nomic growth over the next few quarters. Over       |
| time, the substantial easing of monetary policy,    |
| combined with ongoing measures to foster mar-       |
| ket liquidity, should help to promote moderate      |
| economic growth.                                    |
| Inflation has been high, spurred by the earlier     |
| increases in the prices of energy and some other    |
| commodities, and some indicators of inflation       |
| expectations have been elevated. The Commit-        |


## Page_7_Table_1


| tee expects inflation to moderate later this year   |
|-----------------------------------------------------|
| and next year, but the inflation outlook remains    |
| highly uncertain.                                   |
| Although downside risks to growth remain, the       |
| upside risks to inflation are also of significant   |
| concern to the Committee. The Committee will        |
| continue to monitor economic and financial de-      |
| velopments and will act as needed to promote        |
| sustainable economic growth and price stability.”   |