# 20080625_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:36:03*
*Pages: 16, Tables: 8*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Page 1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
June 24-25, 2008
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Staff Director for Management, Board of
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues- Governors
day, June 24, 2008 at 2:00 p.m. and continued on
Wednesday, June 25, 2008 at 9:00 a.m. Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
PRESENT:
Mr. Bernanke, Chairman Mr. Frierson,1 Deputy Secretary, Office of the Sec-
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman retary, Board of Governors
Mr. Fisher
Mr. Kohn Ms. Bailey,1 Deputy Director, Division of Banking
Mr. Kroszner Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover-
Mr. Mishkin nors
Ms. Pianalto
Mr. Plosser Mr. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Mone-
Mr. Stern tary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Warsh
Mr. Parkinson,1 Deputy Director, Division of Re-
Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Evans, Lacker, and Lock- search and Statistics, Board of Governors
hart, and Ms. Yellen, Alternate Members of the
Federal Open Market Committee Ms. Barger,1 Deputy Director, Division of Banking
Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover-
Messrs. Bullard, Hoenig, and Rosengren, Presi- nors
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St.
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively Mr. Stehm,1 Associate Director, Division of Re-
serve Bank Operations and Payment Systems,
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Board of Governors
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher, Associate Di-
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary rectors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel Board of Governors
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Sheets, Economist Mr. Gagnon,2 Visiting Associate Director, Division
Mr. Stockton, Economist of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Connors, English, and Kamin, Ms. Mester, Mr. Wright, Deputy Associate Director, Division
Messrs. Rolnick, Rosenblum, Slifman, Tracy, of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
and Wilcox, Associate Economists
Mr. Zakrajšek, Assistant Director, Division of
Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Ac- Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
count
Mr. Erceg,2 Assistant Director, Division of Inter-
Ms. J. Johnson,1 Secretary, Office of the Secretary, national Finance, Board of Governors
Board of Governors
_________________
Mr. Cole, Director, Division of Banking Supervi- 1 Attended portion of the meeting relating to the
sion and Regulation, Board of Governors supervisory report concerning investment banks
and related policy issues.
2 Attended portions of the meeting through the
policy vote.

--- Page 2 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research The Manager of the System Open Market Account
and Statistics, Board of Governors reported on recent developments in foreign exchange
markets. There were no open market operations in
Mr. Gross,1 Special Assistant to the Board, Office foreign currencies for the System’s account in the pe-
of Board Members, Board of Governors riod since the previous meeting. The Manager also
reported on developments in domestic financial mar-
Ms. Tevlin,2 Senior Economist, Division of Re- kets and on System open market operations in gov-
search and Statistics, Board of Governors ernment securities and federal agency obligations dur-
ing the period since the previous meeting. By unani-
Mr. Ammer,2 Senior Economist, Division of Inter- mous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
national Finance, Board of Governors
The information reviewed at the June meeting indi-
cated that economic activity had remained soft in re-
Ms. Beechey, Economist, Division of Monetary
cent months. Manufacturing activity had deteriorated,
Affairs, Board of Governors
business investment in equipment appeared to have
moved down, and residential construction had contin-
Ms. Dykes, Project Manager, Division of Monetary
ued its steep descent. Labor market conditions had
Affairs, Board of Governors
weakened further, and consumer sentiment was at his-
torical lows, but despite these developments, consumer
Mr. Luecke, Section Chief, Division of Monetary
spending appeared resilient. Core consumer price in-
Affairs, Board of Governors
flation had been stable over recent months, but head-
line inflation had remained elevated because of further
Ms. Beattie,1 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of
substantial increases in food and energy prices.
the Secretary, Board of Governors
Labor demand continued to weaken in April and May.
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi- Private payroll employment fell at a slower rate than
sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors earlier in the year, but the decline in jobs was again
widespread, with the exception of nonbusiness services.
Ms. Hughes,1 Staff Assistant, Office of the Secre- As a result, aggregate hours of private production or
tary, Board of Governors nonsupervisory workers fell, on average, in April and
May. The unemployment rate jumped from 5.0 per-
Mr. Barron, First Vice President, Federal Reserve cent in April to 5.5 percent in May and was now about
Bank of Atlanta a percentage point above its level of a year ago. The
increase from April to May was accompanied by a rise
Mr. Fuhrer, Executive Vice President, Federal Re- in labor force participation, especially among young
serve Bank of Boston people.
Industrial production contracted in April and May at a
Messrs. Altig, Angulo,1 Rasche, Schweitzer, Sellon,
slightly faster pace than in the first quarter. Manufac-
and Weinberg, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
turing output also fell in April and was unchanged in
Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, St.
May; over the two months, factory production slowed
Louis, Cleveland, Kansas City, and Richmond,
across a broad range of industries. Production in the
respectively
high-tech sector continued to expand but at only a
modest rate. The factory utilization rate edged down
Messrs. Fernald and Fisher, and Ms. McLaughlin,
further in April and May to a level below its first-
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San
quarter average and was well below its recent high in
Francisco, Chicago, and New York, respec-
the third quarter of 2007.
tively
The growth of real consumer spending appeared to
_________________ have picked up moderately from its sluggish pace in the
1 Attended portion of the meeting relating to the first quarter. Real outlays on goods other than motor
supervisory report concerning investment banks vehicles increased at a robust pace, on average, in April
and related policy issues. and May. However, retail purchases of motor vehicles
2 Attended portions of the meeting through the fell to a low level. More broadly, households’ financial
policy vote. conditions appeared to have weakened in recent

--- Page 3 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 4 - 2 5 , 2 0 0 8 Page 3
months. Real disposable personal income had been Real nonfarm inventories excluding motor vehicles
rising only slowly since last summer, restrained by the rose only slightly in the first quarter, as firms cut pro-
gradual deterioration in labor market conditions and duction to keep inventories aligned with the sluggish
sharp increases in food and energy prices. The ratio of pace of sales. The ratio of book-value inventories to
household wealth to income had dropped sharply in sales (excluding motor vehicles) ticked down in April
the first quarter, reflecting substantial net declines in and had changed relatively little, on net, since the mid-
broad equity prices and further depreciation of house dle of 2007. Despite sharply lower sales of motor vehi-
prices. Measures of consumer sentiment fell further in cles, the modest pace of production allowed inventories
April and May; the May readings from the to fall further through May. Production at automakers
Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers was restrained by both weak demand and disruptions
and the Conference Board Consumer Confidence Sur- caused by labor disputes.
vey were near their low points reached during the early
The U.S. international trade deficit widened in April, as
1990s.
a jump in imports outweighed a rise in exports. Most
Activity in the housing sector remained very weak in categories of goods imports rebounded in April from
April and May. Single-family housing starts posted lower levels in March, especially petroleum products,
further declines, leaving the pace of construction in this the prices of which had moved sharply higher. Imports
sector down about two-thirds from the peak in early of non-oil industrial supplies, capital goods, and auto-
2006; starts of multifamily homes were a bit below their motive products also surged in April, whereas imports
average over the last 10 years. Although production of consumer goods expanded more slowly. The in-
cuts in the single-family housing sector resulted in con- crease in exports was broad-based, with strong in-
tinued reductions of inventories of unsold new homes, creases in exports of industrial supplies, capital and
the slow pace of sales left the ratio of unsold new consumer goods, and automotive products.
homes to sales at elevated levels not seen since the
Economic activity in advanced foreign economies ap-
early 1980s. Sales of existing homes remained little
peared to have expanded moderately in the first quar-
changed through April at a low level. However, the
ter, but the pace of that activity varied markedly across
index of pending sales agreements—an indicator of
economies. In the euro area and Japan, strong invest-
existing home sales in coming months—jumped in
ment contributed to a sharp acceleration in output.
April to its highest reading in six months. Conditions
Economic growth in the United Kingdom moderated
in mortgage credit markets remained tight, particularly
because of a slowdown in real estate and business ac-
for nonprime borrowers and for those seeking noncon-
tivities. Falling exports and inventories subtracted
forming mortgages.
from Canadian output growth. Recent data pointed to
In the business sector, real spending on equipment and broad softness across the advanced foreign economies
software appeared to move down a bit further in April in the second quarter, consistent with a weakening of
and May following a slight decrease in the first quarter. consumer and business confidence. Indicators for
Business outlays on transportation equipment contin- emerging market economies pointed to continued solid
ued to fall sharply. The data on shipments and orders growth in the first quarter, albeit at a slower pace than
of nondefense capital goods through May suggested last year among Latin American economies. In particu-
that spending on high-tech equipment and software lar, economic activity in Mexico slowed further in the
was expanding sluggishly, while outlays for other first quarter, in the wake of weaker growth in the
equipment remained weak. The slower pace of capital United States. In contrast, real output in China and
expenditures appeared consistent with a general dete- India appeared to have continued expanding at the
rioration of business conditions, including a decelera- rapid rates seen in 2007. Inflation stayed high, on bal-
tion of sales, a pessimistic tone across monthly surveys ance, in all regions, as recent price increases for food
of business conditions, and tighter standards and terms and energy added to global inflationary pressures.
on business credit. Real spending on nonresidential
Headline consumer price inflation in the United States
construction continued to rise in the first quarter, but
remained elevated in April and May, mostly because of
at a substantially slower rate than over the previous two
large increases in food and energy prices. Excluding
years. The architectural billing index plummeted re-
these categories, core prices rose at a relatively subdued
cently, and vacancy rates for commercial properties
rate in these two months. Average hourly earnings in-
ticked up.
creased in April and May at a slower pace than in the
first quarter, bringing the change over the 12 months

--- Page 4 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
ending in May below the pace over the previous 12 longer-term inflation compensation remained around
months. The employment cost index for hourly com- the middle of their recent elevated range. Some survey
pensation rose moderately in the first quarter and at a measures of households’ expectations of near-term
similar rate to recent years. inflation rose sharply, while survey measures of longer-
term expectations ranged from unchanged to slightly
At its April 29-30 meeting, the Federal Open Market
higher.
Committee (FOMC) lowered its target for the federal
funds rate 25 basis points, to 2 percent. In addition, Conditions eased somewhat in some U.S. financial
the Board of Governors approved a decrease of 25 markets over the intermeeting period but nonetheless
basis points in the discount rate, to 2¼ percent. The remained strained. Functioning of short-term funding
Committee’s statement noted that recent information markets showed some improvement; spreads in inter-
indicated that economic activity remained weak; house- bank funding markets generally declined, as did spreads
hold and business spending had been subdued, and on lower-rated commercial paper. However, liquidity
labor markets had softened further. Financial markets in the market for interbank loans at maturities beyond
remained under considerable stress, and tight credit three months remained thin, and the spreads quoted on
conditions and the deepening housing contraction were those instruments were little changed. Demand for
likely to weigh on economic growth over the next few funds from the Term Auction Facility remained sub-
quarters. Although readings on core inflation had im- stantial, but stop-out rates relative to minimum bid
proved somewhat, energy and other commodity prices rates declined considerably relative to prior auctions,
had increased, and some indicators of inflation expecta- likely in response to increased auction sizes. Deposi-
tions had risen in recent months. The Committee ex- tory institutions’ use of primary credit borrowing in-
pected inflation to moderate in coming quarters, re- creased, on balance, over the intermeeting period.
flecting a projected leveling-out of energy and other Credit outstanding through the Primary Dealer Credit
commodity prices and an easing of pressures on re- Facility declined significantly over the intermeeting pe-
source utilization. Still, uncertainty about the inflation riod. Conditions in the market for Treasury repurchase
outlook remained high, and the Committee noted that agreements appeared to improve somewhat, but condi-
it would be necessary to continue to monitor inflation tions were still poor for lower-quality collateral. Sup-
developments closely. The Committee stated that the ported by sales and redemptions of Treasury securities
substantial easing of monetary policy to date, combined from the System Open Market Account and exchanges
with ongoing measures to foster market liquidity, under the Term Securities Lending Facility, yields on
should help to promote moderate growth over time overnight Treasury repurchase agreements were around
and to mitigate risks to economic activity. The Com- typical spreads to the effective federal funds rate during
mittee indicated that it would continue to monitor eco- much of the intermeeting period, but “haircuts” ap-
nomic and financial developments and act as needed to plied by lenders on non-Treasury collateral remained
promote sustainable economic growth and price stabil- elevated. Term Securities Lending Facility auctions
ity. held since the April FOMC meeting were generally un-
dersubscribed.
The expected path of monetary policy moved down
following the Committee’s decision at its April meeting In longer-term credit markets, yields on investment-
to reduce the target federal funds rate by 25 basis and speculative-grade corporate bonds had risen sig-
points. Although the decision had largely been antici- nificantly since the end of April but by slightly less than
pated by financial markets, investors had assigned some yields on comparable-maturity Treasury securities, im-
odds to an unchanged target rate. Subsequently, plying a further modest narrowing of credit spreads.
money market futures rates rose substantially, on net, Corporate bond issuance surged in May, as some non-
as stronger-than-expected data on spending and on financial firms reduced their reliance on short-term
labor markets along with somewhat improved condi- debt in favor of bond financing. Commercial paper
tions in financial markets appeared to impart greater outstanding declined, and business lending by banks
confidence about prospects for economic activity. decelerated, partly reflecting continued low issuance of
Nominal Treasury yields also rose noticeably, and the leveraged loans as well as tighter credit standards and
Treasury yield curve flattened. Measures of short-term terms at banks. Over the intermeeting period, spreads
inflation compensation derived from yields on infla- of rates on conforming residential mortgages over
tion-indexed Treasury securities increased over the in- comparable-maturity Treasury securities remained
termeeting period, due in part to sharply higher prices about flat. Spreads on jumbo mortgages, however,
for oil and agricultural commodities. Measures of widened somewhat and credit availability for jumbo-

--- Page 5 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 4 - 2 5 , 2 0 0 8 Page 5
mortgage borrowers continued to be tight. In the sec- transitory factors, and the forecast of core inflation for
ondary market, issuance of mortgage-backed securities the second half of this year and next year was marked
by government-sponsored enterprises was strong, but up to incorporate the likely pass-through of the recent
issuance of securities backed by nonconforming resi- jumps in the prices of energy and other commodities,
dential mortgages and commercial mortgages remained and the reversal of these transitory factors. The further
low. Broad stock prices were somewhat volatile but large increase in energy prices also prompted an up-
declined modestly, on net, over the intermeeting pe- ward revision of the forecast of headline PCE inflation
riod. The surge in oil prices weighed on equity prices in the second half of 2008, and headline inflation was
outside of the energy sector, and a more pessimistic expected to exceed core inflation by a considerable
outlook for future earnings in the financial sector margin this year. However, in view of a projected lev-
caused stocks of financial institutions to decline signifi- eling-out of energy prices and the anticipated slack in
cantly. resource utilization, headline inflation was expected to
decline considerably in 2009 from its pace in the sec-
Conditions in the money markets of many major for-
ond half of 2008, and core inflation was forecasted to
eign economies remained strained, showing little im-
edge lower.
provement since late April despite ongoing activities of
foreign central banks aimed at easing liquidity pressures In conjunction with the FOMC meeting in June, all
in funding markets. Yields on sovereign debt in the meeting participants (Federal Reserve Board members
advanced foreign economies moved up approximately and Reserve Bank presidents) provided projections for
in line with increases in comparable Treasury yields in economic growth, the unemployment rate, and infla-
the United States. The trade-weighted foreign ex- tion for the years 2008 through 2010. The projections
change value of the dollar against major currencies are described in the Summary of Economic Projec-
rose. tions, which is attached as an addendum to these min-
utes. A number of participants noted that, given the
M2 rose much more slowly in April and May than in
recent large adverse shocks to output and inflation,
the first quarter. The deceleration seemed to reflect
their projections even late in the forecast period did not
primarily an unwinding of heightened demand for the
fully reveal their perceptions of longer-run sustainable
relative safety and liquidity of money market mutual
rates of economic growth and unemployment or the
funds that had boosted M2 in prior months.
measured rates of inflation that would be consistent
In the forecast prepared for the meeting, the staff with price stability. In this context, participants dis-
raised its projection for the growth of real gross do- cussed several possible refinements of the Committee’s
mestic product (GDP) for 2008. The available indica- approach to projections that could provide a clearer
tors of spending, particularly those for consumption indication of participants’ views about these variables
and business investment, suggested that economic ac- and agreed to consider this matter further.
tivity in the first half of the year had been somewhat
In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
firmer than previously expected. The staff projection
look, FOMC participants noted that spending in recent
prepared for the meeting pointed to modest expansion
months had evidently been less weak than anticipated,
in real GDP in the first half of 2008 followed by a
leading participants to revise up their assessment of
slight slowdown in growth in the second half, when
economic growth in the first half of 2008. Nonethe-
several factors were likely to restrain spending, includ-
less, most participants judged that the slightly firmer
ing lower household wealth, slower real income growth
path of spending did not presage a near-term strength-
due to sharply higher oil prices, and tight credit condi-
ening of the expansion. Economic activity would
tions. The pace of economic activity was projected to
probably continue to expand slowly over the next sev-
pick up in 2009 as those effects waned and weakness in
eral quarters, restrained by a range of factors, including
housing construction abated. Despite this acceleration,
strains in financial markets and institutions and the re-
the trajectory of economic growth anticipated through
sulting tightness of credit conditions; ongoing weak-
2009 implied noticeable slack in resource utilization.
ness in the housing sector; and the increases in energy
The staff’s projection for price inflation in core per- and agricultural commodity prices. And, although the
sonal consumption expenditures (PCE) for 2008 as a incoming data suggested reduced odds that these fac-
whole was unchanged; recent readings on core PCE tors would cause an appreciable contraction of eco-
inflation were better than anticipated and led the staff nomic activity in the near term, participants continued
to lower its projection for the first half of the year. But to see significant downside risks to growth. At the
some of the recent improvement was seen as reflecting same time, however, the outlook for inflation had dete-

--- Page 6 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
riorated. Recent increases in energy and some other year, particularly after the effects of the fiscal stimulus
commodity prices would boost inflation sharply in waned. Lenders were exhibiting greater caution in ex-
coming months. A leveling-out of energy prices and tending credit to households, partly in response to ac-
continued slack in resource utilization were expected to tual and expected increases in delinquency rates on
lead inflation to moderate in 2009 and 2010. However, household credit. Participants reported that second
participants had become more concerned about upside mortgages, automobile loans, and home equity lines of
risks to the inflation outlook—including the possibility credit were becoming harder to obtain, and some exist-
that persistent advances in energy and food prices ing home equity lines were being cut, even for consum-
could spur increases in long-run inflation expectations. ers with good credit scores. The possibilities that the
decline in house prices would be more protracted than
Although financial market conditions generally ap-
previously anticipated, that spillovers from the decline
peared to have improved somewhat over the intermeet-
in housing wealth to consumption could be larger than
ing period, most participants viewed markets as remain-
expected, and that the household saving rate might rise
ing under considerable stress. Some participants noted
more steeply than currently projected were seen as pos-
that the availability of the liquidity facilities that the
ing downside risks to consumption spending going for-
Federal Reserve had introduced in recent months had
ward.
probably bolstered the confidence of investors and
lenders and thus was likely responsible for part of the Participants judged that the outlook for the housing
improvement in market functioning. Term spreads in market remained bleak, with falling prices, slow sales,
interbank funding markets had declined, but remained high inventories of unsold homes, and further declines
elevated by historical standards. The leveraged loan in construction activity over coming months. Although
market had improved somewhat and corporate bond a few participants saw tentative signs that the housing
issuance had been strong. However, the equity prices market might be bottoming out in some parts of the
of many investment and commercial banks had de- country, most aggregate indicators of housing activity
clined over the intermeeting period, reflecting increased pointed to continued weakness. Also, mortgage rates
concern about asset quality and the outlook for profits. had increased, and the equity prices of housing-related
The deteriorating condition of some financial guaran- firms had fallen over the intermeeting period, after hav-
tors and mortgage insurers contributed to worries ing stabilized earlier in the year, suggesting renewed
about banks. Investors remained chary of securitized pessimism among investors about prospects for the
products, such as mortgage credits not guaranteed by a housing industry. Rising foreclosures were seen as
government-sponsored enterprise or agency. A num- likely to continue to add to downward pressure on
ber of financial institutions had been successful in rais- house prices.
ing new capital, but reportedly on less favorable terms
Business spending was expected to remain sluggish, as
than before. Participants judged that many financial
tight credit conditions, uncertainty about economic
institutions would need to continue to recapitalize and
growth, and the rising costs of inputs―especially energy
reduce their leverage. Some anticipated that this proc-
and raw materials―appeared to be making firms quite
ess could well be protracted, and that financial inter-
cautious and inclined to defer capital expenditures.
mediation consequently would be impeded for some
Businesses had been able to raise a considerable vol-
time, holding back growth well into 2009. Overall, fi-
ume of funds in bond markets of late, and profits and
nancial market conditions, while better in many re-
cash flow were still strong in the nonfinancial business
spects, appeared to remain fragile, and participants
sector. But some regional banks that had experienced
judged that potential further adverse financial market
substantial credit losses were expected to adopt a sig-
developments still posed downside risks to economic
nificantly more conservative lending posture, further
activity.
limiting the availability of credit to small businesses.
Recent data pointed to more resilience in consumer Although the available data indicated that spending on
spending in the second quarter than had been expected. nonresidential construction projects had remained rela-
However, most participants thought that much of the tively robust in recent months, participants thought
recent strength probably indicated only a more delayed that this strength might have reflected projects initiated
slowing in consumer spending than had been expected some time ago, when the economic outlook and credit
rather than a more favorable trend. Falling wealth and conditions were more favorable, and they expected
real income, tightening credit conditions, rising energy poor business sentiment and tighter credit to lead
prices, and sharply declining consumer sentiment were commercial construction to soften later this year and
seen as likely to restrain consumer spending later this next year. Some anecdotal reports of recently delayed

--- Page 7 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 4 - 2 5 , 2 0 0 8 Page 7
or canceled new construction projects supported this However, others saw the signs of a rise in inflation ex-
view. pectations as more broad-based and were concerned
that this development could signal an erosion of confi-
Regarding economic activity in various business sec-
dence in the Committee’s commitment to price stability
tors, participants reported continued overall softness in
and, absent effective action by the Committee, could
manufacturing, especially in the housing-related and
impart greater momentum to the inflation process.
motor vehicle sectors. Flooding in the Midwest had
Participants agreed that the possibilities of greater pass-
disrupted transportation and damaged corn and soy-
through of cost increases into prices, higher long-run
bean crops. However, production in the energy and
inflation expectations feeding into labor costs and
steel sectors appeared to be strengthening, and industry
other prices, and further increases in energy prices all
contacts generally reported that demand for exported
posed upside risks to inflation that had intensified since
goods was buoyant. Labor markets in most regions
the time of the April FOMC meeting.
continued to weaken gradually. Most participants an-
ticipated persistent slack in labor markets, with the un- Some participants noted that certain measures of the
employment rate rising further through next year, be- real federal funds rate, especially those using actual or
fore declining slightly in 2010. forecasted headline inflation, were now negative, and
very low by historical standards. In the view of these
The current account deficit had narrowed significantly
participants, the current stance of monetary policy was
on balance in recent quarters, and still-solid foreign
providing considerable support to aggregate demand
growth was expected to contribute to a further narrow-
and, if the negative real federal funds rate was main-
ing of the real U.S. trade deficit in coming quarters.
tained, it could well lead to higher trend inflation. In
However, a few participants commented that this effect
this view, a significant portion of the easing in mone-
might fade over time, as they expected demand in for-
tary policy since last fall was aimed at providing insur-
eign economies to slow.
ance against the risk of an especially severe weakening
Participants were concerned about the inflationary con- in economic activity and, with downside risks having
sequences of recent increases in the prices of energy, diminished somewhat, some firming in policy would be
food, and imports, and they expected headline inflation appropriate very soon, if not at this meeting. However,
to rise in the very near term. However, core inflation other participants observed that the high level of risk
had been stable of late, and participants anticipated that spreads and the restricted availability of credit sug-
a leveling-out of energy prices and slack in labor and gested that overall financial conditions were not espe-
product markets would contribute to a moderation of cially accommodative; indeed, borrowing costs for
inflation pressures over time. Reports on the ability of many households and businesses were higher than they
firms to pass cost increases on to customers were had been last summer.
mixed, but some participants commented that the
In the Committee’s discussion of monetary policy for
global nature of inflationary pressures could make im-
the intermeeting period, members generally agreed that
ports more expensive and give firms greater scope to
the risks to growth had diminished somewhat since the
raise prices. Some participants noted that wage growth
time of the last FOMC meeting while the upside risks
had been quite moderate, reinforcing a view that
to inflation had increased. Nonetheless, the risks to
longer-term inflation expectations and labor cost pres-
growth remained tilted to the downside. Conditions in
sures had remained fairly well contained. However,
some financial markets had improved, but many finan-
others commented that wages might accelerate with a
cial institutions continued to experience significant
lag only after inflation expectations had moved higher,
credit losses and balance sheet pressures, and in these
and that it would be very costly to subsequently bring
circumstances credit availability was likely to remain
those expectations back down. Participants’ views of
constrained for some time. At the same time, however,
the recent evidence on inflation expectations varied.
the near-term outlook for inflation had deteriorated,
Some noted that the increase was greatest for short-
and the risks that underlying inflation pressures could
term survey measures of households’ inflation expecta-
prove to be greater than anticipated appeared to have
tions, which may be influenced disproportionately by
risen. Members commented that the continued strong
consumers’ perceptions of changes in the prices of
increases in energy and other commodity prices would
food and gasoline; those participants judged that under-
prompt a difficult adjustment process involving both
lying inflation trends had not risen nearly as much and
lower growth and higher rates of inflation in the near
anticipated that such survey measures would reverse
term. Members were also concerned about the height-
their recent increases as headline inflation moderated.
ened potential in current circumstances for an upward

--- Page 8 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
drift in long-run inflation expectations. With increased The Committee expects inflation to moderate
upside risks to inflation and inflation expectations, later this year and next year. However, in light
members believed that the next change in the stance of of the continued increases in the prices of en-
policy could well be an increase in the funds rate; in- ergy and some other commodities and the ele-
deed, one member thought that policy should be vated state of some indicators of inflation expec-
firmed at this meeting. However, in the view of most tations, uncertainty about the inflation outlook
members, the outlook for both economic activity and remains high.
price pressures remained very uncertain, and thus the
timing and magnitude of future policy actions was quite The substantial easing of monetary policy to
unclear. Against this backdrop, most members judged date, combined with ongoing measures to foster
that an unchanged federal funds rate at this meeting market liquidity, should help to promote moder-
represented an appropriate balancing of the risks to the ate growth over time. Although downside risks
economic outlook and was consistent, for now, with a to growth remain, they appear to have dimin-
policy path that would support an eventual decline in ished somewhat, and the upside risks to inflation
both inflation and unemployment. Nonetheless, mem- and inflation expectations have increased. The
bers recognized that circumstances could change Committee will continue to monitor economic
quickly and noted that they might need to respond and financial developments and will act as
promptly to incoming information about the evolution needed to promote sustainable economic growth
of risks. and price stability.”
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
Votes for this action: Messrs. Bernanke, Geithner,
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
Kohn, Kroszner, and Mishkin, Ms. Pianalto, Messrs.
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
Plosser, Stern, and Warsh.
cute transactions in the System Account in accordance
with the following domestic policy directive:
Votes against this action: Mr. Fisher.
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
Mr. Fisher dissented because he preferred an increase
monetary and financial conditions that will fos-
in the target federal funds rate at this meeting. While
ter price stability and promote sustainable
the financial system was still frail and downside risks to
growth in output. To further its long-run objec-
growth remained, the risk that inflation would fail to
tives, the Committee in the immediate future
moderate as expected by the Committee had increased
seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
substantially over the intermeeting period. Relatively
with maintaining the federal funds rate at an av-
strong demand for oil and other commodities abroad,
erage of around 2 percent.”
as well as increased labor and other operating costs in
the emerging economies, was boosting prices of glob-
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
ally traded goods and services. Mr. Fisher was espe-
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.:
cially concerned about behavioral changes among busi-
ness operators that appeared to be accommodating
“The Federal Open Market Committee decided
inflationary pressures. In particular, firms increasingly
today to keep its target for the federal funds rate
appeared to be planning to pass through their higher
at 2 percent.
input costs to final goods prices in order to protect
their profit margins. Overall, Mr. Fisher viewed infla-
Recent information indicates that overall eco-
tion expectations as becoming less well anchored. To
nomic activity continues to expand, partly re-
help restrain inflation expectations and inflation, Mr.
flecting some firming in household spending.
Fisher felt it would be appropriate for the Committee
However, labor markets have softened further
to tighten the stance of monetary policy.
and financial markets remain under considerable
stress. Tight credit conditions, the ongoing In a joint session of the Federal Open Market Commit-
housing contraction, and the rise in energy tee and the Board of Governors, meeting participants
prices are likely to weigh on economic growth turned to a consideration of policy issues regarding
over the next few quarters. investment banks and other primary securities dealers.
Participants discussed the financial activities and condi-
tion of primary dealers as well as the objectives of, pro-

--- Page 9 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 4 - 2 5 , 2 0 0 8 Page 9
cedures for, and experience to date in administering the ble measures to strengthen financial market functioning
Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) and the Term and thus enhance financial stability.
Securities Lending Facility (TSLF). (The PDCF and
the TSLF had been established in March in response to It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
unusual and exigent conditions in financial markets.) would be held on Tuesday, August 5, 2008.
In view of the continuing significant strains in financial
markets, participants also discussed the possibility of The meeting adjourned at 1:15 p.m.
extending the PDCF and the TSLF past year-end. In
addition, they reviewed progress in negotiations with Notation Vote
staff of the Securities and Exchange Commission re- By notation vote completed on May 20, 2008, the
garding a memorandum of understanding intended to Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
govern arrangements for sharing information on bro- FOMC meeting held on April 29-30, 2008.
ker-dealers and for cooperation in the supervision of
primary dealers. Finally, participants exchanged views
on longer-run issues regarding appropriate arrange-
ments for supervision and regulation of investment _____________________________
banks and other securities dealers and for the access of Brian F. Madigan
such firms to central bank liquidity, as well as on possi- Secretary

--- Page 10 ---

Page 1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the June 2008 FOMC meeting, the primarily from better-than-expected data on consumer
members of the Board of Governors and the presi- and business spending received between the April and
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom par- June FOMC meetings. Nonetheless, several partici-
ticipate in deliberations of the FOMC, provided projec- pants noted that the recent firmness in consumer
tions for economic growth, unemployment, and infla- spending could well prove transitory and that the ongo-
tion in 2008, 2009, and 2010. Projections were based ing housing market correction, tight credit conditions,
on information available through the conclusion of the and elevated energy prices would damp domestic de-
June meeting, on each participant’s assumptions re- mand in the second half of this year. Still, the substan-
garding a range of factors likely to affect economic out- tial easing of monetary policy since last year and the
comes, and on his or her assessment of appropriate continued strength in exports should help to support
monetary policy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is economic growth; in addition, strains had eased some-
defined as the future policy that, based on current in- what in some financial markets since April. Real GDP
formation, is deemed most likely to foster outcomes growth was expected to increase in 2009 as the adjust-
for economic activity and inflation that best satisfy the ment in the housing sector ran its course, financial
participant’s interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s markets gradually resumed more-normal functioning,
dual objectives of maximum employment and price and the downward pressure on real incomes stemming
stability. from increases in energy and food prices in the first
half of 2008 began to fade. In 2010, economic activity
FOMC participants generally expected that, over the
was projected to expand at or a little above participants’
remainder of this year, output would expand at a pace
estimates of the rate of trend growth.
appreciably below its trend rate, owing primarily to
continued weakness in housing markets, the substantial With output growth continuing to run below trend in
rise in energy prices in recent months, and the reduc- the second half of 2008, most participants expected
tion in the availability of household and business credit that the unemployment rate would move up somewhat
resulting from continued strains in financial markets. over the remainder of this year. The central tendency
As indicated in table 1 and figure 1, output growth fur- of participants’ projections for the average rate of un-
ther ahead was projected to pick up sufficiently to be- employment in the fourth quarter of 2008 was 5.5 per-
gin to reverse some of the increase in the unemploy- cent to 5.7 percent, unchanged from the central ten-
ment rate by 2010. In light of the recent surge in the dency of projections that were provided in conjunction
prices of oil and agricultural commodities, total infla- with the April FOMC meeting and consistent with
tion was expected to rise further in coming months and some slack in resource utilization. The central ten-
to be elevated for 2008 as a whole. However, many dency of participants’ projections was for the unem-
participants expected that persistent economic slack ployment rate to stabilize in 2009 and to edge down in
and a flattening out of energy and other commodity 2010 as output and employment growth pick up.
prices in line with futures market prices would cause
The surge in the prices of oil and agricultural com-
overall inflation to decline noticeably in 2009 and 2010.
modities since April led participants to revise up no-
Most participants judged that greater-than-normal un-
ticeably their projections for total inflation in the near
certainty surrounded their projections for both output
term. However, the central tendency of participants’
growth and inflation. A significant majority of partici-
projections for core PCE inflation in 2008 was 2.2 per-
pants viewed the risks to their forecasts for output
cent to 2.4 percent, unchanged from the central ten-
growth as weighted to the downside, and a similar
dency in April, as lower-than-expected rates of core
number saw the risks to the inflation outlook as skewed
inflation over recent months offset the expectations of
to the upside.
some pass-through of the recent surge in energy prices
The Outlook into core inflation over the next few months. Rates of
The central tendency of participants’ projections for both overall and core inflation were expected to decline
real GDP growth in 2008, at 1.0 percent to 1.6 percent, over the next two years, reflecting a flattening out of
was noticeably higher than the central tendency of the the prices of oil and other commodities consistent with
projections provided in conjunction with the April futures market prices, slack in resource utilization, and
FOMC meeting, which was 0.3 percent to 1.2 percent. longer-term inflation expectations that were expected
The upward revision to the 2008 outlook stemmed to remain generally well anchored.

--- Page 11 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
The contour of participants’ projections for output Risks to the Outlook
growth, unemployment, and inflation was importantly Most participants viewed the risks to their projections
shaped by their judgments about the measured rates of for GDP growth as weighted to the downside and the
inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual associated risks to their projections for the unemploy-
mandate to promote maximum employment and price ment rate as tilted to the upside. The possibility that
stability and about the time horizon over which policy house prices could decline more steeply than antici-
should aim to attain those rates given current economic pated, further reducing households’ wealth, restricting
conditions. Most participants judged that it might take their access to credit, and eroding the capital of lending
a substantial period of time for output and inflation to institutions, continued to be perceived as a significant
recover from the recent shocks, which had elevated downside risk to the outlook for economic growth.
inflation and damped economic activity. A number of Although financial markets had shown some further
participants projected that the rate of unemployment improvement since April, conditions in those markets
might remain slightly above its longer-run sustainable remained strained; a number of participants also
level even in 2010; total inflation in 2010 was also pointed to the risk that further improvement could be
judged likely to continue to run a bit above levels that quite slow and subject to relapse. The potential for
most participants saw as consistent with the price sta- current tight credit conditions to exert an unexpectedly
bility objective of the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate. large restraint on household and business spending was
Most participants saw further declines in both unem- also viewed as a significant downside risk to economic
ployment and inflation as likely in the period beyond activity. An adverse feedback loop, in which weaker
the forecast horizon. economic activity led to a further worsening of finan-
cial conditions, which in turn could damp economic
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Governors
growth even further, continued to be viewed as a wor-
and Reserve Bank presidents, June 2008
Percent risome possibility, though less so than in April. Indeed,
Variable 2008 2009 2010 some participants pointed to the apparent resilience of
Central tendency1 the U.S. economy in the face of recent financial distress
Change in real GDP . . . . 1.0 to 1.6 2.0 to 2.8 2.5 to 3.0
and suggested that the adverse effects of financial de-
April projection . . . . 0.3 to 1.2 2.0 to 2.8 2.6 to 3.1
velopments on economic activity outside of the hous-
Unemployment rate . . . . . 5.5 to 5.7 5.3 to 5.8 5.0 to 5.6 ing sector could prove to be more modest than antici-
April projection . . . . 5.5 to 5.7 5.2 to 5.7 4.9 to 5.5
pated.
PCE inflation . . . . . . . . . . 3.8 to 4.2 2.0 to 2.3 1.8 to 2.0
April projection . . . . 3.1 to 3.4 1.9 to 2.3 1.8 to 2.0 Most participants viewed the risks to their inflation
projections as weighted to the upside. Recent sharp
Core PCE inflation . . . . . 2.2 to 2.4 2.0 to 2.2 1.8 to 2.0
increases in energy and food prices and the pass-
April projection . . . . 2.2 to 2.4 1.9 to 2.1 1.7 to 1.9
through of dollar depreciation into import prices could
Range2
boost inflation in the near term by more than currently
Change in real GDP . . . . . 0.9 to 1.8 1.9 to 3.0 2.0 to 3.5
anticipated. Although participants generally assumed
April projection . . . . 0.0 to 1.5 1.8 to 3.0 2.0 to 3.4
that commodity prices will flatten out, roughly in line
Unemployment rate . . . . . 5.5 to 5.8 5.2 to 6.1 5.0 to 5.8
with the trajectory implied by futures prices, the fact
April projection . . . . 5.3 to 6.0 5.2 to 6.3 4.8 to 5.9
that futures markets had persistently underpredicted
PCE inflation . . . . . . . . . . 3.4 to 4.6 1.7 to 3.0 1.6 to 2.1
commodity prices in recent experience was viewed as
April projection . . . . 2.8 to 3.8 1.7 to 3.0 1.5 to 2.0
an upside risk to the outlook for inflation. Participants
Core PCE inflation . . . . . 2.0 to 2.5 1.8 to 2.3 1.5 to 2.0 also saw a risk that inflation expectations could become
April projection . . . . 1.9 to 2.5 1.7 to 2.2 1.3 to 2.0
less firmly anchored, particularly if the current elevated
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) rates of headline inflation did not moderate as quickly
and of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the
as they expected.
fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE infla-
tion are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index
Participants continued to view uncertainty about the
for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price index for
PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate outlook for economic activity as higher than normal,
are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of with a number pointing to uncertainty about the dura-
the year indicated. Each participant's projections are based on his or her
tion and effects of the ongoing financial strains on real
assessment of appropriate monetary policy.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest activity. In addition, participants expressed noticeably
projections for each variable in each year. more uncertainty about their inflation projections than
2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants'
projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year. they had in January and April, a shift in perception that
they attributed importantly to increased uncertainty

--- Page 12 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t i o n s f o r t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 4 - 2 5 , 2 0 0 8 Page 3
Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2008–10
Percent
Change in real GDP
6
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections 5
4
3
Actual
2
1
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Percent
Unemployment rate
7
6
5
4
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Percent
PCE inflation
4
3
2
1
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Percent
Core PCE inflation
4
3
2
1
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual.

--- Page 13 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
about the future course of energy and food prices and of data about the actual performance of the economy
to greater uncertainty about the extent of pass-through in the first half of the year; their views about output
of changes in those prices into core inflation. (Table 2 growth in coming quarters and in 2009 continued to
provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for real GDP exhibit appreciable dispersion. The dispersion of par-
growth, unemployment, and inflation since 1987.1) ticipants’ projections for real activity next year seemed
largely to reflect differing assessments of the effects of
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
adverse financial market conditions on economic
Percentage points
Variable 2008 2009 2010 growth, the speed with which credit conditions might
improve, and the depth and duration of the correction
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . . ±0.9 ±1.3 ±1.4
in the housing market. Indeed, views differed notably
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . . ±0.3 ±0.7 ±1.0 on the pace at which output and employment would
recover in 2009, with some participants expressing a
Total consumer prices2 . . . . . . ±0.6 ±1.0 ±1.0
concern that growth might be constrained by the per-
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root
mean squared error of projections that were released in the summer sistence of financial strains over a considerable period.
from 1987 through 2007 for the current and following two years by The dispersion of participants’ longer-term projections
various private and government forecasters. As described in the box
was also affected to some degree by differences in their
“Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70
percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, judgments about the economy’s trend growth rate and
and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of the unemployment rate that would be consistent over
projection errors made in the past. Further information is in David
time with maximum employment. The dispersion of
Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the
Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and the projections for PCE inflation in the near term re-
Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Board of Governors of the flected in large part differing views on the extent to
Federal Reserve System, November).
1. For definitions, refer to general note in table 1. which recent increases in energy and food prices would
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure pass through into higher consumer prices. In addition,
that has been most widely used in government and private economic participants held differing views on the degree to which
forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. inflation expectations were anchored and the role that
expectations might play in the inflation process over
Diversity of Participants’ Views the short and medium term. Participants’ inflation pro-
Figures 2.A and 2.B provide more detail on the diver- jections further ahead were shaped by the views of the
sity of participants’ views regarding likely economic rate of inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve’s
outcomes over the projection period. The dispersion dual objectives and the time it would take to achieve
of participants’ projections for real GDP growth in these goals given current economic conditions and ap-
2008 was noticeably narrower than in the forecasts propriate policy.
provided in April, reflecting primarily the accumulation
1 The box “Forecast Uncertainty” at the end of this sum-
mary discusses the sources and interpretation of uncer-
tainty in economic forecasts and explains the approach
used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending partici-
pants’ projections.

--- Page 14 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t i o n s f o r t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 4 - 2 5 , 2 0 0 8 Page 5
Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP and for the unemployment rate, 2008–10
Number of participants Number of participants
Change in real GDP Unemployment rate
2008 16 2008 16
June projections June projections
April projections 14 April projections 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.61.82.02.22.42.62.83.03.23.4 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2
0.10.30.50.70.91.11.31.51.71.92.12.32.52.72.93.13.33.5 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3
Percent range Percent range
Number of participants Number of participants
2009 2009
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.61.82.02.22.42.62.83.03.23.4 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2
0.10.30.50.70.91.11.31.51.71.92.12.32.52.72.93.13.33.5 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3
Percent range Percent range
Number of participants Number of participants
2010 2010
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
0.00.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.61.82.02.22.42.62.83.03.23.4 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2
0.10.30.50.70.91.11.31.51.71.92.12.32.52.72.93.13.33.5 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3
Percent range Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 15 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation and for core PCE inflation, 2008–10
Number of participants Number of participants
PCE inflation Core PCE inflation
2008 16 2008 16
June projections June projections
April projections 14 April projections 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
1.51.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
1.61.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range Percent range
Number of participants Number of participants
2009 2009
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
1.51.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
1.61.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range Percent range
Number of participants Number of participants
2010 2010
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
1.51.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
1.61.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 16 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t i o n s f o r t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 4 - 2 5 , 2 0 0 8 Page 7
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by similar to that experienced in the past and the
the members of the Board of Governors and risks around the projections are broadly bal-
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks anced, the numbers reported in table 2 would
inform discussions of monetary policy among imply a probability of about 70 percent that
policymakers and can aid public understand- actual GDP would expand 2.1 percent to 3.9
ing of the basis for policy actions. Consider- percent in the current year, 1.7 percent to 4.3
able uncertainty attends these projections, percent in the second year, and 1.6 percent to
however. The economic and statistical models 4.4 percent in the third year. The correspond-
and relationships used to help produce eco- ing 70 percent confidence intervals for overall
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de- inflation would be 1.4 percent to 2.6 percent in
scriptions of the real world. And the future the current year and 1.0 percent to 3.0 percent
path of the economy can be affected by myr- in the second and third years.
iad unforeseen developments and events. Because current conditions may differ
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, from those that prevailed on average over his-
participants consider not only what appears to tory, participants provide judgments as to
be the most likely economic outcome as em- whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
bodied in their projections, but also the range jections of each variable is greater than, smaller
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
their occurring, and the potential costs to the forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in
economy should they occur. table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
Table 2 summarizes the average historical to whether the risks to their projections are
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including weighted to the upside, downside, or are
those reported in past Monetary Policy Re- broadly balanced. That is, participants judge
ports and those prepared by Federal Reserve whether each variable is more likely to be
Board staff in advance of meetings of the above or below their projections of the most
Federal Open Market Committee. The pro- likely outcome. These judgments about the
jection error ranges shown in the table illus- uncertainty and the risks attending each par-
trate the considerable uncertainty associated ticipant’s projections are distinct from the di-
with economic forecasts. For example, sup- versity of participants’ views about the most
pose a participant projects that real gross do- likely outcomes. Forecast uncertainty is con-
mestic product (GDP) and total consumer cerned with the risks associated with a particu-
prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, re- lar projection, rather than with divergences
spectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the across a number of different projections.
uncertainty attending those projections is

# Tables

## Page_5_Table_1


| In conjunction with the FOMC meeting in June, all          |
|------------------------------------------------------------|
| meeting participants (Federal Reserve Board members        |
| and Reserve Bank presidents) provided projections for      |
| economic growth, the unemployment rate, and infla-         |
| tion for the years 2008 through 2010. The projections      |
| are described in the Summary of Economic Projec-           |
| tions, which is attached as an addendum to these min-      |
| utes. A number of participants noted that, given the       |
| recent large adverse shocks to output and inflation,       |
| their projections even late in the forecast period did not |
| fully reveal their perceptions of longer-run sustainable   |
| rates of economic growth and unemployment or the           |
| measured rates of inflation that would be consistent       |
| with price stability. In this context, participants dis-   |
| cussed several possible refinements of the Committee’s     |
| approach to projections that could provide a clearer       |
| indication of participants’ views about these variables    |
| and agreed to consider this matter further.                |
| In their discussion of the economic situation and out-     |
| look, FOMC participants noted that spending in recent      |
| months had evidently been less weak than anticipated,      |
| leading participants to revise up their assessment of      |
| economic growth in the first half of 2008. Nonethe-        |
| less, most participants judged that the slightly firmer    |
| path of spending did not presage a near-term strength-     |
| ening of the expansion. Economic activity would            |
| probably continue to expand slowly over the next sev-      |
| eral quarters, restrained by a range of factors, including |
| strains in financial markets and institutions and the re-  |
| sulting tightness of credit conditions; ongoing weak-      |
| ness in the housing sector; and the increases in energy    |
| and agricultural commodity prices. And, although the       |
| incoming data suggested reduced odds that these fac-       |
| tors would cause an appreciable contraction of eco-        |
| nomic activity in the near term, participants continued    |
| to see significant downside risks to growth. At the        |
| same time, however, the outlook for inflation had dete-    |


## Page_6_Table_1


| riorated. Recent increases in energy and some other        |
|------------------------------------------------------------|
| commodity prices would boost inflation sharply in          |
| coming months. A leveling-out of energy prices and         |
| continued slack in resource utilization were expected to   |
| lead inflation to moderate in 2009 and 2010. However,      |
| participants had become more concerned about upside        |
| risks to the inflation outlook—including the possibility   |
| that persistent advances in energy and food prices         |
| could spur increases in long-run inflation expectations.   |
| Although financial market conditions generally ap-         |
| peared to have improved somewhat over the intermeet-       |
| ing period, most participants viewed markets as remain-    |
| ing under considerable stress. Some participants noted     |
| that the availability of the liquidity facilities that the |
| Federal Reserve had introduced in recent months had        |
| probably bolstered the confidence of investors and         |
| lenders and thus was likely responsible for part of the    |
| improvement in market functioning. Term spreads in         |
| interbank funding markets had declined, but remained       |
| elevated by historical standards. The leveraged loan       |
| market had improved somewhat and corporate bond            |
| issuance had been strong. However, the equity prices       |
| of many investment and commercial banks had de-            |
| clined over the intermeeting period, reflecting increased  |
| concern about asset quality and the outlook for profits.   |
| The deteriorating condition of some financial guaran-      |
| tors and mortgage insurers contributed to worries          |
| about banks. Investors remained chary of securitized       |
| products, such as mortgage credits not guaranteed by a     |
| government-sponsored enterprise or agency. A num-          |
| ber of financial institutions had been successful in rais- |
| ing new capital, but reportedly on less favorable terms    |
| than before. Participants judged that many financial       |
| institutions would need to continue to recapitalize and    |
| reduce their leverage. Some anticipated that this proc-    |
| ess could well be protracted, and that financial inter-    |
| mediation consequently would be impeded for some           |
| time, holding back growth well into 2009. Overall, fi-     |
| nancial market conditions, while better in many re-        |
| spects, appeared to remain fragile, and participants       |
| judged that potential further adverse financial market     |
| developments still posed downside risks to economic        |
| activity.                                                  |
| Recent data pointed to more resilience in consumer         |
| spending in the second quarter than had been expected.     |
| However, most participants thought that much of the        |
| recent strength probably indicated only a more delayed     |
| slowing in consumer spending than had been expected        |
| rather than a more favorable trend. Falling wealth and     |
| real income, tightening credit conditions, rising energy   |
| prices, and sharply declining consumer sentiment were      |
| seen as likely to restrain consumer spending later this    |


## Page_6_Table_2


| year, particularly after the effects of the fiscal stimulus   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------|
| waned. Lenders were exhibiting greater caution in ex-         |
| tending credit to households, partly in response to ac-       |
| tual and expected increases in delinquency rates on           |
| household credit. Participants reported that second           |
| mortgages, automobile loans, and home equity lines of         |
| credit were becoming harder to obtain, and some exist-        |
| ing home equity lines were being cut, even for consum-        |
| ers with good credit scores. The possibilities that the       |
| decline in house prices would be more protracted than         |
| previously anticipated, that spillovers from the decline      |
| in housing wealth to consumption could be larger than         |
| expected, and that the household saving rate might rise       |
| more steeply than currently projected were seen as pos-       |
| ing downside risks to consumption spending going for-         |
| ward.                                                         |
| Participants judged that the outlook for the housing          |
| market remained bleak, with falling prices, slow sales,       |
| high inventories of unsold homes, and further declines        |
| in construction activity over coming months. Although         |
| a few participants saw tentative signs that the housing       |
| market might be bottoming out in some parts of the            |
| country, most aggregate indicators of housing activity        |
| pointed to continued weakness. Also, mortgage rates           |
| had increased, and the equity prices of housing-related       |
| firms had fallen over the intermeeting period, after hav-     |
| ing stabilized earlier in the year, suggesting renewed        |
| pessimism among investors about prospects for the             |
| housing industry. Rising foreclosures were seen as            |
| likely to continue to add to downward pressure on             |
| house prices.                                                 |
| Business spending was expected to remain sluggish, as         |
| tight credit conditions, uncertainty about economic           |
| growth, and the rising costs of inputs―especially energy      |
| and raw materials―appeared to be making firms quite           |
| cautious and inclined to defer capital expenditures.          |
| Businesses had been able to raise a considerable vol-         |
| ume of funds in bond markets of late, and profits and         |
| cash flow were still strong in the nonfinancial business      |
| sector. But some regional banks that had experienced          |
| substantial credit losses were expected to adopt a sig-       |
| nificantly more conservative lending posture, further         |
| limiting the availability of credit to small businesses.      |
| Although the available data indicated that spending on        |
| nonresidential construction projects had remained rela-       |
| tively robust in recent months, participants thought          |
| that this strength might have reflected projects initiated    |
| some time ago, when the economic outlook and credit           |
| conditions were more favorable, and they expected             |
| poor business sentiment and tighter credit to lead            |
| commercial construction to soften later this year and         |
| next year. Some anecdotal reports of recently delayed         |


## Page_7_Table_1


| or canceled new construction projects supported this       |
|------------------------------------------------------------|
| view.                                                      |
| Regarding economic activity in various business sec-       |
| tors, participants reported continued overall softness in  |
| manufacturing, especially in the housing-related and       |
| motor vehicle sectors. Flooding in the Midwest had         |
| disrupted transportation and damaged corn and soy-         |
| bean crops. However, production in the energy and          |
| steel sectors appeared to be strengthening, and industry   |
| contacts generally reported that demand for exported       |
| goods was buoyant. Labor markets in most regions           |
| continued to weaken gradually. Most participants an-       |
| ticipated persistent slack in labor markets, with the un-  |
| employment rate rising further through next year, be-      |
| fore declining slightly in 2010.                           |
| The current account deficit had narrowed significantly     |
| on balance in recent quarters, and still-solid foreign     |
| growth was expected to contribute to a further narrow-     |
| ing of the real U.S. trade deficit in coming quarters.     |
| However, a few participants commented that this effect     |
| might fade over time, as they expected demand in for-      |
| eign economies to slow.                                    |
| Participants were concerned about the inflationary con-    |
| sequences of recent increases in the prices of energy,     |
| food, and imports, and they expected headline inflation    |
| to rise in the very near term. However, core inflation     |
| had been stable of late, and participants anticipated that |
| a leveling-out of energy prices and slack in labor and     |
| product markets would contribute to a moderation of        |
| inflation pressures over time. Reports on the ability of   |
| firms to pass cost increases on to customers were          |
| mixed, but some participants commented that the            |
| global nature of inflationary pressures could make im-     |
| ports more expensive and give firms greater scope to       |
| raise prices. Some participants noted that wage growth     |
| had been quite moderate, reinforcing a view that           |
| longer-term inflation expectations and labor cost pres-    |
| sures had remained fairly well contained. However,         |
| others commented that wages might accelerate with a        |
| lag only after inflation expectations had moved higher,    |
| and that it would be very costly to subsequently bring     |
| those expectations back down. Participants’ views of       |
| the recent evidence on inflation expectations varied.      |
| Some noted that the increase was greatest for short-       |
| term survey measures of households’ inflation expecta-     |
| tions, which may be influenced disproportionately by       |
| consumers’ perceptions of changes in the prices of         |
| food and gasoline; those participants judged that under-   |
| lying inflation trends had not risen nearly as much and    |
| anticipated that such survey measures would reverse        |
| their recent increases as headline inflation moderated.    |


## Page_7_Table_2


| However, others saw the signs of a rise in inflation ex-    |
|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| pectations as more broad-based and were concerned           |
| that this development could signal an erosion of confi-     |
| dence in the Committee’s commitment to price stability      |
| and, absent effective action by the Committee, could        |
| impart greater momentum to the inflation process.           |
| Participants agreed that the possibilities of greater pass- |
| through of cost increases into prices, higher long-run      |
| inflation expectations feeding into labor costs and         |
| other prices, and further increases in energy prices all    |
| posed upside risks to inflation that had intensified since  |
| the time of the April FOMC meeting.                         |
| Some participants noted that certain measures of the        |
| real federal funds rate, especially those using actual or   |
| forecasted headline inflation, were now negative, and       |
| very low by historical standards. In the view of these      |
| participants, the current stance of monetary policy was     |
| providing considerable support to aggregate demand          |
| and, if the negative real federal funds rate was main-      |
| tained, it could well lead to higher trend inflation. In    |
| this view, a significant portion of the easing in mone-     |
| tary policy since last fall was aimed at providing insur-   |
| ance against the risk of an especially severe weakening     |
| in economic activity and, with downside risks having        |
| diminished somewhat, some firming in policy would be        |
| appropriate very soon, if not at this meeting. However,     |
| other participants observed that the high level of risk     |
| spreads and the restricted availability of credit sug-      |
| gested that overall financial conditions were not espe-     |
| cially accommodative; indeed, borrowing costs for           |
| many households and businesses were higher than they        |
| had been last summer.                                       |
| In the Committee’s discussion of monetary policy for        |
| the intermeeting period, members generally agreed that      |
| the risks to growth had diminished somewhat since the       |
| time of the last FOMC meeting while the upside risks        |
| to inflation had increased. Nonetheless, the risks to       |
| growth remained tilted to the downside. Conditions in       |
| some financial markets had improved, but many finan-        |
| cial institutions continued to experience significant       |
| credit losses and balance sheet pressures, and in these     |
| circumstances credit availability was likely to remain      |
| constrained for some time. At the same time, however,       |
| the near-term outlook for inflation had deteriorated,       |
| and the risks that underlying inflation pressures could     |
| prove to be greater than anticipated appeared to have       |
| risen. Members commented that the continued strong          |
| increases in energy and other commodity prices would        |
| prompt a difficult adjustment process involving both        |
| lower growth and higher rates of inflation in the near      |
| term. Members were also concerned about the height-         |
| ened potential in current circumstances for an upward       |


## Page_8_Table_1


| drift in long-run inflation expectations. With increased   |
|------------------------------------------------------------|
| upside risks to inflation and inflation expectations,      |
| members believed that the next change in the stance of     |
| policy could well be an increase in the funds rate; in-    |
| deed, one member thought that policy should be             |
| firmed at this meeting. However, in the view of most       |
| members, the outlook for both economic activity and        |
| price pressures remained very uncertain, and thus the      |
| timing and magnitude of future policy actions was quite    |
| unclear. Against this backdrop, most members judged        |
| that an unchanged federal funds rate at this meeting       |
| represented an appropriate balancing of the risks to the   |
| economic outlook and was consistent, for now, with a       |
| policy path that would support an eventual decline in      |
| both inflation and unemployment. Nonetheless, mem-         |
| bers recognized that circumstances could change            |
| quickly and noted that they might need to respond          |
| promptly to incoming information about the evolution       |
| of risks.                                                  |


## Page_8_Table_2


| The Committee expects inflation to moderate        |
|----------------------------------------------------|
| later this year and next year. However, in light   |
| of the continued increases in the prices of en-    |
| ergy and some other commodities and the ele-       |
| vated state of some indicators of inflation expec- |
| tations, uncertainty about the inflation outlook   |
| remains high.                                      |
| The substantial easing of monetary policy to       |
| date, combined with ongoing measures to foster     |
| market liquidity, should help to promote moder-    |
| ate growth over time. Although downside risks      |
| to growth remain, they appear to have dimin-       |
| ished somewhat, and the upside risks to inflation  |
| and inflation expectations have increased. The     |
| Committee will continue to monitor economic        |
| and financial developments and will act as         |
| needed to promote sustainable economic growth      |
| and price stability.”                              |


## Page_8_Table_3


| “The Federal Open Market Committee decided          |
|-----------------------------------------------------|
| today to keep its target for the federal funds rate |
| at 2 percent.                                       |
| Recent information indicates that overall eco-      |
| nomic activity continues to expand, partly re-      |
| flecting some firming in household spending.        |
| However, labor markets have softened further        |
| and financial markets remain under considerable     |
| stress. Tight credit conditions, the ongoing        |
| housing contraction, and the rise in energy         |
| prices are likely to weigh on economic growth       |
| over the next few quarters.                         |