# 20080130_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:36:11*
*Pages: 23, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Page 1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
January 29-30, 2008
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Mr. Parkinson,2 Deputy Director, Division of Re-
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the search and Statistics, Board of Governors
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues-
day, January 29, 2008 at 2:00 p.m. and continued on Mr. Clouse, Senior Associate Director, Division of
Wednesday, January 30, 2008 at 9:00 a.m. Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
PRESENT: Ms. Liang and Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher,
Mr. Bernanke, Chairman Associate Directors, Division of Research and
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Fisher
Mr. Kohn Ms. Barger2 and Mr. Greenlee,2 Associate Direc-
Mr. Kroszner tors, Division of Banking Supervision and
Mr. Mishkin Regulation, Board of Governors
Ms. Pianalto
Mr. Plosser Mr. Gibson,2 Deputy Associate Director, Division
Mr. Stern of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Warsh
Mr. Dale, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary
Messrs. Evans, Lacker, and Lockhart, and Ms. Affairs, Board of Governors
Yellen, Alternate Members of the Federal
Open Market Committee Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Messrs. Hoenig, Poole, and Rosengren, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Messrs. Durham and Perli, Assistant Directors, Di-
St. Louis, and Boston, respectively vision of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gover-
nors
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Board Members, Board of Governors
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Sheets, Economist
Mr. Stockton, Economist Mr. Bassett,3 Senior Economist, Division of Mone-
tary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Connors, English, and Kamin, Ms. Mester,
Messrs. Rosenblum, Slifman, Sniderman, Mr. Doyle,3 Senior Economist, Division of Inter-
Tracy, and Wilcox, Associate Economists national Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Ac- Ms. Kusko,3 Senior Economist, Division of Re-
count search and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Struckmeyer,1 Deputy Staff Director, Office of
Staff Director for Management, Board of 2Attended portion of the meeting relating to the analy-
Governors sis of policy issues raised by financial market develop-
ments.
3Attended portion of the meeting relating to the eco-
nomic outlook and monetary policy decision.
1Attended Wednesday’s session.

--- Page 2 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Mr. Luecke, Senior Financial Analyst, Division of Sandra Pianalto, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors of Cleveland, with Charles L. Evans, President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, as alternate.
Mr. Driscoll, Economist, Division of Monetary Af-
fairs, Board of Governors Richard W. Fisher, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Dallas, with Dennis P. Lockhart, President of
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi- the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, as alternate.
sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Gary H. Stern, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
Ms. Green, First Vice President, Federal Reserve of Minneapolis, with Janet L. Yellen, President of the
Bank of Richmond Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, as alternate.
Messrs. Fuhrer and Judd, Executive Vice Presi- By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Fed-
dents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and eral Open Market Committee were selected to serve
San Francisco, respectively until the selection of their successors at the first regu-
larly scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2009:
Messrs. Altig and Angulo,2 Mses. Hirtle2 and
Mosser, Messrs. Peters 2 and Rasche, Senior Ben S. Bernanke Chairman
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of At- Timothy F. Geithner Vice Chairman
lanta, New York, New York, New York, New Brian F. Madigan Secretary and Economist
York, and St. Louis, respectively Deborah J. Danker Deputy Secretary
David W. Skidmore Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hakkio, Senior Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank Michelle A. Smith Assistant Secretary
of Kansas City Scott G. Alvarez General Counsel
Thomas C. Baxter, Jr. Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Krane, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank Richard M. Ashton Assistant General
of Chicago Counsel
D. Nathan Sheets Economist
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Re- David J. Stockton Economist
serve Bank of Minneapolis
Thomas A. Connors
In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that ad- William B. English
vices of the election of the following members and al- Steven B. Kamin
ternate members of the Federal Open Market Commit- Loretta J. Mester
tee for a term beginning January 29, 2008 had been Arthur J. Rolnick
received and that these individuals had executed their Harvey Rosenblum
oaths of office. Lawrence Slifman
Mark S. Sniderman
The elected members and alternate members were as Joseph S. Tracy
follows: David W. Wilcox Associate Economists
Timothy F. Geithner, President of the Federal Reserve By unanimous vote, the Committee made a few
Bank of New York, with Christine M. Cumming, First amendments to its rules and to the Program for Secu-
Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New rity of FOMC Information. The amendments primarily
York, as alternate. addressed the Committee’s practice of approving the
minutes via notation vote, attendance at Committee
Charles I. Plosser, President of the Federal Reserve meetings, and access to Committee information by Sys-
Bank of Philadelphia, with Jeffrey M. Lacker, President tem employees.
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, as alternate.
By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York was selected to execute transactions for the Sys-
tem Open Market Account.

--- Page 3 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J a n u a r y 2 9 - 3 0 , 2 0 0 8 Page 3
By unanimous vote, William C. Dudley was selected to that, unless otherwise expressly authorized by the
serve at the pleasure of the Committee as Manager, Committee, shall be determined by competitive bid-
System Open Market Account, on the understanding ding, after applying reasonable limitations on the vol-
that his selection was subject to being satisfactory to ume of agreements with individual dealers.
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open
By unanimous vote, the Authorization for Domestic market operations, the Federal Open Market Commit-
Open Market Operations was reaffirmed in the form tee authorizes the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
shown below: to lend on an overnight basis U.S. Government securi-
ties held in the System Open Market Account to deal-
AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN ers at rates that shall be determined by competitive
MARKET OPERATIONS bidding. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall
(Reaffirmed January 29, 2008) set a minimum lending fee consistent with the objec-
tives of the program and apply reasonable limitations
1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes on the total amount of a specific issue that may be auc-
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to tioned and on the amount of securities that each dealer
the extent necessary to carry out the most recent do- may borrow. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York
mestic policy directive adopted at a meeting of the may reject bids which could facilitate a dealer's ability
Committee: to control a single issue as determined solely by the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
(a) To buy or sell U.S. Government securities, in-
cluding securities of the Federal Financing Bank, and 3. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open
securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guaran- market operations, while assisting in the provision of
teed as to principal and interest by, any agency of the short-term investments for foreign and international
United States in the open market, from or to securities accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of
dealers and foreign and international accounts main- New York and accounts maintained at the Federal Re-
tained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, on a serve Bank of New York as fiscal agent of the United
cash, regular, or deferred delivery basis, for the System States pursuant to Section 15 of the Federal Reserve
Open Market Account at market prices, and, for such Act, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes
Account, to exchange maturing U.S. Government and and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (a)
Federal agency securities with the Treasury or the indi- for System Open Market Account, to sell U.S. Gov-
vidual agencies or to allow them to mature without re- ernment securities to such accounts on the bases set
placement; forth in paragraph l(a) under agreements providing for
the resale by such accounts of those securities in 65
(b) To buy U.S. Government securities, obligations business days or less on terms comparable to those
that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to available on such transactions in the market; and (b) for
principal and interest by, any agency of the United New York Bank account, when appropriate, to under-
States, from dealers for the account of the System take with dealers, subject to the conditions imposed on
Open Market Account under agreements for repur- purchases and sales of securities in paragraph l(b), re-
chase of such securities or obligations in 65 business purchase agreements in U.S. Government and agency
days or less, at rates that, unless otherwise expressly securities, and to arrange corresponding sale and repur-
authorized by the Committee, shall be determined by chase agreements between its own account and such
competitive bidding, after applying reasonable limita- foreign, international, and fiscal agency accounts main-
tions on the volume of agreements with individual tained at the Bank. Transactions undertaken with such
dealers. accounts under the provisions of this paragraph may
provide for a service fee when appropriate.
(c) To sell U.S. Government securities and obliga-
tions that are direct obligations of, or fully guaranteed 4. In the execution of the Committee’s decision re-
as to principal and interest by, any agency of the United garding policy during any intermeeting period, the
States to dealers for System Open Market Account un- Committee authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve
der agreements for the resale by dealers of such securi- Bank of New York, upon the instruction of the Chair-
ties or obligations in 65 business days or less, at rates man of the Committee, to adjust somewhat in excep-

--- Page 4 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
tional circumstances the degree of pressure on reserve B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding
positions and hence the intended federal funds rate. forward contracts to receive or to deliver, the foreign
Any such adjustment shall be made in the context of currencies listed in paragraph A above.
the Committee’s discussion and decision at its most
recent meeting and the Committee’s long-run objec- C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit foreign
tives for price stability and sustainable economic banks to draw dollars under the reciprocal currency
growth, and shall be based on economic, financial, and arrangements listed in paragraph 2 below, provided that
monetary developments during the intermeeting pe- drawings by either party to any such arrangement shall
riod. Consistent with Committee practice, the Chair- be fully liquidated within 12 months after any amount
man, if feasible, will consult with the Committee before outstanding at that time was first drawn, unless the
making any adjustment. Committee, because of exceptional circumstances, spe-
cifically authorizes a delay.
By unanimous vote, the Committee approved the Au-
thorization for Foreign Currency Operations with an D. To maintain an overall open position in all for-
amendment to paragraph 1.D. regarding the maximum eign currencies not exceeding $25.0 billion. For this
open position in all foreign currencies. Accordingly, purpose, the overall open position in all foreign curren-
the Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations cies is defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of net
was adopted, as shown below: positions in individual currencies, excluding changes in
dollar value due to foreign exchange rate movements
and interest accruals. The net position in a single for-
AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY eign currency is defined as holdings of balances in that
OPERATIONS currency, plus outstanding contracts for future receipt,
(Amended January 29, 2008) minus outstanding contracts for future delivery of that
currency, i.e., as the sum of these elements with due
1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes regard to sign.
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for
System Open Market Account, to the extent necessary 2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the
to carry out the Committee's foreign currency directive Federal Reserve Bank of New York to maintain recip-
and express authorizations by the Committee pursuant rocal currency arrangements ("swap" arrangements) for
thereto, and in conformity with such procedural in- the System Open Market Account for periods up to a
structions as the Committee may issue from time to maximum of 12 months with the following foreign
time: banks, which are among those designated by the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under
A. To purchase and sell the following foreign cur- Section 214.5 of Regulation N, Relations with Foreign
rencies in the form of cable transfers through spot or Banks and Bankers, and with the approval of the
forward transactions on the open market at home and Committee to renew such arrangements on maturity:
abroad, including transactions with the U.S. Treasury,
with the U.S. Exchange Stabilization Fund established
by Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of 1934, with Foreign bank Amount of arrangement
foreign monetary authorities, with the Bank for Inter- (millions of dollars equivalent)
national Settlements, and with other international fi-
nancial institutions: Bank of Canada 2,000
Bank of Mexico 3,000
Canadian dollars
Danish kroner
Euro Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrange-
Pounds sterling ments, and the proposed terms of any new arrange-
Japanese yen ments that may be authorized, shall be referred for re-
Mexican pesos view and approval to the Committee.
Norwegian kroner
Swedish kronor 3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken
Swiss francs under paragraph 1.A. above shall, unless otherwise ex-

--- Page 5 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J a n u a r y 2 9 - 3 0 , 2 0 0 8 Page 5
pressly authorized by the Committee, be at prevailing alternate). Meetings of the Subcommittee shall be
market rates. For the purpose of providing an invest- called at the request of any member, or at the request
ment return on System holdings of foreign currencies of the Manager, System Open Market Account ("Man-
or for the purpose of adjusting interest rates paid or ager"), for the purposes of reviewing recent or con-
received in connection with swap drawings, transac- templated operations and of consulting with the Man-
tions with foreign central banks may be undertaken at ager on other matters relating to his responsibilities. At
non-market exchange rates. the request of any member of the Subcommittee, ques-
tions arising from such reviews and consultations shall
4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with for- be referred for determination to the Federal Open
eign central banks for the coordination of foreign cur- Market Committee.
rency transactions. In making operating arrangements
with foreign central banks on System holdings of for- 7. The Chairman is authorized:
eign currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
shall not commit itself to maintain any specific balance, A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter
unless authorized by the Federal Open Market Com- into any needed agreement or understanding with the
mittee. Any agreements or understandings concerning Secretary of the Treasury about the division of respon-
the administration of the accounts maintained by the sibility for foreign currency operations between the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York with the foreign System and the Treasury;
banks designated by the Board of Governors under
Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be referred for re- B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully ad-
view and approval to the Committee. vised concerning System foreign currency operations,
and to consult with the Secretary on policy matters re-
5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested to en- lating to foreign currency operations;
sure that adequate liquidity is maintained to meet an-
ticipated needs and so that each currency portfolio shall C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate re-
generally have an average duration of no more than 18 ports and information to the National Advisory Coun-
months (calculated as Macaulay duration). Such in- cil on International Monetary and Financial Policies.
vestments may include buying or selling outright obli-
gations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and inter- 8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to
est by, a foreign government or agency thereof; buying transmit pertinent information on System foreign cur-
such securities under agreements for repurchase of rency operations to appropriate officials of the Treas-
such securities; selling such securities under agreements ury Department.
for the resale of such securities; and holding various
time and other deposit accounts at foreign institutions. 9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the
In addition, when appropriate in connection with ar- foreign currency operations for System Account in ac-
rangements to provide investment facilities for foreign cordance with paragraph 3G(1) of the Board of Gov-
currency holdings, U.S. Government securities may be ernors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to For-
purchased from foreign central banks under agree- eign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated
ments for repurchase of such securities within 30 cal- January 1, 1944.
endar days.
6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preced-
ing paragraphs shall be reported promptly to the For- By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive
eign Currency Subcommittee and the Committee. The was reaffirmed in the form shown below:
Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists of the
Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Committee, the FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE
Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors, and such (Reaffirmed January 29, 2008)
other member of the Board as the Chairman may des-
ignate (or in the absence of members of the Board 1. System operations in foreign currencies shall gener-
serving on the Subcommittee, other Board members ally be directed at countering disorderly market condi-
designated by the Chairman as alternates, and in the tions, provided that market exchange rates for the U.S.
absence of the Vice Chairman of the Committee, his

--- Page 6 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
dollar reflect actions and behavior consistent with IMF In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization
Article IV, Section 1. and direction of the Federal Open Market Committee
as set forth in the Authorization for Foreign Currency
2. To achieve this end the System shall: Operations and the Foreign Currency Directive, the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, through the Man-
A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and sales ager, System Open Market Account ("Manager"), shall
of foreign exchange. be guided by the following procedural understandings
with respect to consultations and clearances with the
B. Maintain reciprocal currency ("swap") arrange- Committee, the Foreign Currency Subcommittee, and
ments with selected foreign central banks. the Chairman of the Committee. All operations under-
taken pursuant to such clearances shall be reported
C. Cooperate in other respects with central banks promptly to the Committee.
of other countries and with international monetary in-
stitutions. 1. The Manager shall clear with the Subcommittee (or
with the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that con-
3. Transactions may also be undertaken: sultation with the Subcommittee is not feasible in the
time available):
A. To adjust System balances in light of probable A. Any operation that would result in a change in
future needs for currencies. the System's overall open position in foreign
currencies exceeding $300 million on any day
B. To provide means for meeting System and or $600 million since the most recent regular
Treasury commitments in particular currencies, and to meeting of the Committee.
facilitate operations of the Exchange Stabilization
Fund. B. Any operation that would result in a change on
any day in the System's net position in a single
C. For such other purposes as may be expressly foreign currency exceeding $150 million, or
authorized by the Committee. $300 million when the operation is associated
with repayment of swap drawings.
4. System foreign currency operations shall be con-
ducted: C. Any operation that might generate a substantial
volume of trading in a particular currency by
A. In close and continuous consultation and coop- the System, even though the change in the Sys-
eration with the United States Treasury; tem's net position in that currency might be
less than the limits specified in 1.B.
B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with foreign
monetary authorities; and D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank
not exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or
C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of (ii) 15 percent of the size of the swap arrange-
the United States in the International Monetary Fund ment.
regarding exchange arrangements under IMF Article
IV. 2. The Manager shall clear with the Committee (or
with the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes
that consultation with the full Committee is not feasible
By unanimous vote, the Procedural Instructions with in the time available, or with the Chairman, if the
Respect to Foreign Currency Operations were reaf- Chairman believes that consultation with the Subcom-
firmed in the form shown below: mittee is not feasible in the time available):
PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS WITH RESPECT A. Any operation that would result in a change in
TO FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS the System's overall open position in foreign
(Reaffirmed January 29, 2008) currencies exceeding $1.5 billion since the
most recent regular meeting of the Committee.

--- Page 7 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J a n u a r y 2 9 - 3 0 , 2 0 0 8 Page 7
B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank December after having been at or near 4.7 percent
exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) since September.
15 percent of the size of the swap arrange-
ment. Industrial production declined in the fourth quarter, as
a drag from motor vehicles and construction-related
3. The Manager shall also consult with the Subcom- industries more than offset a positive contribution
mittee or the Chairman about proposed swap drawings from other industries. Output in high-tech industries
by the System and about any operations that are not of moderated in the fourth quarter, largely because of a
a routine character. deceleration in production of computers and semicon-
ductors. Utilities output climbed for a second consecu-
The Manager of the System Open Market Account tive quarter, and mining output was boosted by in-
reported on recent developments in foreign exchange creases in natural gas extraction and in crude oil.
markets. There were no open market operations in
foreign currencies for the System’s account in the pe- The rise in real consumer spending moderated in the
riod since the previous meeting. The Manager also fourth quarter, with outlays on non-auto consumer
reported on developments in domestic financial mar- goods increasing weakly. Spending on services rose
kets and on System open market operations in gov- solidly in November (the most recent month available),
ernment securities and federal agency obligations dur- led by energy services and commissions paid to stock-
ing the period since the previous meeting. By unani- brokers, but warmer-than-usual temperatures in De-
mous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions. cember likely damped expenditures for energy services
in that month. Sales of light motor vehicles were mod-
The information reviewed at the January meeting, erate during the fourth quarter. Real disposable per-
which included the advance data on the national in- sonal income was little changed in the fourth quarter,
come and product accounts for the fourth quarter, in- held down by higher consumer energy prices. Also, the
dicated that economic activity had decelerated sharply wealth-to-income ratio ticked down in the third quar-
in recent months. The contraction in homebuilding ter, and appeared likely to decline again in the fourth
intensified in the fourth quarter, the growth in con- quarter, as equity prices had fallen since the end of the
sumer spending slowed, and survey measures of both third quarter and available indicators pointed to con-
consumer and business sentiment were at low levels. tinued declines in house prices in the fourth quarter. In
In addition, industrial production contracted in the December, readings on consumer sentiment remained
fourth quarter. Conditions in the labor market deterio- at relatively low levels by historical standards.
rated noticeably, with private payroll employment post-
ing a small decline in December and the unemployment Both single-family housing starts and permit issuance
rate rising. Readings on both headline and core infla- fell in December. Meanwhile, multifamily housing
tion increased in recent months, although the twelve- starts plunged in December, but permit issuance
month change in prices of core personal consumption pointed to a rebound in multifamily starts in the near
expenditures in December was about the same as its term. New home sales dropped in November and De-
year-earlier value. cember after having held relatively steady since August,
keeping inventories of unsold homes at elevated levels.
On average, private nonfarm payroll employment in Sales of existing homes also moved down in December
November and December rose at only about half of but, on balance, had declined less in recent months
the average pace seen from July to October. Over than sales of new homes. Demand for housing
2007 as a whole, the deterioration in labor demand was through the end of 2007 likely continued to be re-
most pronounced in the construction and financial ac- strained by tight financing conditions for jumbo and
tivities industries, which had been hardest hit by the nonprime mortgages.
difficulties in the housing and mortgage markets.
Manufacturing employment declined yet again in De- Real spending on equipment and software rose at a
cember, while the decrease in employment in retail sluggish rate in the fourth quarter after having posted a
trade nearly reversed the sizable increase in that sector solid increase in the third quarter. Sales of medium and
recorded in November. Aggregate hours of production heavy trucks edged up after falling to a four-year low.
or nonsupervisory workers were unchanged in Decem- Spending on high-tech capital goods increased at a
ber. The unemployment rate rose to 5.0 percent in moderate pace over the second half of last year. Out-

--- Page 8 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
side of the transportation and high-tech sectors, spend- quarter was revised down, and business sentiment de-
ing on equipment appeared to have declined last quar- clined in December amidst concerns about high oil
ter after having posted sizable gains over the summer. prices. In the euro area, retail sales growth declined in
Orders and shipments rose somewhat in the fourth October and November, and consumer and business
quarter, but imports in the first two months of the surveys in November and December pointed to eco-
quarter were below their average in the third quarter. nomic weakness. In the United Kingdom, although
Nonresidential construction remained vigorous in the real GDP grew solidly in the fourth quarter, the esti-
fourth quarter. However, indicators of future spending mate of third-quarter real GDP growth was revised
in this sector pointed to a slowdown in coming down. In Canada, indicators suggested that growth in
months, with a decline in architectural billings, a rise in economic activity moderated in the fourth quarter.
retail-sector vacancy rates, and survey reports that con- Private employment shrank in December after having
tractors were experiencing more difficulty in obtaining posted very strong growth in November. Incoming
funding. More generally, surveys of business condi- data on emerging-market economies pointed, on bal-
tions and sentiment deteriorated and suggested that ance, to a slowing of growth in the fourth quarter.
capital spending would be reduced in the near term. Overall, growth in emerging Asia appeared to have
moderated somewhat in the fourth quarter, with trade
Real nonfarm inventory investment excluding motor balances declining in several countries as exports
vehicles appeared to have stepped up from its average slowed. Readings on economic activity in Latin Amer-
rate over the first three quarters of 2007. In Novem- ica were more mixed. Incoming data suggested that
ber, the ratio of manufacturing and trade book-value growth slowed in Mexico in the fourth quarter. In Bra-
inventories (excluding motor vehicles) to sales ticked zil, third-quarter growth was solid, but indicators for
down. the fourth quarter were mixed. Economic activity ap-
peared to be strong in Argentina in both the third and
The U.S. international trade deficit widened slightly in fourth quarters.
October and then more substantially in November, as
increases in imports in both months more than offset In the United States, headline consumer price inflation
increases in exports. The increases in imports almost stepped up noticeably in November and December
entirely reflected a jump in the value of imported oil. from the low rates posted in the summer. Part of the
Non-oil goods imports were boosted by a large in- increase reflected the rapid rise in energy prices, but
crease in imports of consumer goods and small in- prices of core personal consumption expenditures
creases in several other categories, which more than (PCE) also moved up faster in those months than they
offset a steep decline in imports of non-oil industrial had earlier in the year. The pickup in core PCE infla-
supplies. Imports of automotive products and capital tion over the second half of 2007 reflected an accelera-
goods recorded modest gains, with the increase in capi- tion in prices that had been unusually soft earlier in the
tal goods primarily reflecting a jump in imports of tele- year, such as prices for apparel, prescription drugs, and
communications equipment. Imports of services grew nonmarket services. For the year as a whole, core PCE
strongly. Exports in both months were boosted by prices increased at about the same rate as they had in
higher exports of services. Exports of industrial sup- 2006. Household survey measures of expectations for
plies also recorded a strong gain, aided by a large in- year-ahead inflation picked up in November and re-
crease in exports of fuels in November. Higher ex- mained at that level in December and January. House-
ports of semiconductors, aircraft, and machinery holds’ longer-term inflation expectations rose in De-
pushed up exports of capital goods, while exports of cember but ticked down in January. Average hourly
agricultural goods increased only slightly following a earnings increased faster in November and December
large jump in the third quarter. In contrast, exports of than they had in October, although over the twelve
consumer goods fell from their third-quarter level. months that ended in December, this wage measure
rose a bit more slowly than the elevated pace posted in
Economic growth in the advanced foreign economies 2006.
appeared to have slowed in the fourth quarter, with
recent data on household expenditures and retail sales At its December meeting, the FOMC lowered its target
weakening on balance and consumers and businesses for the federal funds rate 25 basis points, to 4¼ per-
considerably less upbeat about growth prospects. In cent. In addition, the Board of Governors approved a
Japan, the estimate of real GDP growth in the third decrease of 25 basis points in the discount rate, to 4¾

--- Page 9 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J a n u a r y 2 9 - 3 0 , 2 0 0 8 Page 9
percent, leaving the gap between the federal funds rate since the December FOMC meeting. The yield curve
target and the discount rate at 50 basis points. The steepened somewhat further, with the two-year yield
Committee’s statement noted that incoming informa- dropping more than the ten-year yield. Near-term in-
tion suggested that economic growth was slowing, re- flation compensation increased in early January amid
flecting the intensification of the housing correction rising oil prices, but it retreated in later weeks, along
and some softening in business and consumer spend- with oil prices, and declined, on net, over the period.
ing. Moreover, strains in financial markets had in-
creased in recent weeks. The Committee indicated that Conditions in short-term funding markets improved
its action, combined with the policy actions taken ear- notably over the intermeeting period, but strains re-
lier, should help promote moderate growth over time. mained. Spreads of rates on securities in interbank
Readings on core inflation had improved modestly dur- funding markets over risk-free rates narrowed some-
ing the year, but elevated energy and commodity prices, what following the announcement of the TAF on De-
among other factors, might put upward pressure on cember 12 and eased considerably after year-end, al-
inflation. In this context, the Committee judged that though they remained at somewhat elevated levels.
some inflation risk remained and said that it would Spreads of rates on asset-backed commercial paper
continue to monitor inflation developments carefully. over risk-free rates also fell, on net, and the level of
Recent developments, including the deterioration in such paper outstanding increased in the first two weeks
financial market conditions, had increased the uncer- of January for the first time since August. In longer-
tainty surrounding the outlook for economic growth term corporate markets, yields on investment-grade
and inflation. The Committee stated that it would con- corporate bonds fell less than those on comparable-
tinue to assess the effects of financial and other devel- maturity Treasury securities, while yields on specula-
opments on economic prospects and would act as tive-grade bonds rose considerably. As a result, corpo-
needed to foster price stability and sustainable eco- rate bond spreads climbed to their highest levels since
nomic growth. early 2003, apparently reflecting increased concern
among investors about the outlook for corporate credit
Over the intermeeting period, the expected path of quality over the next few years. Nonetheless, gross
monetary policy over the next year as measured by bond issuance in December remained strong. Com-
money market futures rates tilted down sharply, pri- mercial bank credit expanded briskly in December,
marily in response to softer-than-expected economic supported by robust growth in business loans and in
data releases. The Committee’s action at its December nonmortgage loans to households, and in the face of
meeting was largely anticipated by market participants, survey reports of tighter lending conditions. Over the
although some investors were surprised by the absence intermeeting period, spreads on conforming mortgages
of any indication of accompanying measures to address over comparable-maturity Treasury securities remained
strains in term funding markets. Some of that surprise about flat, as did spreads on jumbo mortgages, al-
was reversed the next day, following the announcement though credit availability for jumbo-mortgage borrow-
of a Term Auction Facility (TAF) and associated swap ers continued to be tight. Broad stock price indexes
lines with the European Central Bank and the Swiss fell over the intermeeting period on perceptions of a
National Bank. The subsequent release of the minutes deteriorating economic outlook and additional write-
of the meeting elicited little market reaction. However, downs by financial institutions. Similar stresses were
investors did mark down the expected path of policy in again evident in the financial markets of major foreign
response to speeches by Federal Reserve officials; the economies. The trade-weighted foreign exchange value
speeches were interpreted as suggesting that signs of of the dollar against major currencies declined slightly,
broader economic weakness and additional financial on balance, over the intermeeting period.
strains would likely require an easier stance of policy.
The Committee’s decision to reduce the target federal Debt in the domestic nonfinancial sector was estimated
funds rate 75 basis points on January 22 surprised mar- to have increased somewhat more slowly in the fourth
ket participants and led investors to mark down further quarter than in the third. The rate of increase of non-
the path of policy over the next few months. Consis- financial business debt decelerated in the fourth quarter
tent with the shift in the economic outlook, the revi- from its rapid third-quarter pace despite robust bond
sion in policy expectations, and the reduction in the issuance as the rise in commercial and industrial lend-
target federal funds rate, yields on nominal Treasury ing moderated. Household mortgage debt expanded at
coupon securities declined substantially over the period a slow rate in the fourth quarter, reflecting continued

--- Page 10 ---

Page 10 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
weakness in home prices, declining home sales, and and Reserve Bank presidents) provided annual projec-
tighter credit conditions for some borrowers. Non- tions for economic growth, unemployment, and infla-
mortgage consumer credit appeared to expand at a tion for the period 2008 through 2010. The projections
moderate pace. In December, the increase in M2 was are described in the Summary of Economic Projec-
up slightly from its November pace, boosted primarily tions, which is attached as an addendum to these min-
by inflows into the relative safety and liquidity of utes.
money market mutual funds. The rise in small time
deposits moderated but remained elevated, as several In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
thrift institutions offered attractive deposit rates to se- look, and in the projections that they had submitted for
cure funding. In contrast, liquid deposits continued to this meeting, participants noted that information re-
increase weakly and currency contracted noticeably, the ceived since the December meeting had been decidedly
latter apparently reflecting an ongoing trend in overseas downbeat on balance. In particular, the drop in hous-
demand away from U.S. dollar bank notes and towards ing activity had intensified, factory output had weak-
the euro and other currencies. ened, news on business investment had been soft, and
conditions in labor markets appeared to have deterio-
In the forecast prepared for this meeting, the staff re- rated. In addition, consumer confidence had remained
vised up slightly its estimated increase in aggregate eco- low and business confidence appeared to have wors-
nomic activity in the fourth quarter of 2007 but revised ened. Although the functioning of money markets had
down its projected increase for the first half of 2008. improved notably, strains remained evident in a num-
Although data on consumer spending and nonresiden- ber of other financial markets, and credit conditions
tial construction activity for the fourth quarter had had become generally more restrictive. Against this
come in above the staff’s expectations, most of the in- backdrop, participants expected economic growth to
formation received over the intermeeting period was remain weak in the first half of this year before picking
weaker than had been previously expected. The drop up in the second half, aided in part by a more accom-
in housing activity continued to intensify, conditions in modative stance of monetary policy and by likely fiscal
labor markets appeared to have deteriorated noticeably stimulus. Further ahead, participants judged that eco-
near year-end, and factory output had weakened. Con- nomic growth would continue to pick up gradually in
sumer confidence remained low, and indicators of 2009 and 2010. Nonetheless, with housing activity and
business sentiment had worsened. Equity prices had house prices still declining and with financial conditions
also fallen sharply so far in 2008, and, while the func- for businesses and households tightening further, sig-
tioning of money markets had improved, conditions in nificant uncertainties surrounded this outlook and the
some other financial markets had become more restric- risks to economic growth in the near term appeared to
tive. The staff projection showed the weakness in be weighted to the downside. Indeed, several partici-
spending dissipating over the second half of 2008 and pants noted that the risks of a downturn in the econ-
2009, in response to the cumulative easing of monetary omy were significant. Inflation data had been disap-
policy since August, the abatement of housing weak- pointing in recent months, and a few participants cited
ness, a lessening drag from high oil prices, and the anecdotal reports that some firms were able to pass on
prospect of fiscal stimulus. Still, projected resource costs to consumers. However, with inflation expecta-
utilization was lower over the next two years than in tions anticipated to remain reasonably well anchored,
the previous forecast. The projection for core PCE energy and other commodity prices expected to flatten
price inflation in 2008 was raised slightly in response to out, and pressures on resources likely to ease, partici-
elevated readings in recent months. The forecast for pants generally expected inflation to moderate some-
headline PCE price inflation also incorporated a some- what in coming quarters.
what higher rate of increase for energy prices for the
first half of 2008; as a result, headline PCE price infla- Meeting participants observed that conditions in short-
tion was now expected to exceed core PCE price infla- term funding markets had improved considerably since
tion slightly for that year. The forecasts for both head- the December meeting, reflecting the easing of pres-
line and core PCE price inflation for 2009 were un- sures related to funding around the turn of the year as
changed, with both receding from their 2008 levels. well as the implementation of the TAF. However,
broader financial conditions had tightened significantly,
In conjunction with the FOMC meeting in January, all on balance, in the weeks leading up to the meeting, as
meeting participants (Federal Reserve Board members evidence of further deterioration in housing markets

--- Page 11 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J a n u a r y 2 9 - 3 0 , 2 0 0 8 Page 11
and investors’ more pessimistic view of the economic Recent data as well as anecdotal information indicated
outlook adversely affected a range of financial markets. that consumer spending had decelerated considerably,
Many participants were concerned that the drop in eq- perhaps partly reflecting a spillover from the weakness
uity prices, coupled with the ongoing decline in house in the housing sector. Participants remarked that de-
prices, implied reductions in household wealth that clining house prices and sales appeared to be depress-
would likely damp consumer spending. Moreover, ele- ing consumer sentiment and that the contraction in
vated volatility in financial markets likely reflected in- wealth associated with decreases in home and equity
creased uncertainty about the economic outlook, and prices probably was restraining spending. In addition,
that greater uncertainty could lead firms and house- consumption expenditures were being damped by
holds to limit spending. The availability of credit to slower growth in real disposable income induced by
consumers and businesses appeared to be tightening, high energy prices and possibly by a softening of the
likely adding to restraint on economic growth. Partici- labor market. The December employment report
pants discussed the risks to financial markets and insti- showed that job growth had slowed appreciably, and
tutions posed by possible further deterioration in the other indicators also pointed to emerging weakness in
condition of financial guarantors, and many perceived a the labor market in the intermeeting period. And
possibility that additional downgrades in these firms’ spending in the future could be affected by an ongoing
credit ratings could put increased strains on financial tightening in the availability of consumer credit amid
markets. To be sure, some positive financial develop- signs that lenders were becoming increasingly cautious
ments were evident. Banks appeared to be making in view of some deterioration of credit performance on
some progress in strengthening their balance sheets, consumer loans and widening expectations of slower
with several financial institutions able to raise signifi- income growth. Some participants, however, cited evi-
cant amounts of capital to offset the large losses they dence that workers in some sectors were still in short
had suffered in recent quarters. Nevertheless, partici- supply and saw signs that the labor market remained
pants generally viewed financial markets as still vulner- resilient.
able to additional economic and credit weakness. Some
noted the especially worrisome possibility of an adverse The outlook for business investment had turned
feedback loop, that is, a situation in which a tightening weaker as well since the time of the December meeting.
of credit conditions could depress investment and con- Several participants reported that firms in their districts
sumer spending, which, in turn, could feed back to a were reducing capital expenditures in anticipation of a
further tightening of credit conditions. slowing in sales. Manufacturing activity appeared to
have slowed or contracted in many districts. Although
In their discussion of individual sectors of the econ- a few participants reported more upbeat attitudes
omy, meeting participants emphasized that activity in among firms in the technology and energy sectors,
housing markets had continued to deteriorate sharply. business sentiment overall appeared to be declining.
With single-family permits and starts still falling, sales Moreover, a number of indicators pointed to a tighten-
of new homes dropping precipitously, sales of existing ing in credit availability to businesses. For example, the
homes flat, and inventories of unsold homes remaining Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending
elevated even in the face of falling house prices, several Practices indicated that banks had tightened lending
participants noted the absence of signs of stabilization standards and pricing terms on business loans. Lend-
in the sector. Of further concern were the reduced ing standards had been raised especially sharply on
availability of nonconforming loans and the apparent commercial real estate loans. While real outlays for
tightening by banks of credit standards on mortgages, nonresidential construction apparently continued to
both of which had the potential for intensifying the rise through the fourth quarter, anecdotal evidence
housing contraction. The recent declines in interest pointed to a weakening of commercial real estate
rates had spurred a surge in applications for mortgage spending in several districts, with some projects being
refinancing and would limit the upward resets on the canceled or scaled back.
rates on outstanding adjustable-rate mortgages, both of
which would tend to improve some households’ fi- Most participants anticipated that a fiscal stimulus
nances. Nonetheless, participants viewed the housing package, including tax rebates for households and bo-
situation and its potential further effect on employ- nus depreciation allowances for businesses, would be
ment, income, and wealth as one of the major sources enacted before long and would support economic
of downside risk to the economic outlook. growth in the second half of the year. Some pointed

--- Page 12 ---

Page 12 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
out, however, that the fiscal stimulus package might to address the considerable worsening of the economic
not help in the near term, when the risks of a downturn outlook since December as well as increased downside
in economic activity appeared largest. In addition, the risks. As had been the case in some previous cyclical
effects of the proposed package would likely be tempo- episodes, a relatively low real federal funds rate now
rary, with the stimulus reversing in 2009. appeared appropriate for a time to counter the factors
that were restraining economic growth, including the
With regard to the external sector, some participants slide in housing activity and prices, the tightening of
noted that growth abroad had recently been strong and credit availability, and the drop in equity prices. Mem-
that increasing U.S. exports had been a significant bers judged that a 50 basis point reduction in the fed-
source of strength for the U.S. economy of late. How- eral funds rate, together with the Committee’s previous
ever, available data suggested that economic activity policy actions, would bring the real short-term rate to a
outside the United States appeared to be decelerating level that was likely to help the economy expand at a
somewhat. Although slowing foreign growth would moderate pace over time. Still, with no signs of stabili-
reduce a source of support for the U.S. economy at the zation in the housing sector and with financial condi-
same time that domestic spending was slackening, it tions not yet stabilized, the Committee agreed that
could also damp commodity prices and help reduce downside risks to growth would remain even after this
global price pressures. action. Members were also mindful of the need for
policy to promote price stability, and some noted that,
Participants agreed that the inflation data that were when prospects for growth had improved, a reversal of
received since the December meeting had been disap- a portion of the recent easing actions, possibly even a
pointing. But many believed that the slow growth in rapid reversal, might be appropriate. However, most
economic activity anticipated for the first half of this members agreed that a 50 basis point easing at this
year and the associated slack in resource utilization meeting would likely not contribute to an increase in
would contribute to an easing of price pressures. inflation pressures given the actual and expected weak-
Moreover, a leveling-off of energy and commodity ness in economic growth and the consequent reduction
prices such as that embedded in futures markets would in pressures on resources. Rather, members agreed
also help moderate inflation pressures. However, some that inflation was likely to moderate in coming quarters,
participants cautioned that commodity prices had re- but they also concurred that it would be necessary to
mained stubbornly high for quite some time and that continue to monitor inflation developments carefully.
inferences drawn in the past from futures markets
about likely trends in such prices had often proven in- The Committee agreed that the statement to be re-
accurate. Participants also related anecdotal evidence leased after the meeting should indicate that financial
of firms facing increasing input cost pressures and in markets remained under considerable stress, that credit
some cases being able to pass on those costs to con- had tightened further for some businesses and house-
sumers. Moreover, headline inflation had been gener- holds, and that recent information pointed to a deepen-
ally above 2 percent over the past four years, and par- ing of the housing contraction as well as to some sof-
ticipants noted that such persistently elevated readings tening in labor markets. The Committee again viewed
could ultimately affect inflation expectations. Some it as appropriate to indicate that it expected inflation to
survey measures of inflation expectations had edged up moderate in coming quarters but also to emphasize that
in recent months, and longer-term financial market it would be necessary to monitor inflation develop-
gauges of inflation compensation had climbed. The ments carefully. The action taken at the meeting, com-
latter probably reflected at least in part increased uncer- bined with the cumulative policy easing already in
tainty—inflation risk—rather than greater inflation ex- place, should help to promote moderate growth over
pectations; increases in nominal wages did not appear time and to mitigate the risks to economic activity.
to be incorporating higher inflation expectations. On However, members concurred that downside risks to
balance, expectations seemed to remain fairly well an- growth remained, and that the Committee would con-
chored, but participants agreed that continued stability tinue to assess the effects of financial and other devel-
of inflation expectations was essential. opments on economic prospects and would act in a
timely manner as needed to address those risks.
In the discussion of monetary policy for the intermeet-
ing period, most members believed that a further sig- At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
nificant easing in policy was warranted at this meeting voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank

--- Page 13 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J a n u a r y 2 9 - 3 0 , 2 0 0 8 Page 13
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe- 3 percent over the last year. Demand-pull inflation
cute transactions in the System Account in accordance pressures from emerging-market economies abroad
with the following domestic policy directive: appeared to be continuing, and anecdotal reports from
business contacts suggested greater willingness domes-
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks tically to pass rising costs through to prices. Moreover,
monetary and financial conditions that will fos- Mr. Fisher was concerned that inflation expectations
ter price stability and promote sustainable could become unanchored if the perception of negative
growth in output. To further its long-run objec- real rates of interest were to become pervasive. At the
tives, the Committee in the immediate future same time, the economy appeared to be still growing,
seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent albeit at a substantially weakened pace. Given the pol-
with reducing the federal funds rate to an aver- icy tradeoffs confronting the FOMC at this time, Mr.
age of around 3 percent.” Fisher saw the upside risks to inflation as being greater
than the downside risks to longer-term economic
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be- growth, especially in light of the recent, aggressive eas-
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: ing of monetary policy and the lag before it would have
its full effect on the economy.
“The Federal Open Market Committee decided
today to lower its target for the federal funds The Committee then turned to a discussion of selected
rate 50 basis points to 3 percent. longer-term regulatory and structural issues raised by
recent financial market developments. A staff presen-
Financial markets remain under considerable
tation began by noting that the difficulties in financial
stress, and credit has tightened further for some
markets started with unexpectedly heavy losses on sub-
businesses and households. Moreover, recent
prime mortgages and related structured securities,
information indicates a deepening of the housing
which led investors to question the valuations of com-
contraction as well as some softening in labor
plex structured instruments more generally and to pull
markets.
back from such investments. The resulting effects in
The Committee expects inflation to moderate in markets put pressure on some large banking organiza-
coming quarters, but it will be necessary to con- tions, particularly through losses on subprime-
tinue to monitor inflation developments care- mortgage-related securities and other assets, and
fully. through the unplanned expansion of balance sheets
triggered by the disruption of various markets in which
Today’s policy action, combined with those
assets were securitized. The remainder of the presenta-
taken earlier, should help to promote moderate
tion, and the discussion by meeting participants, fo-
growth over time and to mitigate the risks to
cused on two issues: first, the important role of credit
economic activity. However, downside risks to
ratings in the securitization process, including the
growth remain. The Committee will continue to
methods used to set ratings and the way investors use
assess the effects of financial and other devel-
ratings in making their investment decisions; and sec-
opments on economic prospects and will act in a
ond, how weaknesses in risk management practices at
timely manner as needed to address those risks.”
some large global financial services organizations ap-
Votes for this action: Messrs. Bernanke, Geithner, pear to have led to outsized losses at those institutions,
Kohn, Kroszner, and Mishkin, Ms. Pianalto, Messrs. and the reasons that such weaknesses may have
Plosser, Stern, and Warsh. emerged at some firms and not at others.
Votes against this action: Mr. Fisher. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
would be held on Tuesday, March 18, 2008.
Mr. Fisher dissented because he preferred to leave the
federal funds rate unchanged. The rate had been low- The meeting adjourned at 1:15 p.m.
ered by 75 basis points just one week earlier in a deci-
sion he supported, which brought the funds rate down Notation Vote
175 basis points since September. Given these actions, By notation vote completed on December 31, 2007, the
he felt that monetary policy was already quite stimula- Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
tive, while headline inflation was too high at more than FOMC meeting held on December 11, 2007.

--- Page 14 ---

Page 14 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Conference Calls mediate reduction in the federal funds rate was called
On January 9, 2008, the Committee reviewed recent for to begin aligning the real policy rate with a weaken-
economic data and financial market developments. ing economic situation. Such an action, by demonstrat-
The available information suggested that the downside ing the Committee’s commitment to act decisively to
risks to growth had increased significantly since the support economic activity, might reduce concerns
time of the December FOMC meeting. Participants about economic prospects that seemed to be contribut-
discussed the possibility that the slowing in economic ing to the deteriorating conditions in financial markets,
growth and associated softening in labor markets might which could feed back on the economy. However,
exacerbate the tightening in credit conditions and the some concern was expressed that an immediate policy
correction in housing market activity and prices, which action could be misinterpreted as directed at recent
could in turn weigh further on economic activity. Par- declines in stock prices, rather than the broader eco-
ticipants emphasized the risks that such adverse dy- nomic outlook, and one member believed it preferable
namics could pose to economic and financial stability. to delay policy action until the scheduled FOMC meet-
ing on January 29-30. Some members also noted that
Participants noted that core price inflation had edged were policy to become very stimulative it would be im-
up in recent months, boosted in part by the pass- portant for the Committee to be decisive in reversing
through of higher energy costs to the prices of core the course of interest rates once the economy had
consumer goods and services. Inflation was expected strengthened and downside risks had abated.
to edge lower this year as energy prices leveled off and
pressures on resources eased. However, this slowing in At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
inflation was dependent on inflation expectations re- voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
maining well anchored, and participants noted that of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
considerable uncertainty surrounded the inflation out- cute transactions in the System Account in accordance
look. with the following domestic policy directive:
Most participants were of the view that substantial ad- "The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
ditional policy easing in the near term might well be monetary and financial conditions that will fos-
necessary to promote moderate economic growth over ter price stability and promote sustainable
time and to reduce the downside risks to growth, and growth in output. To further its long-run objec-
participants discussed the possible timing of such pol- tives, the Committee in the immediate future
icy actions. seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
with reducing the federal funds rate to an aver-
On January 21, 2008, the Committee again met by con- age of around 3½ percent."
ference call. Incoming information since the confer-
ence call on January 9 had reinforced the view that the The vote encompassed approval of the text below for
outlook for economic activity was weakening. Among inclusion in the statement to be released at 8:30 a.m. on
other developments, strains in some financial markets Tuesday, January 22:
had intensified, as it appeared that investors were be-
coming increasingly concerned about the economic “The Federal Open Market Committee has de-
outlook and the downside risks to activity. Participants cided to lower its target for the federal funds
discussed the possibility that these developments could rate 75 basis points to 3½ percent.
lead to an excessive pull-back in credit availability and
The Committee took this action in view of a
in investment. Although inflation was expected to
weakening of the economic outlook and increas-
moderate from recent elevated levels, participants
ing downside risks to growth. While strains in
stressed that this outlook relied upon inflation expecta-
short-term funding markets have eased some-
tions remaining well anchored and that the inflation
what, broader financial market conditions have
situation should continue to be monitored carefully.
continued to deteriorate and credit has tightened
further for some businesses and households.
All members judged that a substantial easing in policy
Moreover, incoming information indicates a
in the near term was appropriate to foster moderate
deepening of the housing contraction as well as
economic growth and reduce the downside risks to
some softening in labor markets.
economic activity. Most members judged that an im-

--- Page 15 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J a n u a r y 2 9 - 3 0 , 2 0 0 8 Page 15
The Committee expects inflation to moderate in Votes against this action: Mr. Poole
coming quarters, but it will be necessary to con-
Absent and not voting: Mr. Mishkin
tinue to monitor inflation developments care-
fully.
Mr. Poole dissented because he did not believe that
Appreciable downside risks to growth remain. current conditions justified policy action before the
The Committee will continue to assess the ef- regularly scheduled meeting the following week.
fects of financial and other developments on
economic prospects and will act in a timely
manner as needed to address those risks.”
_____________________________
Votes for this action: Messrs. Bernanke, Geithner,
Brian F. Madigan
Evans, Hoenig, Kohn, Kroszner, Rosengren, and
Secretary
Warsh.

--- Page 16 ---

Page 1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the January 2008 FOMC meeting, and ongoing turmoil in financial markets, and higher oil
the members of the Board of Governors and the presi- prices. However, some participants noted that a fiscal
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom par- stimulus package would likely provide a temporary
ticipate in the deliberations of the FOMC, provided boost to domestic demand in the second half of this
projections for economic growth, unemployment, and year. Beyond 2008, a number of factors were projected
inflation in 2008, 2009, and 2010. Projections were to buoy economic growth, including a gradual turn-
based on information available through the conclusion around in housing markets, lower interest rates associ-
of the January meeting, on each participant’s assump- ated with the substantial easing of monetary policy to
tions regarding a range of factors likely to affect eco- date and appropriate adjustments to policy going for-
nomic outcomes, and on his or her assessment of ap- ward, and an anticipated reduction in financial market
propriate monetary policy. “Appropriate monetary strains. Real GDP was expected to accelerate some-
policy” is defined as the future policy that, based on what in 2009 and by 2010 to expand at or a little above
current information, is deemed most likely to foster participants’ estimates of the rate of trend growth.
outcomes for economic activity and inflation that best
With output growth running below trend over the next
satisfy the participant’s interpretation of the Federal
year or so, most participants expected that the unem-
Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum employment and
ployment rate would edge higher. The central tendency
price stability.
of participants’ projections for the average rate of un-
The projections, which are summarized in table 1 and employment in the fourth quarter of 2008 was 5.2 to
chart 1, suggest that FOMC participants expected that 5.3 percent, above the 4.8 to 4.9 percent unemploy-
output would grow at a pace appreciably below its ment rate forecasted in October and broadly suggestive
trend rate in 2008, owing primarily to a deepening of of some slack in labor markets. The unemployment
the housing contraction and a tightening in the avail- rate was generally expected to change relatively little in
ability of household and business credit, and that the 2009 and then to edge lower in 2010 as output growth
unemployment rate would increase somewhat. Given picks up, although in both years the unemployment
the substantial reductions in the target federal funds rate was projected to be a little higher than had been
rate through the January FOMC meeting as well as the anticipated in October.
assumption of appropriate policy going forward, output
The higher-than-expected rates of overall and core in-
growth further ahead was projected to pick up to a
flation since October, which were driven in part by the
pace around or a bit above its long-run trend by 2010.
steep run-up in oil prices, had caused participants to
Inflation was expected to decline in 2008 and 2009
revise up somewhat their projections for inflation in
from its recent elevated levels as energy prices leveled
the near term. The central tendency of participants’
out and economic slack contained cost and price in-
projections for core PCE inflation in 2008 was 2.0 to
creases. Most participants judged that considerable
2.2 percent, up from the 1.7 to 1.9 percent central ten-
uncertainty surrounded their projections for output
dency in October. However, core inflation was ex-
growth and viewed the risks to their forecasts as
pected to moderate over the next two years, reflecting
weighted to the downside. A majority of participants
muted pressures on resources and fairly well-anchored
viewed the risks to the inflation outlook as broadly bal-
inflation expectations. Overall PCE inflation was pro-
anced, but a number of participants saw the risks to
jected to decline from its current elevated rate over the
inflation as skewed to the upside.
coming year, largely reflecting the assumption that en-
The Outlook ergy and food prices would flatten out. Thereafter,
The central tendency of participants’ projections for overall PCE inflation was projected to move largely in
real GDP growth in 2008, at 1.3 to 2.0 percent, was step with core PCE inflation.
considerably lower than the central tendency of the
Participants’ projections for 2010 were importantly
projections provided in conjunction with the October
influenced by their judgments about the measured rates
FOMC meeting, which was 1.8 to 2.5 percent. These
of inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual
downward revisions to the 2008 outlook stemmed
mandate to promote maximum employment and price
from a number of factors, including a further intensifi-
stability and about the time frame over which policy
cation of the housing market correction, tighter credit
should aim to attain those rates given current economic
conditions amid increased concerns about credit quality

--- Page 17 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
conditions. Many participants judged that, given the pants to remain slightly above its longer-run sustainable
recent adverse shocks to both aggregate demand and level even in 2010, and inflation was judged likely still
inflation, policy would be able to foster only a gradual to be a bit above levels that some participants judged
return of key macroeconomic variables to their longer- would be consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual
run sustainable or optimal levels. Consequently, the mandate.
rate of unemployment was projected by some partici-
Table 1: Economic Projections of Federal Reserve Governors
and Reserve Bank Presidents
(Percent)
2008 2009 2010
Central Tendency1
Growth of real GDP 1.3 to 2.0 2.1 to 2.7 2.5 to 3.0
October projections 1.8 to 2.5 2.3 to 2.7 2.5 to 2.6
Unemployment rate 5.2 to 5.3 5.0 to 5.3 4.9 to 5.1
October projections 4.8 to 4.9 4.8 to 4.9 4.7 to 4.9
PCE inflation 2.1 to 2.4 1.7 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0
October projections 1.8 to 2.1 1.7 to 2.0 1.6 to 1.9
Core PCE inflation 2.0 to 2.2 1.7 to 2.0 1.7 to 1.9
October projections 1.7 to 1.9 1.7 to 1.9 1.6 to 1.9
Range2
Growth of real GDP 1.0 to 2.2 1.8 to 3.2 2.2 to 3.2
October projections 1.6 to 2.6 2.0 to 2.8 2.2 to 2.7
Unemployment rate 5.0 to 5.5 4.9 to 5.7 4.7 to 5.4
October projections 4.6 to 5.0 4.6 to 5.0 4.6 to 5.0
PCE inflation 2.0 to 2.8 1.7 to 2.3 1.5 to 2.0
October projections 1.7 to 2.3 1.5 to 2.2 1.5 to 2.0
Core PCE inflation 1.9 to 2.3 1.7 to 2.2 1.4 to 2.0
October projections 1.7 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0
Note: Projections of the growth of real GDP, of PCE inflation, and of core PCE in-
flation are percent changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth
quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage
rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures
and the price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy.
Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate
in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant's projections are based on
his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for
each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants' projections, from
lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.

--- Page 18 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t i o n s f o r t h e M e e t i n g o f J a n u a r y 2 9 - 3 0 , 2 0 0 8 Page 3
Chart 1: Central Tendencies and Ranges of Economic Projections*
Real GDP Growth
Percent
Central Tendency of Projections 6
Range of Projections
• 4
• • • •
2
0
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Unemployment Rate
Percent
8
7
• 6
•
• • 5
•
4
3
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
PCE Inflation
Percent
5
4
• • •
3
• • 2
1
0
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Core PCE Inflation
Percent
5
4
3
• • • •
2
•
1
0
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
* See notes to Table 1 for variable definitions.

--- Page 19 ---

P age 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Risks to the Outlook ment, and inflation over the past twenty years.1) In
Most participants viewed the risks to their GDP projec- contrast, the uncertainty attached to participants’ infla-
tions as weighted to the downside and the associated tion projections was generally viewed as being broadly
risks to their projections of unemployment as tilted to in line with past experience, although several partici-
the upside. The possibility that house prices could de- pants judged that the degree of uncertainty about infla-
cline more steeply than anticipated, further reducing tion was higher than normal.
households’ wealth and access to credit, was perceived
as a significant risk to the central outlook for economic
growth and employment. In addition, despite some Table 2: Average Historical Projection Error
recovery in money markets after the turn of the year, Ranges
financial market conditions continued to be strained— (Percentage Points)
stock prices had declined sharply since the December 2008 2009 2010
meeting, concerns about further potential losses at ma-
jor financial institutions had mounted amid worries Real GDP1 ±1.2 ±1.4 ±1.4
about the condition of financial guarantors, and credit Unemployment
±0.5 ±0.8 ±1.0
conditions had tightened in general for both house- rate2
holds and firms. The potential for adverse interactions, Total consumer
±1.0 ±1.0 ±0.9
in which weaker economic activity could lead to a prices3
worsening of financial conditions and a reduced avail-
Note: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or mi-
ability of credit, which in turn could further damp eco-
nus the root mean squared error of projections that were
nomic growth, was viewed as an especially worrisome released in the winter from 1986 through 2006 for the cur-
possibility. rent and following two years by various private and govern-
ment forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncer-
Regarding risks to the inflation outlook, several partici- tainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 per-
pants pointed to the possibility that real activity could cent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unem-
rebound less vigorously than projected, leading to more ployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by
the average size of projection errors made in the past. Fur-
downward pressure on costs and prices than antici-
ther information is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip
pated. However, participants also saw a number of (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook
upside risks to inflation. In particular, the pass-through from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Econom-
of recent increases in energy and commodity prices as ics Discussion Series #2007-60 (November).
1. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the
well as of past dollar depreciation to consumer prices
previous year to fourth quarter of the year indicated.
could be greater than expected. In addition, partici-
2. Projection is the fourth quarter average of the civilian
pants recognized a risk that inflation expectations could unemployment rate (percent).
become less firmly anchored if the current elevated 3. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price
rates of inflation persisted for longer than anticipated measure that has been most widely used in government and
private economic forecasts. Projection is percent change,
or if the recent substantial easing in monetary policy
fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of
was misinterpreted as reflecting less resolve among the year indicated. The slightly narrower estimated width of
Committee members to maintain low and stable infla- the confidence interval for inflation in the third year com-
tion. On balance, a larger number of participants than pared with those for the second and third years is likely the
result of using a limited sample period for computing these
in October viewed the risks to their inflation forecasts
statistics.
as broadly balanced, although several participants con-
tinued to indicate that their inflation projections were
skewed to the upside. Diversity of Participants’ Views
Charts 2(a) and 2(b) provide more detail on the diver-
The ongoing financial market turbulence and tightening
sity of participants’ views. The dispersion of partici-
of credit conditions had increased participants’ uncer-
pants’ projections for real GDP growth was markedly
tainty about the outlook for economic activity. Most
wider than in the forecasts submitted in October,
participants judged that the uncertainty attending their
which in turn were considerably more diverse than
January projections for real GDP growth and for the
unemployment rate was above typical levels seen in the
past. (Table 2 provides an estimate of average ranges 1 The box “Forecast Uncertainty” at the end of this summary dis-
of forecast uncertainty for GDP growth, unemploy- cusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in economic
forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty
and risks attending participants’ projections.

--- Page 20 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t i o n s f o r t h e M e e t i n g o f J a n u a r y 2 9 - 3 0 , 2 0 0 8 Page 5
those submitted in conjunction with the June FOMC ployment. Views also differed about the pace at which
meeting and included in the Board’s Monetary Policy Re- output and employment would recover toward those
port to the Congress in July. Mirroring the increase in di- levels over the forecast horizon and beyond, given ap-
versity of views on real GDP growth, the dispersion of propriate monetary policy. The dispersion of the pro-
participants’ projections for the rate of unemployment jections for PCE inflation in the near term partly re-
also widened notably, particularly for 2009 and 2010. flected different views on the extent to which recent
The dispersion of projections for output and employ- increases in energy and other commodity prices would
ment seemed largely to reflect differing assessments of pass through into higher consumer prices and on the
the effect of financial market conditions on real activ- influence that inflation expectations would exert on
ity, the speed with which credit conditions might im- inflation over the short and medium run. Participants’
prove, and the depth and duration of the housing mar- inflation projections further out were influenced by
ket contraction. The dispersion of participants’ longer- their views of the rate of inflation consistent with the
term projections was also affected to some degree by Federal Reserve’s dual objectives and the time it would
differences in their judgments about the economy’s take to achieve these goals given current economic
trend growth rate and the unemployment rate that conditions and appropriate policy.
would be consistent over time with maximum em-

--- Page 21 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Chart 2(a): Distribution of Participants’ Projections (percent)
Real GDP Unemployment Rate
2008 2008
Number of Participants Number of Participants
16 16
14 14
12 12
January Projections 10 January Projections 10
October Projections 8 October Projections 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
0 0
1.0 - 1.2 - 1.4 - 1.6 - 1.8 - 2.0 - 2.2 - 2.4 - 2.6 - 2.8 - 3.0 - 3.2 - 4.6 - 4.8 - 5.0 - 5.2 - 5.4 - 5.6 -
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7
2009 2009
Number of Participants Number of Participants
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
0 0
1.0 - 1.2 - 1.4 - 1.6 - 1.8 - 2.0 - 2.2 - 2.4 - 2.6 - 2.8 - 3.0 - 3.2 - 4.6 - 4.8 - 5.0 - 5.2 - 5.4 - 5.6 -
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7
2010 2010
Number of Participants Number of Participants
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
0 0
1.0 - 1.2 - 1.4 - 1.6 - 1.8 - 2.0 - 2.2 - 2.4 - 2.6 - 2.8 - 3.0 - 3.2 - 4.6 - 4.8 - 5.0 - 5.2 - 5.4 - 5.6 -
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7

--- Page 22 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t i o n s f o r t h e M e e t i n g o f J a n u a r y 2 9 - 3 0 , 2 0 0 8 Page 7
Chart 2(b): Distribution of Participants’ Projections (percent)
PCE Inflation Core PCE Inflation
2008 2008
Number of Participants Number of Participants
16 16
14 January Projections 14
January Projections 12 October Projections 12
October Projections 10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
0 0
1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 - 2.5 - 2.7 - 1.3 - 1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 -
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
2009 2009
Number of Participants Number of Participants
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
0 0
1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 - 2.5 - 2.7 - 1.3 - 1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 -
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
2010 2010
Number of Participants Number of Participants
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
0 0
1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 - 2.5 - 2.7 - 1.3 - 1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 -
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4

--- Page 23 ---

P age 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the
presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks help shape monetary policy and can aid public
understanding of the basis for policy action s. Considerable uncertainty attends these
projections, however. The economic and s tatistical models and relationships used to
help produce economic forecasts are necessar ily imperfect descriptions of the real world.
And the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen develop-
ments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider
not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their
projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occur-
ring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur.
Table 2 summarizes the average historical a ccuracy of a range of forecasts, including
those reported in past Monetary Policy Repo rts and those prepared by Federal Reserve
Board staff in advance of meetings of the Fe deral Open Market Committee. The pro-
jection error ranges shown in the table illustr ate the considerable uncertainty associated
with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real GDP
and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and
2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in
the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported
in table 2 might imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand
between 1.8 percent to 4.2 percent in the cur rent year, and 1.6 percent to 4.4 percent in
the second and third years. The correspondin g 70 percent confidence intervals for over-
all inflation would be 1 percent to 3 percen t in the current and second years, and 1.1
percent to 2.9 percent in the third year.
Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed on average over history,
participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projec-
tions of each variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in table 2. Participants also provide judgments
as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, downside, or are
broadly balanced. That is, participants judge whether each variable is more likely to be
above or below their projections of the mos t likely outcome. These judgments about
the uncertainty and the risks attending each participant’s projections are distinct from
the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes. Forecast uncertainty
is concerned with the risks associated with a particular projection, rather than with di-
vergences across a number of different projections.

# Tables

## Page_13_Table_1


| Financial markets remain under considerable       |
|---------------------------------------------------|
| stress, and credit has tightened further for some |
| businesses and households. Moreover, recent       |
| information indicates a deepening of the housing  |
| contraction as well as some softening in labor    |
| markets.                                          |
| The Committee expects inflation to moderate in    |
| coming quarters, but it will be necessary to con- |
| tinue to monitor inflation developments care-     |
| fully.                                            |
| Today’s policy action, combined with those        |
| taken earlier, should help to promote moderate    |
| growth over time and to mitigate the risks to     |
| economic activity. However, downside risks to     |
| growth remain. The Committee will continue to     |
| assess the effects of financial and other devel-  |
| opments on economic prospects and will act in a   |
| timely manner as needed to address those risks.”  |