# 20081029_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:35:54*
*Pages: 20, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Page 1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
October 28-29, 2008
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Mr. Struckmeyer,1 Deputy Staff Director, Office of
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Staff Director for Management, Board of
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues- Governors
day, October 28, 2008 at 2:00 p.m. and continued on
Wednesday, October 29, 2008 at 9:00 a.m. Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
PRESENT:
Mr. Bernanke, Chairman Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher, Associate Di-
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman rectors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Ms. Duke Board of Governors
Mr. Fisher
Mr. Kohn Messrs. Levin and Nelson, Associate Directors,
Mr. Kroszner Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gov-
Ms. Pianalto ernors
Mr. Plosser
Mr. Stern Ms. Kole, Assistant Director, Division of Interna-
Mr. Warsh tional Finance, Board of Governors
Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Evans, Lacker, and Lock- Mr. McCarthy, Visiting Reserve Bank Officer, Di-
hart, and Ms. Yellen, Alternate Members of the vision of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gover-
Federal Open Market Committee nors
Messrs. Bullard, Hoenig, and Rosengren, Presi- Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. and Statistics, Board of Governors
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Messrs. Bassett and Luecke, Section Chiefs, Divi-
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Mr. Morin, Senior Economist, Division of Re-
Mr. Sheets, Economist search and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Economist
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-
Messrs. Connors, English, and Kamin, Ms. Mester, sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Rosenblum, Slifman, Sniderman, and
Wilcox, Associate Economists Mr. Moore, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland
Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Ac-
count Mr. Fuhrer, Executive Vice President, Federal Re-
serve Bank of Boston
Ms. Bailey, Deputy Director, Division of Banking
Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover- Messrs. Altig and McAndrews, Ms. Mosser,
nors Messrs. Rasche, Sullivan, and Williams, Senior
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of At-
Mr. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Mone-
tary Affairs, Board of Governors
1 Attended Wednesday’s session only.

--- Page 2 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
lanta, New York, New York, St. Louis, Chi- “The FOMC amends paragraph 1.A. of the Au-
cago, and San Francisco, respectively thorization for Foreign Currency Operations to
include the New Zealand dollar in the list of for-
Messrs. Clark and Hornstein, Vice Presidents, Fed- eign currencies in which the Federal Reserve
eral Reserve Banks of Kansas City and Rich- Bank of New York may transact for the System
mond, respectively Open Market Account.”
Meeting participants also discussed a proposal to set up
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Re-
temporary liquidity-related swap arrangements with the
serve Bank of Minneapolis
central banks of Mexico, Brazil, Korea, and Singapore.
In their remarks, participants focused on the outlook
for complementarity between these swaps and the new
short-term liquidity facility that the International Mone-
The Manager of the System Open Market Account
tary Fund was considering; on the governance and
reported on recent developments in foreign exchange
structure of the swap lines; and on the particular coun-
markets. There were no open market operations in
tries included. Several participants pointed to the in-
foreign currencies for the System’s account in the pe-
ternational reserves held by the countries and the im-
riod since the previous meeting. The Manager also
portance of ensuring that these temporary swap lines,
reported on developments in domestic financial mar-
like the others that had been established during this
kets and on System open market operations in gov-
period, be used only for the purposes intended. On
ernment securities and federal agency obligations dur-
balance, the Committee concluded that in current cir-
ing the period since the previous meeting. By unani-
cumstances the swap arrangements with these four
mous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
large and systemically important economies were ap-
In the discussion of System open market operations propriate, and it unanimously approved the following
over the period, it was noted that reserve management resolutions.
had become more complex as a result of the large pro-
“The FOMC directs the Federal Reserve Bank
vision of reserves associated with the recent expansion
of New York to establish and maintain a recip-
of the Federal Reserve’s liquidity facilities; in particular,
rocal currency arrangement (“swap arrange-
the effective federal funds rate had been persistently
ment”) for the System Open Market Account
below the FOMC’s target. While the payment of inter-
with each of (i) the Banco Central do Brasil, (ii)
est on reserves seemed to be helpful in mitigating
the Bank of Korea, (ii) the Banco de Mexico,
downward pressure on the funds rate, a number of in-
and (iv) the Monetary Authority of Singapore.
stitutions evidently were willing to sell funds at interest
Each such swap arrangement would be for an
rates below that paid on excess reserve balances. An-
aggregate amount not to exceed $30 billion.
ecdotal reports suggested that this was particularly the
Drawings under the arrangement require ap-
case for those institutions that are not eligible to receive
proval. Unless extended by the Committee, each
interest on the balances they maintain at the Federal
such swap arrangement shall expire on April 30,
Reserve. Going forward, however, the interest rate on
2009.
excess reserve balances could be adjusted, and it might
establish a more effective floor on the federal funds The FOMC amends paragraph 1.A. of the Au-
rate over time as more depository institutions revise thorization for Foreign Currency Operations to
their strategies in the federal funds market in light of include the Brazilian real, the Korean won, and
the payment of interest on reserves. the Singapore dollar in the list of foreign curren-
cies in which the Federal Reserve Bank of New
In view of a further widening in financial market strains
York may transact for the System Open Market
internationally, the Committee considered proposals to
Account.
establish temporary reciprocal currency (“swap”) ar-
rangements with several additional foreign central The FOMC delegates to the Foreign Currency
banks. Members unanimously approved the following Subcommittee the authority to approve individ-
resolution, which effectively permitted the Foreign ual drawing requests of up to $5 billion under
Currency Subcommittee to establish a swap line with each of the aforementioned swap arrangements
the Reserve Bank of New Zealand. with the Banco Central do Brasil, the Bank of

--- Page 3 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f O c t o b e r 2 8 - 2 9 , 2 0 0 8 Page 3
Korea, the Banco de Mexico, and the Monetary declined in September, and weekly unemployment in-
Authority of Singapore.” surance claims continued to rise in October.
A number of adverse financial developments influ- Industrial production dropped sharply in September.
enced economic and financial market conditions over Although much of the decline was due to the effects of
the intermeeting period. Lehman Brothers Holdings the recent hurricanes and a strike at an aircraft manu-
had filed for bankruptcy the day before the meeting of facturer, most major industries experienced slow or
the Committee in September. In large part because of declining output in recent months. Motor vehicle as-
losses on Lehman debt, the net asset value of a major semblies were unchanged in the third quarter at a low
money market mutual fund fell below $1 per share, level. The pace of high-tech equipment production
spurring a substantial outflow from money market mu- slowed in the third quarter relative to its rate in the first
tual funds and straining their liquidity. The rapid dete- half of the year, reportedly in part because tight credit
rioration of American International Group, Inc. (AIG), conditions were restraining demand. Available infor-
and Wachovia Corporation, along with the closing of mation suggested that demand and production in this
Washington Mutual, led to intensified market concerns sector were likely to remain relatively subdued over the
about the condition of financial institutions. In this coming months. The output of other manufacturing
environment, investors pulled back from risk-taking, sectors declined in the third quarter. While standard
funding markets for terms beyond overnight largely indicators of near-term production suggested factory
ceased to function at times, credit risk spreads rose output would decline further over the next few
sharply, and equity prices registered steep declines. months, the recovery of production in industries af-
fected by the hurricanes was expected to offset these
The information reviewed at the October meeting indi-
declines to a degree. The factory utilization rate fell in
cated that economic conditions deteriorated in recent
September to well below its long-run average.
months. The labor market weakened further in Sep-
tember as private payrolls fell at a faster pace than ear- Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) appar-
lier in the year and the unemployment rate remained ently declined in September for the fourth consecutive
above 6 percent. Industrial production fell in Septem- month. Motor vehicle sales fell back to their very low
ber, although much of the drop was related to effects July pace, and preliminary reports indicated that the
of recent hurricanes and a strike at an aircraft manufac- slump continued into October, as tighter credit condi-
turer. Consumer spending declined, reflecting stagnant tions were restraining demand. Purchases of goods
real income, tighter credit, declining wealth, and con- other than motor vehicles were estimated to have fallen
cerns about economic conditions. The housing market noticeably. Real outlays on services other than energy
remained weak, with construction activity, new home increased only modestly in July and August. Real dis-
sales, and home prices falling further. Business spend- posable income, excluding the effects of tax rebates
ing on equipment and software appeared to have de- and the emergency unemployment benefits, was little
clined again in the third quarter, and indicators of in- changed in July and August from the second-quarter
vestment in structures weakened. Economic activity in average. Measures of consumer sentiment dropped in
many foreign economies slowed in recent months. October to near or below their low levels of midyear,
Headline consumer inflation measures, pulled down by with the Conference Board measure exceptionally low.
declines in consumer energy prices, moderated in Au-
Residential construction activity continued to decline
gust and September. Core consumer inflation meas-
steeply through the third quarter. In September, both
ures also eased somewhat in these two months.
single-family housing starts and permit issuance fell. In
The labor market continued to weaken. According to the multifamily sector, starts edged up in September
the September labor market report, the unemployment but remained toward the lower end of their two-year
rate remained at 6.1 percent, but private payroll em- range. New home sales in August and September were
ployment fell faster than the average pace earlier in the at a pace well below that of the first half of the year.
year. Most major industry groups shed jobs. The Although the cutbacks in homebuilding had reduced
manufacturing, construction, and temporary help in- the inventory of unsold houses, the slower rate of sales
dustries continued to experience sizable losses in em- kept the months’ supply of new homes very elevated
ployment; meanwhile, retail trade and financial services relative to the level that had prevailed before the down-
registered larger declines than earlier in the year. Non- turn in the housing market. Sales of existing single-
business services added jobs, but at the slowest rate of family homes in September were somewhat higher than
the year. The average workweek and aggregate hours they had been earlier in the year, likely supported by

--- Page 4 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
increases in foreclosure-related sales. Tight conditions down after strong increases in previous months. Air-
in mortgage markets continued to restrain housing de- craft exports surged, but sales of other capital goods
mand, especially for borrowers needing nonconforming declined.
mortgages. Several indexes indicated that house prices
The data for the advanced foreign economies during
declined substantially over the 12 months through Au-
the intermeeting period generally suggested that eco-
gust.
nomic activity was weakening further, and confidence
In the business sector, investment in equipment and indicators in these areas declined as the financial crisis
software appeared to weaken further in the third quar- worsened. Labor market conditions deteriorated in
ter. Nominal shipments of nondefense capital goods these economies, with the exception of Canada. Real
excluding aircraft were flat in the third quarter, while gross domestic product (GDP) fell in the United King-
orders for those goods declined. Demand for high- dom in the third quarter. Headline inflation continued
tech equipment appeared to have softened considera- to be elevated in many economies, but the most recent
bly, and spending on non-high-tech, non-transportation consumer price indexes for Japan and for the euro area
equipment was estimated to have fallen. Transporta- suggested some deceleration in prices.
tion equipment investment was held down in the third
In emerging market economies, data received over the
quarter by falling sales for medium and heavy trucks
intermeeting period showed a continued slowing of real
and by a strike-induced drop in aircraft deliveries in
activity. Real GDP growth in China moved down in
September. Nominal expenditures on nonresidential
the third quarter. Industrial production contracted in
structures declined for the second consecutive month
recent months for many countries. External balances
in August. Forward-looking indicators turned more
deteriorated significantly in many emerging market
downbeat: Vacancy rates for commercial properties
economies as exports to advanced economies slowed.
rose further, property values declined, and the architec-
Headline inflation in emerging market economies
tural billings index fell in September. Furthermore, the
eased, reflecting falling oil and food prices.
latest Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank
Lending Practices indicated that banks tightened lend- Headline consumer prices in the United States were
ing standards for commercial real estate loans over the estimated to have risen only modestly in September,
past three months. extending the recent moderation of overall inflation
following the rapid increases earlier in the year. Con-
The book-value data for manufacturing and trade in-
sumer energy prices fell for the second consecutive
ventories suggested that the real value of inventories
month, while retail food prices continued to climb at a
continued to decline over the summer through August,
rapid pace, boosted by the substantial run-up in farm
but a number of indicators suggested that stocks in
commodity prices through midyear. Core consumer
some industries remained above desired levels. The
price inflation rose somewhat during the third quarter,
days’ supply of light motor vehicles at dealers had risen,
reflecting the pass-through of previous increases in the
on balance, through the year and was rather high in
costs of energy and materials and import prices. Those
September. The ratio of book-value inventories to
upward price pressures diminished recently: Prices of
sales in the manufacturing and trade sectors, excluding
oil and other commodities fell sharply over the inter-
motor vehicles, rose in August, particularly in a number
meeting period, and non-oil import prices as well as
of durable goods sectors. In addition, the index of cus-
producer prices of intermediate materials excluding
tomers’ inventories in the Institute of Supply Manage-
food and energy declined in September. Some survey
ment’s manufacturing survey indicated that inventories
measures of inflation expectations declined during the
remained above desired levels.
period. Available measures of hourly labor compensa-
The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in August, tion increased at about the same moderate pace as over
with a decline in the value of imports more than offset- the past several years.
ting a fall in the value of exports of goods and services.
At its September meeting, the Federal Open Market
A drop in the value of petroleum imports, which re-
Committee (FOMC) kept the target federal funds rate
flected both lower volumes and a decrease in prices,
unchanged at 2 percent. The Committee’s statement
exceeded an increase in non-oil imports that was driven
noted that strains in financial markets had increased
by a rise in imports of consumer goods and industrial
significantly and that labor markets had weakened fur-
supplies. Exports of automotive products fell sharply
ther. Economic growth appeared to have slowed re-
in August after a surge in July, and exports of con-
cently, which partly reflected a softening of household
sumer goods, industrial supplies, and services moved

--- Page 5 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f O c t o b e r 2 8 - 2 9 , 2 0 0 8 Page 5
spending. Tight credit conditions, the ongoing housing In the wake of the failures or near failures of several
contraction, and some slowing in export growth were large financial institutions, short-term funding markets
likely to weigh on economic growth over the next few came under significant additional pressure over the in-
quarters. The Committee stated that, over time, the termeeting period, and the Federal Reserve and other
substantial easing of monetary policy, combined with central banks took a number of actions to provide li-
ongoing measures to foster market liquidity, should quidity and improve market functioning. In the over-
help promote moderate economic growth. Inflation night federal funds market, financial institutions be-
had been high, spurred by the earlier increases in the came more selective about the counterparties with
prices of energy and some other commodities. The whom they were willing to trade. The overnight Lon-
Committee expected inflation to moderate later this don interbank offered rate (Libor) rose substantially,
year and next year, but the inflation outlook remained and the spread of term Libor rates over comparable-
highly uncertain. The downside risks to growth and maturity overnight index swap (OIS) rates rose sharply
the upside risks to inflation were both of significant from already-high levels. The demand for commercial
concern to the Committee. The Committee indicated paper declined as prime money market mutual funds
that it would continue to monitor economic and finan- experienced large net outflows after the net asset value
cial developments carefully and would act as needed to of one such fund fell below $1 per share. As a conse-
promote sustainable economic growth and price stabil- quence, risk spreads on commercial paper rose consid-
ity. erably and were very volatile. Amid strong flows into
government-only money market mutual funds, the de-
Over the intermeeting period, market participants
mand for short-dated Treasury bills rose, and these
marked down their expectations for the path of the
securities traded with very low yields despite sizable
federal funds rate for the next two years. The Commit-
new issuance during the period. The market for repur-
tee’s decision to leave the target federal funds rate un-
chase agreements (repos) also experienced significant
changed at the September FOMC meeting led some
dislocations during the intermeeting period. Partly be-
investors to scale back expectations for policy easing
cause of high demand for Treasury securities, the over-
over the next year. Subsequently, however, market
night repo rate for Treasury general collateral was near
expectations reversed in response to the heightened
zero for much of the period, and failures to deliver
financial turmoil and to generally weaker-than-expected
Treasury securities reached record highs. Repo rates
economic data. The Committee’s decision to reduce
on agency collateral also were volatile, and liquidity in
the target federal funds rate 50 basis points as part of a
non-Treasury, non-agency repo markets was poor.
coordinated action with other central banks on Octo-
Conditions in short-term funding markets improved
ber 8, along with the accompanying statement, led in-
somewhat following the announcements of a U.S. gov-
vestors to mark down further the expected path for the
ernment guarantee of certain liabilities of U.S. banking
federal funds rate. Yields on short-term nominal
organizations and similar actions by foreign authorities,
Treasury coupon securities declined over the intermeet-
the expansion of swap arrangements between the Fed-
ing period, reportedly as a result of substantial flight-to-
eral Reserve and other central banks, and a number of
quality flows and heightened demand for liquidity. In
initiatives by the Federal Reserve and the Treasury to
contrast, higher term premiums and expectations of
address the pressures on money market mutual funds
increases in the supply of Treasury securities associated
and the commercial paper market.
with the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act and
other initiatives seemed to put upward pressure on In longer-term credit markets, yields and spreads on
longer-term nominal Treasury yields. Yields on longer- investment-grade and speculative-grade corporate
term inflation-indexed Treasury securities, which are bonds increased, while indexes of credit default swap
relatively illiquid, rose more sharply than did those on (CDS) spreads for investment-grade financial and non-
nominal securities. Measures of inflation compensation financial firms reached unprecedented levels. Liquidity
based on differences between nominal and inflation- in the corporate bond and CDS markets was strained.
indexed Treasury yields were quite volatile over the Issuance of investment-grade corporate bonds was
intermeeting period and, because of shifting liquidity moderate in September and October, while there was
premiums, likely provided less information than usual little issuance of speculative-grade bonds. Commercial
concerning inflation expectations or inflation uncer- and industrial loans continued to expand rapidly in
tainty. early October, as firms drew on existing bank lines of
credit. However, conditions deteriorated in the secon-

--- Page 6 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
dary market for syndicated leveraged loans, with prices of the likely systemic implications and the potential for
falling to new lows and bid-asked spreads widening significant adverse effects on the economy of a disor-
notably. Broad equity price indexes declined sharply derly failure of AIG, the Federal Reserve Board on
over the intermeeting period, and option-implied vola- September 16, with the support of the Treasury, au-
tility on the S&P 500 index rose well above its previous thorized the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to
record high. The Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey lend up to $85 billion to the firm to assist it in meeting
pointed to further tightening of terms and standards its obligations and to facilitate the orderly sale of some
for consumer loans. Consumer credit increased at its of its businesses. On October 8, the Federal Reserve
slowest pace in more than 15 years during the three announced a supplemental liquidity arrangement for
months ending in August. Conditions in the municipal AIG.
bond market were also poor over much of the inter-
The Federal Reserve Board also approved a number of
meeting period.
new facilities to address strains in short-term funding
The strains from the banking and credit crisis intensi- markets. On September 19, it announced the Asset-
fied and took on a more global aspect over the inter- Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund
meeting period. This development and the related ero- Liquidity Facility (AMLF), which extends nonrecourse
sion of the economic outlook and reduction in infla- loans at the primary credit rate to U.S. depository insti-
tionary pressures led many central banks to reduce their tutions and bank holding companies to finance the pur-
policy rates, including in the internationally coordinated chase of high-quality asset-backed commercial paper
action announced on October 8. Liquidity conditions (ABCP) from money market mutual funds. On Octo-
in the money markets of major foreign economies dete- ber 7, the Board announced the creation of the Com-
riorated further. Spreads between term Libor and OIS mercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF), which provides
rates in euros and sterling rose from already-elevated a liquidity backstop to U.S. issuers of highly rated
levels, although by less than in dollars. Sovereign bond commercial paper through a special-purpose vehicle
yields in the advanced foreign economies were volatile; that purchases three-month unsecured commercial pa-
nominal yield curves in many countries steepened on per and ABCP directly from eligible issuers. On Octo-
net. Equity market indexes fell sharply in the advanced ber 21, it publicized the creation of the Money Market
economies as well as in emerging market economies, Investor Funding Facility (MMIFF), under which the
which until recently had not been hit as hard by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York will provide fund-
financial turmoil. The dollar appreciated against most ing to a series of special-purpose vehicles to facilitate
currencies, with the prominent exception of the Japa- an industry-supported initiative to finance the purchase
nese yen. of certain highly rated certificates of deposit, bank
notes, and commercial paper from U.S. money market
In the United States, M2 accelerated sharply in Sep-
mutual funds. The AMLF, CPFF, and MMIFF were
tember, and it appeared to be on pace for another large
intended to improve the liquidity in short-term debt
increase in October, apparently reflecting a heightened
markets and ease the strains in credit markets more
preference by households and firms for safe assets.
broadly.
Liquid deposits expanded strongly in September, but
leveled off in early October. Small time deposits in- In addition, to address the sizable demand for dollar
creased briskly in September and early October as funding in foreign jurisdictions, the FOMC authorized
banks and thrifts reportedly continued to bid aggres- the expansion of its existing swap lines with the Euro-
sively for these deposits. Retail money funds, which pean Central Bank and Swiss National Bank; by the end
were little changed in September, experienced signifi- of the intermeeting period, the formal quantity limits
cant net inflows in early October. In contrast, institu- on these lines had been eliminated. The quantity limits
tional money funds, which are not included in M2, ex- were also lifted on new swap lines set up with the Bank
perienced substantial outflows during this period. of Japan and the Bank of England. The FOMC au-
thorized new swap lines with five other central banks
In response to the extraordinary stresses in financial
during the period. In domestic markets, the Federal
markets, the Federal Reserve together with other U.S.
Reserve raised the regular auction amounts of the 28-
government agencies and many foreign central banks
and 84-day maturity Term Auction Facility (TAF) auc-
and governments implemented a number of unprece-
tions to $150 billion each. Also, the Federal Reserve
dented policy initiatives during the intermeeting period.
announced two forward TAF auctions for $150 billion
Early in the period, the condition of AIG, a large com-
each, to be conducted in November to provide funding
plex financial institution, deteriorated rapidly. In view

--- Page 7 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f O c t o b e r 2 8 - 2 9 , 2 0 0 8 Page 7
over year-end. In total, up to $900 billion of TAF Treasury issued short-term bills over and above its
credit over year-end was authorized. regular borrowing program, with the proceeds depos-
ited at the Federal Reserve. This facility helped offset
Despite the substantial provision of liquidity by the
the provision of reserves to the banking system
Federal Reserve and other central banks, functioning in
through the various liquidity facilities. Second, employ-
many credit markets remained very poor, a situation
ing authority granted under the Emergency Economic
that reflected market participants’ uncertainty about
Stabilization Act, the Federal Reserve Board an-
their liquidity needs and their future access to funding
nounced on October 6 that it would pay interest on
as well as concerns about the health of many financial
required and excess reserve balances beginning on Oc-
institutions. To strengthen confidence in U.S. financial
tober 9. The payment of interest on excess reserve
institutions, the Treasury, the Federal Reserve, and the
balances was intended to assist in maintaining the fed-
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) issued
eral funds rate close to the target set by the Committee.
a joint statement on October 14, which included sev-
Initially, the interest rate on required reserves was set at
eral elements. First, the Treasury announced a volun-
the average target federal funds rate over each reserve
tary capital purchase plan under which eligible financial
maintenance period less 10 basis points, while the rate
institutions could sell preferred shares to the U.S. gov-
on excess reserves was set at the lowest target federal
ernment. Second, the FDIC provided a temporary
funds rate over each reserve maintenance period less 75
guarantee of the senior unsecured debt of all FDIC-
basis points. On October 22, the rate on excess re-
insured institutions and their holding companies, as
serves was adjusted to be the lowest target federal
well as all balances in non-interest-bearing transaction
funds rate during the maintenance period less 35 basis
deposit accounts. The statement included notice that
points.
nine major financial institutions had agreed to partici-
pate in both the capital purchase program and the In the forecast prepared for the meeting, the staff low-
FDIC guarantee program. Third, the Federal Reserve ered its projection for economic activity in the second
announced details of the CPFF, which was scheduled half of 2008 as well as in 2009 and 2010. Real GDP
to begin on October 27. After this joint statement and appeared to have declined in the third quarter, and the
the announcements of similar programs in a number of few available indicators that reflected conditions fol-
other countries, financial market pressures appeared to lowing the intensification of the financial market tur-
ease somewhat, though conditions remained strained. moil in mid-September pointed to another decline in
the fourth quarter. The declines in stock-market
The expansion of existing liquidity facilities as well as
wealth, low levels of consumer sentiment, weakened
the creation of new facilities contributed to a notable
household balance sheets, and restrictive credit condi-
increase in the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance
tions were likely to hinder household spending over the
sheet. The amount of primary credit outstanding rose
near term. Business expenditures also probably would
considerably over the intermeeting period, with both
be held back by a weaker sales outlook and tighter
foreign and domestic depository institutions making
credit conditions. The staff expected that real GDP
use of the discount window. TAF credit outstanding
would continue to contract somewhat in the first half
more than doubled over the period. Credit extended
of 2009 and then rise in the second half, with the result
through the Primary Dealer Credit Facility rose rapidly
that real GDP would be about unchanged for the year.
ahead of quarter-end; although it subsided subse-
Although futures markets pointed to a lower trajectory
quently, the amount of credit outstanding remained
for oil prices than at the time of the September meet-
well above the levels seen before mid-September. The
ing, real activity was expected to be restrained by fur-
Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF) auctions con-
ther contraction in residential investment, reduced
ducted over the intermeeting period had very high de-
household wealth, continued tight credit conditions,
mand; in addition, dealers exercised most of the op-
and a deterioration of foreign economic performance.
tions for TSLF loans spanning the September quarter-
In 2010, real GDP growth was expected to pick up to
end.
near the rate of potential growth, as the restraints on
Two initiatives were introduced over the intermeeting household and business spending from the financial
period to help manage the expansion of the balance market tensions were anticipated to begin to ease and
sheet and promote control of the federal funds rate. the contraction in the housing market to come to an
First, on September 17, the Treasury announced a tem- end. With growth below its potential rate for an ex-
porary Supplementary Financing Program at the re- tended period, the unemployment rate was expected to
quest of the Federal Reserve. Under this program, the

--- Page 8 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
rise significantly through early 2010. The staff reduced institutions had deepened market concerns about coun-
its forecast for both core and overall PCE inflation, as terparty credit risk and liquidity risk. As a result, finan-
the disinflationary effects of the receding cost pressures cial intermediaries had cut back on lending to some
of energy, materials, and import prices and of resource counterparties, particularly for terms beyond overnight,
slack were expected to be greater than at the time of and in general were conserving liquidity and capital.
the September FOMC meeting. Core inflation was Moreover, risk aversion of investors increased, driving
projected to slow considerably in 2009 and then to credit spreads sharply higher. Survey results and anec-
edge down further in 2010. dotal information also suggested that credit conditions
had tightened significantly further for businesses and
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, all partici-
households. Equity prices had varied widely and were
pants—that is, Federal Reserve Board members and
substantially lower, on net. Participants saw the poten-
Reserve Bank presidents—provided annual projections
tial for financial strains to intensify if some investors,
for economic growth, the unemployment rate, and in-
such as hedge funds, found it necessary to sell assets
flation for the period 2008 through 2011. The projec-
and as lending institutions built reserves against losses.
tions are described in the Summary of Economic Pro-
Participants were concerned that the negative spiral in
jections, which is attached as an addendum to these
which financial strains lead to weaker spending, which
minutes.
in turn leads to higher loan losses and a further deterio-
In their discussion of the economic situation and out- ration in financial conditions, could persist for a while
look, FOMC meeting participants indicated that the longer. While the global efforts to recapitalize banks
worsening financial situation, the slowdown in growth and guarantee deposits had helped stabilize the situa-
abroad, and incoming information on economic activity tion, risk spreads remained higher, asset prices lower,
had led them to mark down significantly their outlook and credit conditions tighter than prior to the recent
for growth. While economic activity had evidently al- disruptions. Moreover, some participants noted that
ready been slowing over the summer, the turmoil in the specifics and effectiveness of some government
recent weeks had apparently resulted in tighter financial programs to support financial markets and institutions
conditions and greater uncertainty among businesses remained unclear.
and households about economic prospects, further lim-
Participants indicated that the increase in financial tur-
iting their ability and willingness to make significant
moil had already had an impact on business decisions.
spending commitments. Recent measures of business
Reports from contacts in many parts of the country
and consumer sentiment had fallen to historical lows.
suggested that the weaker and less certain economic
Participants generally expected the economy to con-
outlook was leading businesses to cancel capital and
tract moderately in the second half of 2008 and the first
other discretionary expenditures and lay off workers.
half of 2009, and agreed that the downside risks to
Several participants noted that even businesses that had
growth had increased. While some expected an im-
previously been largely unaffected by the financial tur-
proving financial situation to contribute to a recovery
bulence were now experiencing difficulties obtaining
in growth by mid-2009, others judged that the period
new credit, and some businesses were said to be draw-
of economic weakness could persist for some time.
ing down lines of credit preemptively rather than risk
Several participants indicated that they expected some
the lines becoming unavailable. Contacts indicated that
fiscal stimulus in coming quarters, but they were uncer-
fewer commercial real estate construction projects were
tain about the extent and duration of the resulting sup-
being undertaken. Residential construction activity
port to economic activity. Participants agreed that in
remained extremely subdued, with the stock of unsold
coming quarters inflation was likely to move down to
homes still very elevated.
levels consistent with price stability, reflecting the re-
cent declines in the prices of energy and other com- Meeting participants noted that real consumer spending
modities, the appreciation of the dollar, and the ex- had been weakening through the summer, responding
pected widening of margins of resource slack. Indeed, to lower employment and tighter credit. Moreover,
some saw a risk that over time inflation could fall be- households, like businesses, were reportedly reacting to
low levels consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual the shifting economic circumstances in recent weeks by
objectives of price stability and maximum employment. cutting expenditures further. Spending on consumer
durables, such as automobiles, and discretionary items
Participants noted that financial conditions had wors-
had been particularly hard hit, and retailers anticipated
ened significantly over the intermeeting period. The
very weak holiday spending.
failure or near failure of a number of major financial

--- Page 9 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f O c t o b e r 2 8 - 2 9 , 2 0 0 8 Page 9
Participants noted that the financial turmoil had in- tating the resolution of troubled, systemically important
creasingly become an international phenomenon, lead- financial institutions. Participants judged that the pol-
ing to a marked deterioration in global growth pros- icy actions had been helpful and well calibrated to their
pects. While advanced foreign economies had already assessment of the developing situation. Several partici-
shown signs of slowing, they had been significantly pants observed that it would be crucial for such policy
affected by the worsening of financial strains over the actions to be unwound appropriately as the financial
intermeeting period. Moreover, a number of emerging situation normalized. However, participants also ob-
market economies, which had heretofore been less in- served that unfolding economic developments could
fluenced by the financial developments in industrial require the FOMC to further lower its target for the
countries, had in recent weeks been significantly af- federal funds rate in the future and to review the ade-
fected, as the increasing strains in financial markets led quacy of its liquidity facilities.
global investors to pull back from exposures to such
In the discussion of monetary policy for the intermeet-
economies. As a result, interest rates on emerging
ing period, Committee members agreed that significant
market debt had shot up and prices of emerging market
easing in policy was warranted at this meeting in view
equity had dropped sharply. Participants saw the
of the marked deterioration in the economic outlook
stronger dollar and weaker growth abroad as likely to
and anticipated reduction in inflation pressures. The
restrain future growth in U.S. exports.
recent substantial tightening in financial conditions, the
Participants agreed that inflation was likely to diminish sharp downshift in spending here and abroad, and the
materially in coming quarters. Commodity prices had rapid abatement of upside inflation risks all suggested
fallen sharply, the dollar had strengthened notably, and that a forceful policy response would be appropriate.
considerable economic slack was anticipated. More- Some members were concerned that the effectiveness
over, some survey measures of inflation expectations of cuts in the target federal funds rate may have been
had declined as had those derived from inflation-linked diminished by the financial dislocations, suggesting that
Treasury securities, although recent movements in the further policy action might have limited efficacy in pro-
latter measures were likely influenced in part by in- moting a recovery in economic growth. And some also
creases in the premiums required to hold the relatively noted that the Committee had limited room to lower its
illiquid inflation-indexed securities. Some participants federal funds rate target further and should therefore
indicated that their business contacts had reported re- consider moving slowly. However, others maintained
duced pricing power and lower markups. Against this that the possibility of reduced policy effectiveness and
backdrop, participants generally expected inflation to the limited scope for reducing the target further were
decline to levels consistent with price stability. A few reasons for a more aggressive policy adjustment; an
participants noted that disruptions to the credit inter- easing of policy should contribute to a beneficial reduc-
mediation process and the inefficiencies associated with tion in some borrowing costs, even if a given rate re-
shifts of resources among economic sectors could be duction currently would elicit a smaller effect than in
expected to reduce aggregate supply as well as restrain more typical circumstances, and more aggressive easing
aggregate demand; as a consequence, such factors should reduce the odds of a deflationary outcome.
could limit the effect of slower output growth on rates Members also saw the substantial downside risks to
of resource slack and inflation. Others, though, saw a growth as supporting a relatively large policy move at
risk that if resource utilization remained weak for some this meeting, though even after today’s 50 basis point
time, inflation could fall below levels consistent with action, the Committee judged that downside risks to
the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate for promoting price growth would remain. Members anticipated that eco-
stability and maximum employment, a development nomic data over the upcoming intermeeting period
that would pose important policy challenges in light of would show significant weakness in economic activity,
the already-low level of the Committee’s federal funds and some suggested that additional policy easing could
rate target. well be appropriate at future meetings. In any event,
the Committee agreed that it would take whatever steps
Participants discussed a number of issues relating to
were necessary to support the recovery of the econ-
broader monetary policy strategy. Over the past year,
omy.
the Federal Reserve’s response to the financial turbu-
lence had encompassed substantial monetary policy At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
easing, the provision of large volumes of liquidity voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
through standard and extraordinary means, and facili- of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-

--- Page 10 ---

Page 10 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
cute transactions in the System Account in accordance The meeting adjourned at 11:45 a.m.
with the following domestic policy directive:
Conference Calls
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks On September 29, 2008, the Committee met by confer-
monetary and financial conditions that will fos- ence call to review recent developments and to con-
ter price stability and promote sustainable sider changes to swap arrangements with foreign cen-
growth in output. To further its long-run objec- tral banks. Amid signs of growing strains in money
tives, the Committee in the immediate future markets, the discussion focused on recent Federal Re-
seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent serve actions and on potential expansions in official
with reducing the federal funds rate to an aver- liquidity facilities. In light of severe pressures in dollar
age of around 1 percent.” funding markets abroad, the Committee unanimously
approved both extending the liquidity-related swap ar-
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
rangements with foreign central banks an additional
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.:
three months, through April 30, 2009, and increasing
“The Federal Open Market Committee decided substantially the sizes of those existing arrangements.
today to lower its target for the federal funds The enlarged facilities would support the provision of
rate 50 basis points to 1 percent. U.S. dollar liquidity in amounts of up to $30 billion by
the Bank of Canada, $80 billion by the Bank of Eng-
The pace of economic activity appears to have
land, $120 billion by the Bank of Japan, $15 billion by
slowed markedly, owing importantly to a decline
Danmarks Nationalbank, $240 billion by the European
in consumer expenditures. Business equipment
Central Bank, $15 billion by the Norges Bank, $30 bil-
spending and industrial production have weak-
lion by the Reserve Bank of Australia, $30 billion by
ened in recent months, and slowing economic
Sveriges Riksbank, and $60 billion by the Swiss Na-
activity in many foreign economies is damping
tional Bank. In addition, the Committee was briefed
the prospects for U.S. exports. Moreover, the
on plans for implementation of a provision in pending
intensification of financial market turmoil is
legislation that would allow the Federal Reserve to be-
likely to exert additional restraint on spending,
gin immediately to pay interest on reserves held by de-
partly by further reducing the ability of house-
pository institutions, and on the proposed acquisition
holds and businesses to obtain credit.
of Wachovia by Citigroup.
In light of the declines in the prices of energy
On October 7, 2008, the Committee again met by con-
and other commodities and the weaker pros-
ference call. Stresses in financial markets had contin-
pects for economic activity, the Committee ex-
ued to increase: Interest-rate spreads in interbank
pects inflation to moderate in coming quarters
funding markets had widened markedly, corporate and
to levels consistent with price stability.
municipal bond yields had risen, and equity prices had
Recent policy actions, including today’s rate re- dropped sharply. For the first time in many years, the
duction, coordinated interest rate cuts by central net asset value of a major money market fund had
banks, extraordinary liquidity measures, and offi- fallen below $1 per share; this event sparked a flight
cial steps to strengthen financial systems, should out of prime money market funds and caused a severe
help over time to improve credit conditions and impairment of the functioning of the commercial paper
promote a return to moderate economic growth. market. Since the September 16 FOMC meeting, indi-
Nevertheless, downside risks to growth remain. cators of economic activity in both the United States
The Committee will monitor economic and fi- and in major foreign countries had come in weaker
nancial developments carefully and will act as than expected. In the United States, automobile sales,
needed to promote sustainable economic growth capital goods shipments, and private payrolls had fallen
and price stability.” notably. Elsewhere, indicators of economic activity
and sentiment had deteriorated in a broad range of im-
Votes for this action: Messrs. Bernanke and Geith-
portant foreign economies. Prices of crude oil and
ner, Ms. Duke, Messrs. Fisher, Kohn, and Kroszner,
other commodities had dropped substantially, and
Ms. Pianalto, Messrs. Plosser, Stern, and Warsh.
some measures of inflation expectations had declined.
Votes against this action: None. Participants agreed that downside risks to economic
growth had increased and upside risks to inflation had
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
diminished. Participants discussed the considerable
would be held on Tuesday, December 16, 2008.

--- Page 11 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f O c t o b e r 2 8 - 2 9 , 2 0 0 8 Page 11
expansion of Federal Reserve liquidity in recent prospects for economic activity have reduced
months. Most agreed that these actions to provide li- the upside risks to inflation.
quidity had had a beneficial impact. Nonetheless, fi-
The Committee will monitor economic and fi-
nancial conditions were exerting considerable restraint
nancial developments carefully and will act as
on economic activity.
needed to promote sustainable economic growth
All members judged that a significant easing in policy at and price stability.”
this time was appropriate to foster moderate economic
Votes for this action: Messrs. Bernanke and Geith-
growth and to reduce the downside risks to economic
ner, Ms. Duke, Messrs. Fisher, Kohn, and Kroszner,
activity. Members also welcomed the opportunity to
Ms. Pianalto, Messrs. Plosser, Stern, and Warsh.
coordinate this policy action with similar measures by
the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Euro- Votes against this action: None.
pean Central Bank, Sveriges Riksbank, and the Swiss
Notation Votes
National Bank. By showing that policymakers around
By notation vote completed September 21, 2008 the
the globe were working closely together, had a similar
Committee unanimously approved the following reso-
view of global economic conditions, and were willing
lution:
to take strong actions to address those conditions, co-
ordinated action could help to bolster consumer and “The FOMC amends paragraph 1.A. of the Au-
business confidence and so yield greater economic thorization for Foreign Currency Operations to
benefits than unilateral action. include Australian dollars in the list of foreign
currencies in which the Federal Reserve Bank of
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
New York may transact for the System Open
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
Market Account.”
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
cute transactions in the System Account in accordance By notation vote completed on October 6, 2008, the
with the following domestic policy directive: Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
FOMC meeting held on September 16, 2008.
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
monetary and financial conditions that will fos- By notation vote completed October 11, 2008 the
ter price stability and promote sustainable Committee unanimously approved the following reso-
growth in output. To further its long-run objec- lution:
tives, the Committee in the immediate future
“The Federal Open Market Committee author-
seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
izes the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
with reducing the federal funds rate to an aver-
(FRBNY) to increase the amounts available
age of around 1½ percent.”
from the System Open Market Account under
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be- the existing reciprocal currency arrangements
low: (“swap” arrangements) with the Bank of Eng-
land, the European Central Bank, the Bank of
“The Federal Open Market Committee has de-
Japan, and the Swiss National Bank to meet the
cided to lower its target for the federal funds
amounts requested by those central banks in
rate 50 basis points to 1½ percent. The Com-
connection with their fixed-rate tender auctions.
mittee took this action in light of evidence point-
The FRBNY must report to the Committee each
ing to a weakening of economic activity and a
time the aggregate draws by one of these central
reduction in inflationary pressures.
banks increases the level outstanding for that
Incoming economic data suggest that the pace bank by an increment of $200 billion over the
of economic activity has slowed markedly in re- level outstanding on October 10, 2008.”
cent months. Moreover, the intensification of
financial market turmoil is likely to exert addi-
tional restraint on spending, partly by further re-
ducing the ability of households and businesses
to obtain credit. Inflation has been high, but the _____________________________
Committee believes that the decline in energy Brian F. Madigan
and other commodity prices and the weaker Secretary

--- Page 12 ---

Page 1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the October 28-29, 2008 FOMC Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Governors
meeting, the members of the Board of Governors and and Reserve Bank presidents, October 2008
Percent
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of
Variable 2008 2009 2010 2011
whom participate in deliberations of the FOMC,
Central tendency1
provided projections for economic growth, Change in real GDP 0.0 to 0.3 -0.2 to 1.1 2.3 to 3.2 2.8 to 3.6
unemployment, and inflation in 2008, 2009, 2010, and June projection. . . 1.0 to 1.6 2.0 to 2.8 2.5 to 3.0 n/a
2011. Projections were based on information available
Unemployment rate 6.3 to 6.5 7.1 to 7.6 6.5 to 7.3 5.5 to 6.6
through the conclusion of the meeting, on each June projection. . . 5.5 to 5.7 5.3 to 5.8 5.0 to 5.6 n/a
participant’s assumptions regarding a range of factors
PCE inflation. . . . . . 2.8 to 3.1 1.3 to 2.0 1.4 to 1.8 1.4 to 1.7
likely to affect economic outcomes, and on his or her June projection. . . 3.8 to 4.2 2.0 to 2.3 1.8 to 2.0 n/a
assessment of appropriate monetary policy.
Core PCE inflation. . 2.3 to 2.5 1.5 to 2.0 1.3 to 1.8 1.3 to 1.7
“Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future
June projection. . . 2.2 to 2.4 2.0 to 2.2 1.8 to 2.0 n/a
policy that, based on current information, is deemed
Range2
most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity
Change in real GDP -0.3 to 0.5 -1.0 to 1.8 1.5 to 4.5 2.0 to 5.0
and inflation that best satisfy the participant’s
June projection. . . 0.9to 1.8 1.9 to 3.0 2.0 to 3.5 n/a
interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives
Unemployment rate 6.3 to 6.6 6.6 to 8.0 5.5 to 8.0 4.9 to 7.3
of maximum employment and price stability.
June projection. . . 5.5 to 5.8 5.2 to 6.1 5.0 to 5.8 n/a
Given the recent intensification and broadening of the PCE inflation. . . . . . 2.7 to 3.6 1.0 to 2.2 1.1 to 1.9 0.8 to 1.8
global financial crisis, FOMC participants viewed the June projection. . . 3.4 to 4.6 1.7 to 3.0 1.6 to 2.1 n/a
outlook for economic growth and employment as
Core PCE inflation. 2.1 to 2.5 1.3 to 2.1 1.1 to 1.9 0.8 to 1.8
having worsened significantly since June. As indicated June projection. . . 2.0 to 2.5 1.8 to 2.3 1.5 to 2.0 n/a
in Table 1 and depicted in Figure 1, participants
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP)
expected that real GDP growth would remain very and of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the
weak next year and that the subsequent pace of fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE
inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price
recovery would be quite slow; they also anticipated that
index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and the price
the unemployment rate would increase substantially index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the
further. In view of the recent sharp declines in the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in
the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant's projections
prices of energy and other commodities and the
are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy.
widening slack in resource utilization, participants 1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest
expected that inflation would drop markedly in coming projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants'
quarters. Participants generally judged that the degree projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
of uncertainty surrounding their projections for both
economic activity and inflation was greater than intensification of the financial crisis. Many participants
historical norms. Most participants viewed the risks to highlighted the recent decline in consumer confidence
the growth outlook as skewed to the downside, and and the extent to which households were swiftly
nearly all of them saw the risks to the inflation outlook curbing their outlays in response to large losses in
as either balanced or tilted to the downside. stock-market and housing wealth and deterioration in
labor market conditions. Severe dislocations in credit
The Outlook
markets were also seen as weighing heavily on
Participants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2008
consumer spending and business investment.
had a central tendency of 0 to 0.3 percent, compared
with the central tendency of 1 to 1.6 percent for the Participants’ growth projections had a central tendency
growth projections that were made last June. The of -0.2 to 1.1 percent for 2009, 2.3 to 3.2 percent for
downward revisions in their growth forecasts for the 2010, and 2.8 to 3.6 percent for 2011, as most
year as a whole were due almost entirely to substantial participants expected that the near-term weakness in
shifts in their views of second-half growth. A number economic activity would continue into next year and
of participants noted that incoming data on consumer that the subsequent recovery would be relatively
spending and employment had been weaker than gradual. Growth in 2009 was likely to be restrained by
expected during the summer, even prior to the persistent credit market strains and ongoing

--- Page 13 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2008–11
Percent
Change in real GDP 6
Central tendency of projections
5
Range of projections
4
3
Actual 2
1
+
_0
1
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Percent
Unemployment rate
8
7
6
5
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Percent
PCE inflation
4
3
2
1
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
Percent
Core PCE inflation
4
3
2
1
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual.

--- Page 14 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t i o n s f o r t h e M e e t i n g o f O c t o b e r 2 8 - 2 9 , 2 0 0 8 Page 3
adjustments in the housing sector, as well as by weak mandate for promoting price stability and maximum
fundamentals for household and business spending. employment.
Indeed, many participants anticipated that financial
Risks to the Outlook
market stresses would recede only slowly,
Participants continued to view uncertainty about the
notwithstanding the extraordinary measures that had
outlook for economic activity as higher than normal.1
been taken to enhance liquidity and stabilize financial
The risks to their projections for GDP growth were
markets and institutions. Participants also noted that
judged as being skewed to the downside and the
demand for exports was likely to be damped in coming
associated risks to their projections for the
quarters by the significantly weaker economic outlook
unemployment rate were tilted to the upside.
for many U.S. trading partners. Participants expected
Participants emphasized the considerable degree of
that more robust economic expansion would resume in
uncertainty about the future course of the financial
2010, and most anticipated that growth would rise
crisis and its impact on the real economy. Previous
further in 2011 to a pace that would temporarily exceed
episodes of financial market turmoil might not provide
its longer-run sustainable rate and hence would help
much information about the likely trajectory going
reduce the degree of slack in resource utilization.
forward, given the severity of the current crisis and the
Participants anticipated that labor market conditions extraordinary government measures that had been
would continue to deteriorate over the coming year. taken. Several participants highlighted the risk of a
Their projections for the unemployment rate during the persistent negative feedback loop between credit
fourth quarter of this year had a central tendency of 6.3 markets and economic activity, while others referred to
to 6.5 percent, an upward shift of more than ½ the possibility that financial market functioning might
percentage point from their June projections and a normalize more rapidly and hence that the adverse
further rise from September’s unemployment rate of effects of the crisis might be somewhat smaller than
6.1 percent—which was the latest available figure at the anticipated in their modal outlook. Some participants
time of the FOMC meeting. Looking further ahead, noted that further monetary policy easing could
the central tendency of participants’ unemployment eventually become constrained by the lower bound of
rate projections was 7.1 to 7.6 percent for 2009, 6.5 to zero on nominal interest rates, in which case an
7.3 percent for 2010, and 5.5 to 6.6 percent for 2011. elevated degree of uncertainty might be associated with
Most participants judged that the unemployment rate in gauging the magnitude and stimulative effects of other
2011 would still be above its longer-run sustainable policy tools such as quantitative easing.
level and hence would be likely to decline further in the
As in June, most participants continued to view the
period beyond the forecast horizon.
uncertainty surrounding their inflation projections as
The central tendency of participants’ projections for higher than historical norms. The majority of
total PCE inflation in 2008 declined to 2.8 to 3.1 participants judged the risks to the inflation outlook as
percent, about a percentage point lower than the roughly balanced, and a number of others viewed these
central tendency of their projections last June. risks as skewed to the downside—a marked shift from
Participants noted that this downward revision in the June, when the risks to inflation were generally seen as
near-term inflation outlook mainly reflected the recent tilted to the upside. Many participants noted that their
sharp decline in the prices of energy and other assessments regarding the downside risks to inflation
commodities, apparently triggered by the global were linked to their judgments regarding the magnitude
slowdown in economic activity. Most participants also of downside risks to economic activity. Some
marked down their forecasts for inflation beyond 2008, participants also noted that heightened volatility of
reflecting their expectations of widening resource slack prices for energy and other commodities was
over coming quarters as well as gradual pass-through of contributing to the elevated degree of uncertainty
the drop in the prices of energy and raw materials. The regarding the inflation outlook.
central tendency of participants’ projections for total
PCE inflation was 1.3 to 2 percent for 2009, 1.4 to 1.8
percent for 2010, and 1.4 to 1.7 percent for 2011. 1Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty since
Participants generally projected that inflation at the end 1987 for the change in real GDP, the unemployment rate,
and total consumer price inflation. At the end of this
of the projection period would be close to or a bit
summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses the
below their assessments of the measured rates of
sources and interpretation of uncertainty in economic
inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual
forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the
uncertainty and risks attending participants’ projections.

--- Page 15 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges substantially greater dispersion than in June, mainly
Percentage points reflecting the diversity of views regarding the duration
Variable 2008 2009 2010 2011
of the financial crisis and the magnitude and
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . ±0.6 ±1.3 ±1.4 ±1.4
persistence of its impact on the real economy. The
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . . ±0.2 ±0.6 ±0.9 ±1.0 dispersion in participants’ projections was also affected
to some degree by differences in their estimates of the
Total consumer prices2 . . . . . . ±0.3 ±1.0 ±1.0 ±1.0
longer-run rates of output growth and unemployment
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root
mean squared error of projections that were released in the autumn to which the economy would converge under
from 1987 through 2007 for the current and following three years by appropriate policy and in the absence of any further
various private and government forecasters. As described in the box
shocks.
“Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70
percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment,
Figures 2.C and 2.D provide corresponding
and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of
projection errors made in the past. Further information is in David information regarding the diversity of participants’
Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the views regarding the inflation outlook. The dispersion
Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and
Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Board of Governors of the in participants’ projections for 2009 and 2010 was
Federal Reserve System, November). substantially greater than in June, primarily reflecting
1. For definitions, refer to general note in table 1.
differences in their views about how much slack in
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
that has been most widely used in government and private economic resource utilization was likely to develop and about the
forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous extent to which that slack would place downward
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.
pressure on increases in wages and prices. Some
participants indicated that their inflation projections for
Diversity of Views 2011 were roughly in line with their assessments of the
Figures 2.A and 2.B provide further detail on the measured rate of inflation consistent with the Federal
diversity of participants’ views regarding likely Reserve’s dual mandate for promoting price stability
outcomes for real GDP growth and the unemployment and maximum employment; other participants
rate, respectively. For both variables, the dispersion of anticipated that inflation in 2011 would be a bit below
participants’ projections for 2008 was noticeably their assessments of the mandate-consistent inflation
narrower than in the forecasts provided in June, mainly rate, mainly reflecting the lagged effects of weak
due to the accumulation of incoming data regarding the economic activity and the relatively sluggish pace of
performance of the economy to date. In contrast, recovery.
participants’ projections for 2009 and 2010 exhibited

--- Page 16 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t i o n s f o r t h e M e e t i n g o f O c t o b e r 2 8 - 2 9 , 2 0 0 8 Page 5
Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2008–11
Number of participants
2008 16
October projections
June projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2-0.0- 0.2- 0.4- 0.6- 0.8- 1.0- 1.2- 1.4- 1.6- 1.8- 2.0- 2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
-0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2009
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2-0.0- 0.2- 0.4- 0.6- 0.8- 1.0- 1.2- 1.4- 1.6- 1.8- 2.0- 2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
-0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2010
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2-0.0- 0.2- 0.4- 0.6- 0.8- 1.0- 1.2- 1.4- 1.6- 1.8- 2.0- 2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
-0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2011 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2-0.0- 0.2- 0.4- 0.6- 0.8- 1.0- 1.2- 1.4- 1.6- 1.8- 2.0- 2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
-0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 17 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2008–11
Number of participants
2008 16
October projections
June projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.8- 5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0-
4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2009
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.8- 5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0-
4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2010
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.8- 5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0-
4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2011 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.8- 5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0-
4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 18 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t i o n s f o r t h e M e e t i n g o f O c t o b e r 2 8 - 2 9 , 2 0 0 8 Page 7
Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2008–11
Number of participants
2008 16
October projections
June projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5- 2.7- 2.9- 3.1- 3.3- 3.5- 3.7- 3.9- 4.1- 4.3- 4.5-
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2009
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5- 2.7- 2.9- 3.1- 3.3- 3.5- 3.7- 3.9- 4.1- 4.3- 4.5-
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2010
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5- 2.7- 2.9- 3.1- 3.3- 3.5- 3.7- 3.9- 4.1- 4.3- 4.5-
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2011 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5- 2.7- 2.9- 3.1- 3.3- 3.5- 3.7- 3.9- 4.1- 4.3- 4.5-
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 19 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 2.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inflation, 2008–11
Number of participants
2008 16
October projections
June projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2009
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2010
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2011 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 20 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t i o n s f o r t h e M e e t i n g o f O c t o b e r 2 8 - 2 9 , 2 0 0 8 Page 9
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by experienced in the past and the risks around
the members of the Board of Governors and the projections are broadly balanced, the
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks numbers reported in table 2 would imply a
inform discussions of monetary policy among probability of about 70 percent that actual
policymakers and can aid public GDP would expand between 2.4 percent to 3.6
understanding of the basis for policy actions. percent in the current year, 1.7 percent to 4.3
Considerable uncertainty attends these percent in the second year, and 1.6 percent to
projections, however. The economic and 4.4 percent in the third and fourth years. The
statistical models and relationships used to corresponding 70 percent confidence intervals
help produce economic forecasts are for overall inflation would be 1.7 percent to 2.3
necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real percent in the current year and 1.0 percent to
world. And the future path of the economy 3.0 percent in the second, third, and fourth
can be affected by myriad unforeseen years.
developments and events. Thus, in setting the Because current conditions may differ
stance of monetary policy, participants from those that prevailed on average over
consider not only what appears to be the most history, participants provide judgments as to
likely economic outcome as embodied in their whether the uncertainty attached to their
projections, but also the range of alternative projections of each variable is greater than,
possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels
and the potential costs to the economy should of forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in
they occur. table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
Table 2 summarizes the average historical to whether the risks to their projections are
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including weighted to the upside, downside, or are
those reported in past Monetary Policy broadly balanced. That is, participants judge
Reports and those prepared by Federal whether each variable is more likely to be
Reserve Board staff in advance of meetings of above or below their projections of the most
the Federal Open Market Committee. The likely outcome. These judgments about the
projection error ranges shown in the table uncertainty and the risks attending each
illustrate the considerable uncertainty participant’s projections are distinct from the
associated with economic forecasts. For diversity of participants’ views about the most
example, suppose a participant projects that likely outcomes. Forecast uncertainty is
real GDP and total consumer prices will rise concerned with the risks associated with a
steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 particular projection, rather than with
percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty divergences across a number of different
attending those projections is similar to that projections.

# Tables

## Page_10_Table_1


| “The Federal Open Market Committee decided         |
|----------------------------------------------------|
| today to lower its target for the federal funds    |
| rate 50 basis points to 1 percent.                 |
| The pace of economic activity appears to have      |
| slowed markedly, owing importantly to a decline    |
| in consumer expenditures. Business equipment       |
| spending and industrial production have weak-      |
| ened in recent months, and slowing economic        |
| activity in many foreign economies is damping      |
| the prospects for U.S. exports. Moreover, the      |
| intensification of financial market turmoil is     |
| likely to exert additional restraint on spending,  |
| partly by further reducing the ability of house-   |
| holds and businesses to obtain credit.             |
| In light of the declines in the prices of energy   |
| and other commodities and the weaker pros-         |
| pects for economic activity, the Committee ex-     |
| pects inflation to moderate in coming quarters     |
| to levels consistent with price stability.         |
| Recent policy actions, including today’s rate re-  |
| duction, coordinated interest rate cuts by central |
| banks, extraordinary liquidity measures, and offi- |
| cial steps to strengthen financial systems, should |
| help over time to improve credit conditions and    |
| promote a return to moderate economic growth.      |
| Nevertheless, downside risks to growth remain.     |
| The Committee will monitor economic and fi-        |
| nancial developments carefully and will act as     |
| needed to promote sustainable economic growth      |
| and price stability.”                              |