# 20080430_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:36:01*
*Pages: 18, Tables: 0*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Page 1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
April 29-30, 2008
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Ms. Roseman,1 Director, Division of Reserve Bank
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Operations and Payment Systems, Board of
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues- Governors
day, April 29, 2008 at 2:00 p.m. and continued on
Wednesday, April 30, 2008 at 9:00 a.m. Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of
Staff Director for Management, Board of
PRESENT: Governors
Mr. Bernanke, Chairman
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Mr. Fisher Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Kohn
Mr. Kroszner Mr. Frierson,1 Deputy Secretary, Office of the Sec-
Mr. Mishkin retary, Board of Governors
Ms. Pianalto
Mr. Plosser Ms. Bailey, Deputy Director, Division of Banking
Mr. Stern Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover-
Mr. Warsh nors
Ms. Cumming, Messrs. Evans, Lacker, and Lock- Mr. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Mone-
hart, and Ms. Yellen, Alternate Members of the tary Affairs, Board of Governors
Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Hammond1 and Marquardt,1 Deputy Di-
Messrs. Bullard, Hoenig, and Rosengren, Presi- rectors, Division of Reserve Bank Operations
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. and Payment Systems, Board of Governors
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively
Ms. Edwards,1 Associate Director, Division of
Mr. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Bank of Minneapolis
Ms. Shanks,1 Associate Secretary, Office of the
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Secretary, Board of Governors
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher, Associate Di-
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary rectors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel Board of Governors
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Sheets, Economist Mr. Gagnon, Visiting Associate Director, Division
Mr. Stockton, Economist of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Connors, English, and Kamin, Ms. Mester, Ms. Martin,1 Associate General Counsel, Legal Di-
Messrs. Rosenblum, Slifman, Sniderman, and vision, Board of Governors
Wilcox, Associate Economists
Mr. Carpenter,1 Assistant Director, Division of
Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Ac- Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
count
_________________
Ms. J. Johnson,1 Secretary, Office of the Secretary, 1 Attended portion of the meeting relating to the
Board of Governors implications of interest on reserves for monetary
policy implementation.

--- Page 2 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Mr. Dale, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary The Manager of the System Open Market Account
Affairs, Board of Governors reported on recent developments in foreign exchange
markets. There were no open market operations in
Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research foreign currencies for the System’s account in the pe-
and Statistics, Board of Governors riod since the previous meeting. The Manager also
reported on developments in domestic financial mar-
Ms. Allison,1 Senior Counsel, Legal Division, kets and on System open market operations in gov-
Board of Governors ernment securities and federal agency obligations dur-
ing the period since the previous meeting. By unani-
Mr. Gross,1 Special Assistant to the Board, Office mous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions.
of Board Members, Board of Governors
By unanimous vote, the Committee extended for one
year beginning in mid-December 2008 the reciprocal
Ms. Weinbach, Adviser, Division of Monetary Af-
currency (“swap”) arrangements with the Bank of Can-
fairs, Board of Governors
ada and the Banco de Mexico. The arrangement with
the Bank of Canada is in the amount of $2 billion
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary
equivalent and that with the Banco de Mexico is in the
Affairs, Board of Governors
amount of $3 billion equivalent. Both arrangements
are associated with the Federal Reserve’s participation
Mr. Luecke, Section Chief, Division of Monetary
in the North American Framework Agreement of 1994.
Affairs, Board of Governors
The vote to renew the System’s participation in the
swap arrangements maturing in December was taken at
Ms. Beattie,1 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of
this meeting because of the provision that each party
the Secretary, Board of Governors
must provide six months’ prior notice of an intention
to terminate its participation.
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-
sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors In view of continuing strains in interbank and other
financial markets, the Committee took up proposals to
Ms. Hughes,1 Staff Assistant, Office of the Secre- expand several of the liquidity arrangements that had
tary, Board of Governors been put in place in recent months. Chairman Ber-
nanke indicated his intention to increase the overall size
Mr. Fuhrer, Executive Vice President, Federal Re- of the Term Auction Facility under delegated authority
serve Bank of Boston from the Board of Governors, and he proposed in-
creases in the swap lines with the European Central
Messrs. Hilton, McAndrews,1 Rasche, Rudebusch, Bank and Swiss National Bank to help address pres-
Steindel, Sullivan, and Weinberg, Senior Vice sures in short-term dollar funding markets. Meeting
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New participants discussed the possible costs and benefits of
York, New York, St. Louis, San Francisco, a proposed broadening of eligible collateral for the
New York, Chicago, and Richmond, respec- Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF). On balance,
tively the Committee agreed that expanding the range of eli-
gible collateral for the TSLF might help to increase the
Messrs. Clark and Meyer,1 Vice Presidents, Federal effectiveness of the facility and so further promote the
Reserve Banks of Kansas City and Philadel- orderly functioning of financial markets.
phia, respectively
By unanimous votes, the Committee approved the fol-
lowing three resolutions:
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Re-
serve Bank of Minneapolis
The Federal Open Market Committee directs
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to in-
Mr. Roberds, Policy Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank
crease the amount available from the System
of Atlanta
Open Market Account under the existing recip-
_____________________
rocal currency arrangement (“swap” arrange-
1 Attended portion of the meeting relating to the impli-
ment) with the European Central Bank to an
cations of interest on reserves for monetary policy im-
amount not to exceed $50 billion. Within that
plementation.

--- Page 3 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 9 - 3 0 , 2 0 0 8 Page 3
aggregate limit, draws of up to $25 billion are Although industrial production rose in March, produc-
hereby authorized. The current swap arrange- tion over the first quarter as a whole was soft, having
ment shall be extended until January 30, 2009, declined, on average, in January and February. Gains in
unless further extended by the Federal Open manufacturing output of consumer and high-tech
Market Committee. goods in March were partially offset by a sharp drop in
production of motor vehicles and parts and by ongoing
The Federal Open Market Committee directs weakness in the output of construction-related indus-
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to in- tries. The output of utilities rebounded in March fol-
crease the amount available from the System lowing a weather-related drop in February, and mining
Open Market Account under the existing recip- output moved up after exhibiting weakness earlier in
rocal currency arrangement (“swap” arrange- the year. The factory utilization rate edged up in March
ment) with the Swiss National Bank to an but stayed well below its recent high in the third quar-
amount not to exceed $12 billion. Within that ter of 2007.
aggregate limit, draws of up to $6 billion are
Real consumer spending expanded slowly in the first
hereby authorized. The current swap arrange-
quarter. Real outlays on durable goods, including
ment shall be extended until January 30, 2009,
automobiles, were estimated to have declined in March,
unless further extended by the Federal Open
but expenditures on nondurable goods were thought to
Market Committee.
have edged up, boosted by a sizable increase in real
outlays for gasoline. For the quarter as a whole, how-
In connection with the Term Securities Lending
ever, real expenditures on both durable and nondurable
Facility, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
goods declined. Real disposable personal income also
may accept pledges of AAA-rated asset-backed
grew slowly in the first quarter, restrained by rapidly
securities (in addition to the other assets previ-
rising prices for energy and food. The ratio of house-
ously authorized by the FOMC) as collateral
hold wealth to disposable income appeared to have
against loans of U.S. Government securities.
moved down again in the first quarter, damped by the
appreciable net decline in broad equity prices over that
The information reviewed at the April meeting, which period and by further reductions in house prices.
included the advance data on the national income and Measures of consumer sentiment fell sharply in March
product accounts for the first quarter, indicated that and April; the April reading of consumer sentiment
economic growth had remained weak so far this year. published in the Reuters/University of Michigan Sur-
Labor market conditions had deteriorated further, and vey of Consumers was near the low levels posted in the
manufacturing activity was soft. Housing activity had early 1990s.
continued its sharp descent, and business spending on
Residential construction continued its rapid contraction
both structures and equipment had turned down. Con-
in the first quarter. Single-family housing starts main-
sumer spending had grown very slowly, and household
tained their steep downward trajectory in March, and
sentiment had tumbled further. Core consumer price
starts of multifamily homes declined to the lower por-
inflation had slowed in recent months, but overall infla-
tion of their recent range. Sales of new single-family
tion remained elevated.
homes declined in February to a very low rate and
Labor demand continued to weaken in March. Private dropped further in March. Even though production
payroll employment fell in March at a rate similar to cuts by homebuilders helped to reduce the level of in-
that in January and February. The reduction in jobs ventories at the end of February, the slow pace of sales
was again widespread, with losses registered at firms in caused the ratio of unsold new homes to sales to in-
the construction, manufacturing, and professional and crease further. Sales of existing homes remained weak,
business services sectors. Employment at firms in the on average, in February and March, and the index of
nonbusiness services sector, which includes health care, pending sales agreements in February suggested con-
continued to rise. Aggregate hours of private produc- tinued sluggish activity in coming months. The recent
tion or nonsupervisory workers moved up in March softening in residential housing demand was consistent
but posted a decline for the first quarter as a whole af- with reports of tighter credit conditions for both prime
ter having contracted slightly in the first two months of and nonprime borrowers.
the year. The unemployment rate rose to 5.1 percent in
In the business sector, real spending on equipment and
March, significantly above its level a year ago, and the
software contracted slightly in the first quarter after
labor force participation rate was little changed.

--- Page 4 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
having posted a small increase in the fourth quarter. nomic growth slowed some in the fourth quarter and
Following declines in both shipments and orders of was estimated to have held about steady in the first
nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft in January quarter. In emerging Asia, real economic growth was
and February, shipments increased in March, but or- estimated to have picked up in the first quarter from a
ders were flat. The deteriorating outlook for sales, re- robust pace in the fourth quarter, led by brisk expan-
duced credit availability, and downbeat readings on sions in China and Singapore. Growth in other emerg-
business sentiment all pointed to further weakness in ing Asian economies generally remained subdued. The
capital spending in the near term. Real outlays for non- pace of expansion in Latin America likely declined
residential structures also were estimated to have de- some in the first quarter, largely because the Mexican
clined in the first quarter. Indicators suggested that the economy slowed in the wake of softer growth in the
demand for commercial properties had fallen off sub- United States.
stantially from record levels last year, and commercial
Headline inflation in the United States was elevated in
property prices appeared to be decelerating. Reduced
March. Although the increase in food prices slowed in
credit availability and less-favorable lending terms had
March relative to earlier in the year, energy prices rose
apparently weighed on activity in this sector.
sharply. Excluding these categories, core inflation rose
Real investment in nonfarm inventories excluding mo- at a relatively subdued rate again in March. The core
tor vehicles was estimated to have bounced back to a personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index
moderate annual rate in the first quarter, but motor increased at a somewhat more moderate rate in the first
vehicle inventories continued to fall. Some of the drop quarter than in the fourth quarter of 2007. Survey
in motor vehicle stocks was a result of the disruption to measures of households’ expectations for year-ahead
production from a labor dispute. The ratio of book- inflation rose further in early April, but survey meas-
value inventories to sales in the manufacturing and ures of longer-term inflation expectations moved rela-
trade sector (excluding motor vehicles) moved up a tively little. Average hourly earnings increased in
little, on average, in January and February. Still, outside March at a somewhat slower pace than in January and
of categories tied to housing and construction, firms February. This wage measure rose significantly less
did not appear to be burdened with excess stocks. over the 12 months that ended in March than in the
previous 12 months. The employment cost index for
The U.S. international trade deficit widened in Febru-
hourly compensation continued to rise at a moderate
ary. Imports rose sharply, more than offsetting contin-
rate in the first quarter.
ued robust growth of exports. Most major categories
of non-oil imports increased in February, and imports At its March 18 meeting, the Federal Open Market
of natural gas, automobiles, and consumer goods Committee (FOMC) lowered its target for the federal
surged. Imports of services continued to rise at a ro- funds rate 75 basis points, to 2¼ percent. In addition,
bust pace. By contrast, oil imports moved down. In- the Board of Governors approved a decrease of 75
creases in exports in February were concentrated in basis points in the discount rate, to 2½ percent. The
agricultural goods, automobiles, and industrial supplies, Committee’s statement noted that recent information
particularly fuels. Exports of capital goods declined for indicated that the outlook for economic activity had
the second consecutive month, with weakness evident weakened further; growth in consumer spending had
across a wide range of products. slowed, and labor markets had softened. It also indi-
cated that financial markets remained under consider-
Real economic growth in the major advanced foreign
able stress, and that the tightening of credit conditions
economies was estimated to have slowed further in the
and the deepening of the housing contraction were
first quarter and consumer and business sentiment was
likely to weigh on economic growth over the next few
generally down. In Japan, business sentiment fell sig-
quarters. Inflation had been elevated, and some indica-
nificantly and indicators of investment remained weak.
tors of inflation expectations had risen, but the Com-
In the euro area, growth was estimated to have re-
mittee expected inflation to moderate in coming quar-
mained subdued in the first quarter, with Germany and
ters, reflecting a projected leveling-out of energy and
France faring better than Italy and Spain. Growth in
other commodity prices and an easing of pressures on
the United Kingdom slowed in the first quarter, as
resource utilization. Still, the Committee noted that
credit conditions tightened. Available data for Canada
uncertainty about the inflation outlook had increased,
indicated a continued substantial drag from exports in
and that it would be necessary to continue to monitor
the first quarter, although domestic demand appeared
inflation developments carefully. The Committee said
relatively robust. In emerging market economies, eco-
that its action, combined with those taken earlier, in-

--- Page 5 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 9 - 3 0 , 2 0 0 8 Page 5
cluding measures to foster market liquidity, should help port of tighter lending conditions in the Senior Loan
to promote moderate growth over time and to mitigate Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices
the risks to economic activity. The Committee noted, conducted in April. Part of the strength in commercial
however, that downside risks to growth remained, and and industrial loans was apparently due to increased
indicated that it would act in a timely manner as needed utilization of existing credit lines, the pricing of which
to promote sustainable economic growth and price reflects changes in lending policies only with a lag.
stability. Some banks surveyed in April reported that they had
started to take actions to limit their exposure to home
Conditions in U.S. financial markets improved some-
equity lines of credit, draws on which had grown rap-
what, on balance, over the intermeeting period, but
idly in recent months. After having tightened consid-
strains in some short-term funding markets increased.
erably in March, conditions in the conforming segment
Pressures on bank balance sheets and capital positions
of the residential mortgage market recovered some-
appeared to mount further, reflecting additional losses
what. Spreads of rates on conforming residential
on asset-backed securities and on business and house-
mortgages over those on comparable-maturity Treasury
hold loans. Against this backdrop, term spreads in in-
securities decreased, and credit default swap premiums
terbank funding markets and spreads on commercial
for the government-sponsored enterprises declined
paper issued by financial institutions widened signifi-
substantially. Broad stock price indexes increased
cantly. Financial institutions continued to tap the Fed-
markedly over the intermeeting period, mainly in re-
eral Reserve’s credit programs. Primary credit borrow-
sponse to earnings reports and announcements of re-
ing picked up noticeably after March 16, when the Fed-
capitalizations from major financial institutions that
eral Reserve reduced the spread between the primary
evidently lessened investors’ concerns about the possi-
credit rate and the target federal funds rate to 25 basis
bility of severe difficulties materializing at those firms.
points. Demand for funds from the Term Auction
Facility stayed high over the period. In addition, the Conditions in the money markets of major foreign
Primary Dealer Credit Facility drew substantial demand economies remained strained, particularly in the United
through late March, although the amount outstanding Kingdom and the euro area. Term interbank funding
subsequently declined somewhat. Early in the period, spreads rose in these areas, despite steps taken by their
historically low interest rates on Treasury bills and on central banks to help ease liquidity pressures. Yields on
general-collateral Treasury repurchase agreements indi- sovereign debt in the advanced foreign economies
cated a considerable demand for safe-haven assets. moved up in a range that was about in line with the
However, Federal Reserve actions that increased the increases in comparable Treasury yields in the United
availability of Treasury securities to the public appar- States. The trade-weighted foreign exchange value of
ently helped to improve conditions in those markets. the dollar against major currencies rose.
In five weekly auctions beginning on March 27, the
M2 expanded briskly again in March, as households
Term Securities Lending Facility provided a substantial
continued to seek the relative liquidity and safety of
volume of Treasury securities in exchange for less-
liquid deposits and retail money market mutual funds.
liquid assets. Yields on short-term Treasury securities
The increases in these components were also supported
and Treasury repurchase agreements moved higher, on
by declines in opportunity costs stemming from mone-
balance, following these auctions; nonetheless, “hair-
tary policy easing.
cuts” applied by lenders on non-Treasury collateral
remained elevated, and in some cases increased some- Over the intermeeting period, the expected path of
what, toward the end of the period. monetary policy over the next year as measured by
money market futures rates moved up significantly on
In longer-term credit markets, yields on investment-
net, apparently because economic data releases and
grade corporate bonds rose, but their spreads relative
announcements by large financial firms imparted
to Treasury securities decreased a bit from recent mul-
greater confidence among investors about the pros-
tiyear highs. In contrast, yields on speculative-grade
pects for the economy’s performance in coming quar-
issues dropped, and their spreads relative to Treasury
ters. Futures rates also moved up in response to both
yields narrowed significantly. Gross bond issuance by
the Committee’s decision to lower the target for the
nonfinancial firms was robust in March and the first
federal funds rate by 75 basis points at the March 18
half of April and included a small amount of issuance
meeting, which was a somewhat smaller reduction than
by speculative-grade firms. Supported by increases in
market participants had expected, and the Committee’s
business and residential real estate loans, commercial
accompanying statement, which reportedly conveyed
bank credit expanded briskly in March despite the re-

--- Page 6 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
more concern about inflation than had been antici- In conjunction with the FOMC meeting in April, all
pated. The subsequent release of the minutes of the meeting participants (Federal Reserve Board members
March FOMC meeting elicited limited reaction. Con- and Reserve Bank presidents) provided annual projec-
sistent with the higher expected path for policy and tions for economic growth, the unemployment rate,
easing of safe-haven demands, yields on nominal and inflation for the period 2008 through 2010. The
Treasury coupon securities rose substantially over the projections are described in the Summary of Economic
period, and the Treasury yield curve flattened. Meas- Projections, which is attached as an addendum to these
ures of inflation compensation for the next five years minutes.
derived from yields on inflation-indexed Treasury secu-
In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
rities were quite volatile around the time of the March
look, FOMC participants noted that the data received
FOMC meeting and on balance increased somewhat
since the March FOMC meeting, while pointing to
over the intermeeting period, although they remained
continued weakness in economic activity, had been
in the lower portion of their range over the past several
broadly consistent with their expectations. Conditions
months. Measures of longer-term inflation compensa-
across a number of financial markets were judged to
tion declined, returning to around the middle of their
have improved over the intermeeting period, but finan-
recent elevated range.
cial markets remained fragile and strains in some mar-
In the forecast prepared for this meeting, the staff kets had intensified. Although participants anticipated
made little change to its projection for the growth of that further improvement in market conditions would
real gross domestic product (GDP) in 2008 and 2009. occur only slowly and that some backsliding was possi-
The available indicators of recent economic activity had ble, the generally better state of financial markets had
come in close to the staff’s expectations and had con- caused participants to mark down the odds that eco-
tinued to suggest that a substantial softening in eco- nomic activity could be severely disrupted by a further
nomic activity was under way. The staff projection substantial deterioration in the financial environment.
pointed to a contraction of real GDP in the first half of Economic activity was anticipated to be weakest over
2008 followed by a modest rise in the second half of the next few months, with many participants judging
this year, aided in part by the fiscal stimulus package. that real GDP was likely to contract slightly in the first
The forecast showed real GDP expanding at a rate half of 2008. GDP growth was expected to begin to
somewhat above its potential in 2009, reflecting the recover in the second half of this year, supported by
impetus from cumulative monetary policy easing, con- accommodative monetary policy and fiscal stimulus,
tinued strength in net exports, a gradual lessening in and to increase further in 2009 and 2010. Views varied
financial market strains, and the waning drag from past about the likely pace and vigor of the recovery through
increases in energy prices. Despite this pickup in the 2009, although all participants projected GDP growth
pace of activity, the trajectory of resource utilization to be at or above trend in 2010. Incoming information
anticipated through 2009 implied noticeable slack. The on the inflation outlook since the March FOMC meet-
projection for core PCE price inflation in 2008 as a ing had been mixed. Readings on core inflation had
whole was unchanged; it was reduced a bit over the improved somewhat, but some of this improvement
first half of the year to reflect the somewhat lower- was thought likely to reflect transitory factors, and en-
than-expected readings of recent core PCE inflation ergy and other commodity prices had increased further
and raised a bit over the second half of the year to in- since March. Total PCE inflation was projected to
corporate the spillover from larger-than-anticipated moderate from its current elevated level to between 1½
increases in prices of crude oil and non-oil imports percent and 2 percent in 2010, although participants
since the previous FOMC meeting. The forecast of stressed that this expected moderation was dependent
headline PCE inflation in 2008 was revised up in light on food and energy prices flattening out and critically
of the further run-up in energy prices and somewhat on inflation expectations remaining reasonably well
higher food price inflation; headline PCE inflation was anchored.
expected to exceed core PCE price inflation by a con-
Conditions across a number of financial markets had
siderable margin this year. In view of the projected
improved since the previous FOMC meeting. Equity
slack in resource utilization in 2009 and flattening out
prices and yields on Treasury securities had increased,
of oil and other commodity prices, both core and head-
volatility in both equity and debt markets had ebbed
line PCE price inflation were projected to drop back
somewhat, and a range of credit risk premiums had
from their 2008 levels, in line with the staff’s previous
moved down. Participants noted that the better tone
forecasts.
of financial markets had been helped by the apparent

--- Page 7 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 9 - 3 0 , 2 0 0 8 Page 7
willingness and ability of financial institutions to raise effects of such a decline could be amplified through
new capital. Investors’ confidence had probably also their impact on financial institutions and financial mar-
been buoyed by corporate earnings reports for the first kets, remained a key source of downside risk to partici-
quarter, which suggested that profit growth outside of pants’ projections for economic growth.
the financial sector remained solid, and also by the
Growth in consumer spending appeared to have
resolution of the difficulties of a major broker-dealer in
slowed to a crawl in recent months and consumer sen-
mid-March. Moreover, the various liquidity facilities
timent had fallen sharply. The pressure on households’
introduced by the Federal Reserve in recent months
real incomes from higher energy prices and the erosion
were thought to have bolstered market liquidity and
of wealth resulting from continuing declines in house
aided a return to more orderly market functioning. But
prices likely contributed to the deceleration in con-
participants emphasized that financial markets re-
sumer outlays. Reports from contacts in the banking
mained under considerable stress, noted that the func-
and financial services sectors indicated that the avail-
tioning of many markets remained impaired, and ex-
ability of both consumer credit and home equity lines
pressed concern that some of the recent recovery in
had tightened considerably further in recent months
markets could prove fragile. Strains in short-term
and that delinquency rates on household credit had
funding markets had intensified over the intermeeting
continued to drift upwards. Consumer sentiment and
period, in part reflecting continuing pressures on the
spending had also been held down by the softening in
liquidity positions of financial institutions. Despite a
labor markets—nonfarm payroll employment had
narrowing of spreads on corporate bonds, credit condi-
fallen for the third consecutive month in March and
tions were seen as remaining tight. The Senior Loan
the unemployment rate had moved up. The restraint
Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices
on spending emanating from weakness in labor markets
conducted in April indicated that banks had tightened
was expected to increase over coming quarters, with
lending standards and pricing terms on loans to both
participants projecting the unemployment rate to pick
businesses and households. Participants stressed that it
up further this year and to remain elevated in 2009.
could take some time for the financial system to return
to a more normal footing, and a number of participants Consumption spending was likely to be supported in
were of the view that financial headwinds would proba- the near term by the fiscal stimulus package, which was
bly continue to restrain economic activity through expected to boost spending temporarily in the middle
much of next year. Even so, the likelihood that the of this year. Some participants suggested that the weak
functioning of the financial system would deteriorate economic environment could increase the propensity
substantially further with significant adverse implica- of households to use their tax rebates to pay down ex-
tions for the economic outlook was judged by partici- isting debt and so might diminish the impact of the
pants to have receded somewhat since the March package. However, it was also noted that the tighten-
FOMC meeting. ing in credit availability might mean a significant num-
ber of households may be credit constrained and this
The housing market had continued to weaken since the
might increase the proportion of the rebates that is
previous meeting, and participants saw little indication
spent. The timing and magnitude of the impact of the
of a bottoming out in either housing activity or prices.
stimulus package on GDP was also seen as depending
Housing starts and the demand for new homes had
on the extent to which the boost to consumption
declined further, house prices in many parts of the
spending is absorbed by a temporary run-down in
country were falling faster than they had towards the
firms’ inventories or by an increase in imports rather
end of 2007, and inventories of unsold homes re-
than by an expansion in domestic output.
mained quite elevated. A small number of participants
reported tentative signs that housing activity in a few The outlook for business spending remained decidedly
areas of the country might be beginning to pick up, and downbeat. Indicators of business sentiment were low,
a narrowing of credit risk spreads on AAA indexes of and reports from business contacts suggested that firms
sub-prime mortgages in recent weeks was also noted. were scaling back their capital spending plans. Several
Nonetheless, the outlook for the housing market re- participants reported that uncertainty about the eco-
mained bleak, with housing demand likely to be af- nomic outlook was leading firms to defer spending pro-
fected by restrictive conditions in mortgage markets, jects until prospects for economic activity became
fears that house prices would fall further, and weaken- clearer. The tightening in the supply of business credit
ing labor markets. The possibility that house prices was also seen as holding back investment, with some
could decline by more than anticipated, and that the firms apparently reluctant to reduce their liquidity posi-

--- Page 8 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
tions in the current environment. Spending on non- creases in prices and so may not provide a useful guide
residential construction projects continued to slow, to emerging price pressures.
although the extent of that slowing varied across the
On balance, participants expected the recent increases
country. A few participants reported that the commer-
in oil and food prices to continue to boost overall con-
cial real estate market in some areas remained relatively
sumer price inflation in the near term; thereafter, total
firm, supported by low vacancy rates.
inflation was projected to moderate, with all partici-
The strength of U.S. exports remained a notable bright pants expecting total PCE inflation of between 1½ per-
spot. Growth in exports, which had been supported by cent and 2 percent by 2010. Participants stressed that
solid advances in foreign economies and by declines in the expected moderation in inflation was dependent on
the foreign exchange value of the dollar, had partially the continued stability of inflation expectations. A
insulated the output and profits of U.S. companies, number of participants voiced concern that long-term
especially those in the manufacturing sector, from the inflation expectations could drift upwards if headline
effects of weakening domestic demand. Several par- inflation remained elevated for a protracted period or if
ticipants voiced concern, however, that the pace of the recent substantial policy easing was misinterpreted
activity in the rest of the world could slow in coming by the public as suggesting that Committee members
quarters, suggesting that the impetus provided from net had a greater tolerance for inflation than previously
exports might well diminish. thought. The possibility that inflation expectations
could increase was viewed as a key upside risk to the
The information received on the inflation outlook since
inflation outlook. However, participants emphasized
the March FOMC meeting had been mixed. Recent
that appropriate monetary policy, combined with effec-
readings on core inflation had improved somewhat,
tive communication of the Committee’s commitment
although participants noted that some of that im-
to price stability, would mitigate this risk.
provement probably reflected transitory factors.
Moreover, the increase in crude oil prices to record Participants stressed the difficulty of gauging the ap-
levels, together with rapid increases in food and import propriate stance of policy in current circumstances.
prices in recent months, was likely to put upward pres- Some participants noted that the level of the federal
sure on inflation over the next few quarters. Prices funds target, especially when compared with the cur-
embedded in futures contracts continued to point to a rent rate of inflation, was relatively low by historical
leveling-off of energy and commodity prices. Although standards. Even taking account of current financial
these futures contracts probably remained the best ba- headwinds, such a low rate could suggest that policy
sis for projecting movements in commodity prices, par- was reasonably accommodative. However, other par-
ticipants emphasized the considerable uncertainty at- ticipants observed that the pronounced strains in bank-
tending the likely path of commodity prices and cau- ing and financial markets imparted much greater uncer-
tioned that commodity prices in recent years had often tainty to such assessments and meant that measures of
advanced more quickly than had been implied by fu- the stance of policy based on the real federal funds rate
tures contracts. Several participants reported that busi- were not likely to provide a reliable guide in the current
ness contacts had expressed growing concerns about environment. Several participants expressed the view
the increase in their input costs and that there were that the easing in monetary policy since last fall had not
signs that an increasing number of firms were seeking as yet led to a loosening in overall financial conditions,
to pass on these higher costs to their customers in the but rather had prevented financial conditions from
form of higher prices. Other participants noted, how- tightening as much as they otherwise would have in
ever, that the extent of the pass-through of higher en- response to escalating strains in financial markets. This
ergy and food prices to core retail prices appeared rela- view suggested that the stimulus from past monetary
tively limited to date, and that profit margins in the policy easing would be felt mainly as conditions in fi-
nonfinancial sector remained reasonably high, suggest- nancial markets improved.
ing that there was some scope for firms to absorb cost
In the Committee’s discussion of monetary policy for
increases without raising prices. Available data and
the intermeeeting period, most members judged that
anecdotal reports indicated that gains in labor compen-
policy should be eased by 25 basis points at this meet-
sation remained moderate, and some participants sug-
ing. Although prospects for economic activity had not
gested that wage growth was unlikely to pick up sharply
deteriorated significantly since the March meeting, the
in coming quarters if, as anticipated, labor markets re-
outlook for growth and employment remained weak
mained relatively soft. However, several participants
and slack in resource utilization was likely to increase.
were of the view that wage inflation tended to lag in-

--- Page 9 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 9 - 3 0 , 2 0 0 8 Page 9
An additional easing in policy would help to foster growth in output. To further its long-run objec-
moderate growth over time without impeding a mod- tives, the Committee in the immediate future
eration in inflation. Moreover, although the likelihood seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent
that economic activity would be severely disrupted by a with reducing the federal funds rate to an aver-
sharp deterioration in financial markets had apparently age of around 2 percent.”
receded, most members thought that the risks to eco-
nomic growth were still skewed to the downside. A The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
reduction in interest rates would help to mitigate those low to be released at 2:15 p.m.:
risks. However, most members viewed the decision to
reduce interest rates at this meeting as a close call. The “The Federal Open Market Committee decided
substantial easing of monetary policy since last Sep- today to lower its target for the federal funds
tember, the ongoing steps taken by the Federal Reserve rate 25 basis points to 2 percent.
to provide liquidity and support market functioning,
Recent information indicates that economic ac-
and the imminent fiscal stimulus would help to support
tivity remains weak. Household and business
economic activity. Moreover, although downside risks
spending has been subdued and labor markets
to growth remained, members were also concerned
have softened further. Financial markets remain
about the upside risks to the inflation outlook, given
under considerable stress, and tight credit condi-
the continued increases in oil and commodity prices
tions and the deepening housing contraction are
and the fact that some indicators suggested that infla-
likely to weigh on economic growth over the
tion expectations had risen in recent months. None-
next few quarters.
theless, most members agreed that a further, modest
easing in the stance of policy was appropriate to bal- Although readings on core inflation have im-
ance better the risks to achieving the Committee’s dual proved somewhat, energy and other commodity
objectives of maximum employment and price stability prices have increased, and some indicators of in-
over the medium run. flation expectations have risen in recent months.
The Committee expects inflation to moderate in
The Committee agreed that that the statement to be
coming quarters, reflecting a projected leveling-
released after the meeting should take note of the sub-
out of energy and other commodity prices and
stantial policy easing to date and the ongoing measures
an easing of pressures on resource utilization.
to foster market liquidity. In light of these significant
Still, uncertainty about the inflation outlook re-
policy actions, the risks to growth were now thought to
mains high. It will be necessary to continue to
be more closely balanced by the risks to inflation. Ac-
monitor inflation developments carefully.
cordingly, the Committee felt that it was no longer ap-
propriate for the statement to emphasize the downside The substantial easing of monetary policy to
risks to growth. Given these circumstances, future pol- date, combined with ongoing measures to foster
icy adjustments would depend on the extent to which market liquidity, should help to promote moder-
economic and financial developments affected the me- ate growth over time and to mitigate risks to
dium-term outlook for growth and inflation. In that economic activity. The Committee will continue
regard, several members noted that it was unlikely to be to monitor economic and financial develop-
appropriate to ease policy in response to information ments and will act as needed to promote sustain-
suggesting that the economy was slowing further or able economic growth and price stability.
even contracting slightly in the near term, unless eco-
Votes for this action: Messrs. Bernanke, Geithner,
nomic and financial developments indicated a signifi-
Kohn, Kroszner, and Mishkin, Ms. Pianalto, Messrs.
cant weakening of the economic outlook.
Stern and Warsh.
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank Votes against this action: Messrs. Fisher and
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe- Plosser.
cute transactions in the System Account in accordance
with the following domestic policy directive: Messrs. Fisher and Plosser dissented because they pre-
ferred no change in the target federal funds rate at this
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks meeting. Although the economy had been weak, it had
monetary and financial conditions that will fos- evolved roughly as expected since the previous meet-
ter price stability and promote sustainable ing. Stresses in financial markets also had continued,

--- Page 10 ---

Page 10 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
but the Federal Reserve’s liquidity facilities were helpful reducing the burden and complexity associated with the
in that regard and the more worrisome development in current system of reserve requirements and ensuring
their view was the outlook for inflation. Rising prices that the Committee’s interest rate targets could be re-
for food, energy, and other commodities; signs of liably achieved. Participants noted that frameworks for
higher inflation expectations; and a negative real federal monetary policy implementation employed in other
funds rate raised substantial concerns about the pros- countries span a wide range and that the experiences of
pects for inflation. Mr. Plosser cited the recent rapid these countries provided useful information for the
growth of monetary aggregates as additional evidence Federal Reserve’s consideration of alternative ap-
that the economy had ample liquidity after the aggres- proaches. They agreed that further study was required
sive easing of policy to date. Mr. Fisher was concerned to narrow the range of options under consideration and
that an adverse feedback loop was developing by which that it would be important to consult closely with de-
lowering the funds rate had been pushing down the pository institutions and others in the design of a new
exchange value of the dollar, contributing to higher system.
commodity and import prices, cutting real spending by
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
businesses and households, and therefore ultimately
would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, June 24-25,
impairing economic activity. To help prevent inflation
2008.
expectations from becoming unhinged, both Messrs.
Fisher and Plosser felt the Committee should put addi-
The meeting adjourned at 1:00 p.m.
tional emphasis on its price stability goal at this point,
and they believed that another reduction in the funds
Notation Votes
rate at this meeting could prove costly over the longer
By notation vote completed on March 20, 2008, the
run.
Committee unanimously approved a resolution that
In a joint session of the Federal Open Market Commit- added non-agency AAA-rated commercial-mortgage-
tee and the Board of Governors, meeting participants backed securities to the list of collateral acceptable in
turned to a discussion of the implications of the pay- connection with the Term Securities Lending Facility.
ment of interest on reserves for monetary policy im-
plementation. Following passage of the Financial Ser- By notation vote completed on April 7, 2008, the
vices Regulatory Relief Act of 2006, which will permit Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
the Federal Reserve to reduce reserve requirements and FOMC meeting held on March 18, 2008.
to pay interest on reserves beginning in 2011, the staff
had undertaken work to explore and evaluate alterna-
tive approaches to monetary policy implementation
using these new authorities. After a staff presentation
summarizing the work to date, policymakers discussed _____________________________
the potential advantages and disadvantages of several Brian F. Madigan
of the alternative approaches. Considerations included Secretary

--- Page 11 ---

Page 1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the April 2008 FOMC meeting, the economy this year. Real incomes were being held
members of the Board of Governors and the presi- down by higher oil prices; falling house prices had re-
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom par- duced household wealth; and households and busi-
ticipate in the deliberations of the FOMC, provided nesses were facing tighter credit conditions. Exports
projections for the rates of economic growth, unem- were seen as a notable source of strength this year ow-
ployment, and inflation in 2008, 2009, and 2010. Pro- ing to continued economic growth overseas and the
jections were based on information available through depreciation of the dollar over the past year or so.
the conclusion of the April meeting, on each partici- Many participants also said that the substantial easing
pant’s assumptions regarding a range of factors likely to of monetary policy since last year and the fiscal stimu-
affect economic outcomes, and on his or her assess- lus package should help to support spending in the
ment of appropriate monetary policy. “Appropriate second half of the year. Beyond 2008, factors pro-
monetary policy” is defined as the future policy that, jected to buoy economic growth included the contin-
based on current information, is deemed most likely to ued effects of an accommodative stance of monetary
foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation policy in conjunction with a gradual easing of financial
that best satisfy the participant’s interpretation of the market strains, a stabilization in housing markets, and a
Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum em- leveling-off of oil and commodity prices. Participants
ployment and price stability. were encouraged by steps taken at major financial insti-
tutions to bolster their balance sheets and to raise new
The projections, which are summarized in table 1 and
capital. Some expressed the view that financial market
chart 1, suggest that FOMC participants expected eco-
sentiment may have swung excessively to the pessimis-
nomic growth to be much weaker in 2008 than last
tic side, and that risk spreads would come down and
year, owing primarily to a continued contraction of
credit would become more available as risk aversion
housing activity, a reduction in the availability of
diminishes. Also, demand and supply in the housing
household and business credit, and rising energy prices.
market should become better aligned as the decline in
The unemployment rate was expected to increase sig-
house prices increases the affordability of homeowner-
nificantly. However, output growth further ahead was
ship and the decline in housing starts reduces the sup-
projected to pick up by enough to begin to reverse
ply of new homes. Most participants expected real
some of the increase in the unemployment rate by
GDP to grow roughly at their estimates of its trend rate
2010. In light of the recent surge in the prices of oil
in 2009 and somewhat above trend in 2010.
and other commodities, inflation was expected to re-
main elevated in 2008. Inflation was projected to mod- With output growth well below trend this year, most
erate in 2009 and 2010 as the prices of crude oil and participants expected that the unemployment rate
other commodities level out and economic slack damps would move up. The central tendency of participants’
cost and price pressures. Most participants judged that projections for the average rate of unemployment in
the uncertainty around their projections for both out- the fourth quarter of 2008 was 5.5 to 5.7 percent,
put growth and inflation was greater than normal. above the 5.2 to 5.3 percent unemployment rate fore-
Most viewed the risks to output as weighted to the casted in January and consistent with significant slack
downside. Participants were roughly evenly divided as in labor markets and the economy. Most participants
to whether the risks to the inflation outlook are broadly expected the unemployment rate to edge down in 2009
balanced or skewed to the upside. and 2010.
The Outlook The steep run-up in the prices of oil and other com-
The central tendency of participants’ projections for modities since January was the primary factor leading
real GDP growth in 2008, at 0.3 to 1.2 percent, was participants to revise up sharply their projections for
considerably lower than the central tendency of the overall inflation in the near term. In contrast, the cen-
projections provided in conjunction with the January tral tendencies of the projections for core PCE infla-
FOMC meeting, which was 1.3 to 2.0 percent. Partici- tion in 2008 increased only moderately, from 2.0 to 2.2
pants viewed activity as likely to be particularly weak in percent in January to 2.2 to 2.4 percent in April, reflect-
the first half of 2008; some rebound was anticipated in ing the effects of higher food and energy prices on
the second half of the year. Incoming data on spend- other goods and services and the rise in import prices
ing and employment already indicated a softening

--- Page 12 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
associated with the decline in the dollar and higher in- those rates given current economic conditions. Many
flation in our trading partners. participants judged that, given the recent adverse
shocks to both aggregate demand and inflation, policy
Rates of both overall and core inflation were expected
would be able to foster only a gradual return of key
to decline over the next two years, reflecting a flatten-
macroeconomic variables to their longer-run sustain-
ing out of the prices of oil and other commodities con-
able or optimal levels. Consequently, the rate of un-
sistent with futures market prices and the effects of
employment was projected by many participants to
significant economic slack. Participants’ projections for
remain above its longer-run sustainable level even in
2010 were importantly influenced by their judgments
2010, and inflation was viewed likely still to be a bit
about the measured rates of inflation consistent with
above levels that some participants judged would be
the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate to promote maxi-
consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate.
mum employment and price stability and about the
time frame over which policy should aim to attain
Table 1: Economic Projections of Federal Reserve Governors and
Reserve Bank Presidents
(Percent)
2008 2009 2010
Central Tendency1
Growth of real GDP 0.3 to 1.2 2.0 to 2.8 2.6 to 3.1
January projections 1.3 to 2.0 2.1 to 2.7 2.5 to 3.0
Unemployment rate 5.5 to 5.7 5.2 to 5.7 4.9 to 5.5
January projections 5.2 to 5.3 5.0 to 5.3 4.9 to 5.1
PCE inflation 3.1 to 3.4 1.9 to 2.3 1.8 to 2.0
January projections 2.1 to 2.4 1.7 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0
Core PCE inflation 2.2 to 2.4 1.9 to 2.1 1.7 to 1.9
January projections 2.0 to 2.2 1.7 to 2.0 1.7 to 1.9
Range2
Growth of real GDP 0.0 to 1.5 1.8 to 3.0 2.0 to 3.4
January projections 1.0 to 2.2 1.8 to 3.2 2.2 to 3.2
Unemployment rate 5.3 to 6.0 5.2 to 6.3 4.8 to 5.9
January projections 5.0 to 5.5 4.9 to 5.7 4.7 to 5.4
PCE inflation 2.8 to 3.8 1.7 to 3.0 1.5 to 2.0
January projections 2.0 to 2.8 1.7 to 2.3 1.5 to 2.0
Core PCE inflation 1.9 to 2.5 1.7 to 2.2 1.3 to 2.0
January projections 1.9 to 2.3 1.7 to 2.2 1.4 to 2.0
Note: Projections of the growth of real GDP, of PCE inflation, and of core PCE inflation are percent
changes from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. PCE infla-
tion and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal
consumption expenditures and the price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding food and
energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth
quarter of the year indicated. Each participant's projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate
monetary policy.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each
year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants' projections, from lowest to highest, for
that variable in that year.

--- Page 13 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t i o n s f o r t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 9 - 3 0 , 2 0 0 8 Page 3
Chart 1: Central Tendencies and Ranges of Economic Projections*
Real GDP Growth
Percent
7
Central Tendency of Projections 6
Range of Projections 5
• 4
• • • • 3
2
1
0
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Unemployment Rate
Percent
8
7
• 6
•
• • 5
•
4
3
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
PCE Inflation
Percent
5
4
•
• •
3
• • 2
1
0
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Core PCE Inflation
Percent
5
4
3
• • • •
2
•
1
0
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
* See notes to Table 1 for variable definitions.

--- Page 14 ---

P age 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Risks to the Outlook in part the difficulty of assessing the opposing effects
Most participants viewed the risks to their GDP projec- of increased economic slack and higher energy prices.
tions as weighted to the downside and the associated (Table 2 provides estimates of average ranges of fore-
risks to their projections of the unemployment rate as cast uncertainty for GDP growth, unemployment, and
tilted to the upside. The possibility that house prices inflation since 1987.1)
could decline more steeply than anticipated, putting
further downward pressure on residential investment
and consumption, was perceived as a significant risk to Table 2: Average Historical Projection Error
the outlook for economic growth and employment. Ranges
Another risk was the possibility that foreign economies (Percentage Points)
might slow more than expected, damping U.S. exports. 2008 2009 2010
Financial market conditions continued to pose serious
risks—stock prices had declined on net since the Janu- Real GDP1 ±1.0 ±1.3 ±1.4
ary meeting and credit conditions had tightened further Unemployment
±0.4 ±0.7 ±1.0
for both households and firms. Although several par- rate2
ticipants noted that financial strains had eased some- Total consumer
±0.7 ±1.0 ±1.0
what in April, most agreed that overall financial condi- prices3
tions remained tighter than at the beginning of the year.
Note: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus
The potential for adverse interactions, in which weaker
the root mean squared error of projections that were released in
economic activity could lead to a worsening of financial the spring from 1987 through 2007 for the current and follow-
conditions and a reduced availability of credit, which in ing two years by various private and government forecasters.
turn could further damp economic growth, continued As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain
assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual
to be viewed as a worrisome possibility.
outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices
Regarding risks to the inflation outlook, participants will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors
made in the past. Further information is in David Reifschneider
pointed to the possibility that economic slack could put
and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Eco-
either more or less downward pressure on costs and nomic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance
prices than anticipated. Some noted that downside and Economics Discussion Series #2007-60 (November).
risks to aggregate demand implied a risk of greater eco- 1. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the pre-
vious year to fourth quarter of the year indicated.
nomic slack and corresponding downside risks to price
2. Projection is the fourth-quarter average of the civilian
pressures. However, many participants (noticeably
unemployment rate (percent).
more than in January) saw the upside risks to inflation 3. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price
as greater than the downside risks to inflation. In par- measure that has been most widely used in government and
ticular, the pass-through of recent increases in energy private economic forecasts. Projection is percent change,
fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the
and commodity prices as well as of past dollar deprecia-
year indicated.
tion to consumer prices could be greater than expected.
In addition, some participants expressed concern that
commodity prices may not flatten out as implied by
Diversity of Participants’ Views
futures prices, thus putting further upward pressure on
Charts 2(a) and 2(b) provide more detail on the diver-
prices. Finally, inflation expectations could become
sity of participants’ views. The dispersions of partici-
less firmly anchored if the current elevated rates of in-
pants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2008 and
flation were to persist for longer than anticipated or if
2009 were roughly equally wide in January and April,
the public were to misinterpret the recent substantial
but for 2010 the dispersion was a bit wider in April.
policy easing as reflecting less resolve among Commit-
Relative to the projections made in June 2007, just be-
tee members to maintain low and stable inflation.
fore the onset of financial market turbulence, the diver-
Participants continued to view uncertainty about the sity in views about real activity had widened considera-
outlook for economic activity as higher than normal,
with some noting that economic slowdowns are gener-
ally associated with heightened uncertainty as are epi-
sodes of unusual credit restraint. In addition, partici- 1 The box “Forecast Uncertainty” at the end of this summary dis-
pants expressed notably more uncertainty about their cusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in economic
forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty
inflation projections than they had in January, reflecting
and risks attending participants’ projections.

--- Page 15 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t i o n s f o r t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 9 - 3 0 , 2 0 0 8 Page 5
bly.2 This increased dispersion was also apparent in consistent over time with maximum employment. The
projections for the unemployment rate. The dispersion dispersion of the projections for PCE inflation in 2008
of projections for output and employment in 2008 and 2009 had widened somewhat since January, reflect-
seemed largely to reflect differing assessments of the ing different views on the extent to which recent in-
effect of financial market conditions on real activity, creases in the prices of oil and other commodities
the speed with which credit conditions might improve, would pass through into higher consumer prices, on
and the depth and duration of the housing market con- whether the prices of oil and other commodities would
traction. For 2009, views differed notably about the flatten out as implied in futures market prices, and on
pace at which output and employment would recover, the influence that inflation expectations would exert on
with some participants concerned that financial strains inflation over the short and medium run. Participants’
could prove more persistent than most participants inflation projections further out were influenced by
expected. The dispersion of participants’ longer-term their views of the rate of inflation consistent with the
projections was also affected to some degree by differ- Federal Reserve’s dual objectives and the time it would
ences in their judgments about the economy’s trend take to achieve these goals given current economic
growth rate and the unemployment rate that would be conditions and appropriate policy.
2 The June 2007 projections were included in the Board’s Monetary
Policy Report to the Congress in July 2007.

--- Page 16 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Chart 2(a): Distribution of Participants’ Projections (percent)
Real GDP Unemployment Rate
2008 2008
Number of Participants Number of Participants
16 16
14 14
12 12
April Projections 10 April Projections 10
January Projections 8 January Projections 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
0 0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 4.7 - 4.9 - 5.1 - 5.3 - 5.5 - 5.7 - 5.9 - 6.1 - 6.3 -
0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2 6.4
2009 2009
Number of Participants Number of Participants
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
0 0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 4.7 - 4.9 - 5.1 - 5.3 - 5.5 - 5.7 - 5.9 - 6.1 - 6.3 -
0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2 6.4
2010 2010
Number of Participants Number of Participants
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
0 0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 4.7 - 4.9 - 5.1 - 5.3 - 5.5 - 5.7 - 5.9 - 6.1 - 6.3 -
0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 4.8 5.0 5.2 5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2 6.4

--- Page 17 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t i o n s f o r t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 9 - 3 0 , 2 0 0 8 Page 7
Chart 2(b): Distribution of Participants’ Projections (percent)
PCE Inflation Core PCE Inflation
2008 2008
Number of Participants Number of Participants
16 16
14 April Projections 14
April Projections 12 January Projections 12
January Projections 10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
0 0
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 1.3 - 1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 - 2.5 -
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
2009 2009
Number of Participants Number of Participants
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
0 0
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 1.3 - 1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 - 2.5 -
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
2010 2010
Number of Participants Number of Participants
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
0 0
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 1.3 - 1.5 - 1.7 - 1.9 - 2.1 - 2.3 - 2.5 -
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6

--- Page 18 ---

P age 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the
presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks info rm discussions of monetary policy among
policymakers and can aid public understandin g of the basis for policy actions. Consider-
able uncertainty attends these projections, ho wever. The economic and statistical mod-
els and relationships used to help produce ec onomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect
descriptions of the real world. And the futu re path of the economy can be affected by
myriad unforeseen developments and events . Thus, in setting the stance of monetary
policy, participants consider not only what appears to be the most likely economic out-
come as embodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the
likelihood of their occurring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur.
Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by Federal Reserve
Board staff in advance of meetings of the Fe deral Open Market Committee. The pro-
jection error ranges shown in the table illustr ate the considerable uncertainty associated
with economic forecasts. For example, sup pose a participant projects that real GDP
and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and
2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in
the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported
in table 2 would imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand
between 2.0 percent to 4.0 percent in the current year, 1.7 percent to 4.3 percent in the
second year, and 1.6 percent to 4.4 percent in the third year. The corresponding 70 per-
cent confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.3 percent to 2.7 percent in the
current year and 1.0 percent to 3.0 percent in the second and third years.
Because current conditions may differ from t hose that prevailed on average over history,
participants provide judgments as to whethe r the uncertainty attached to their projec-
tions of each variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in ta ble 2. Participants also provide judgments
as to whether the risks to their projections ar e weighted to the upside, downside, or are
broadly balanced. That is, participants judge whether each variable is more likely to be
above or below their projections of the most likely outcome. These judgments about
the uncertainty and the risks attending each participant’s projections are distinct from
the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes. Forecast uncertainty
is concerned with the risks associated with a particular projection, rather than with di-
vergences across a number of different projections.