# 20101103_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:36:40*
*Pages: 20, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
November 2–3, 2010
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Bank
held in the offices of the Board of Governors in Wash- Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover-
ington, D.C., on Tuesday, November 2, 2010, at nors
1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, November 3,
2010, at 9:00 a.m. Nellie Liang, Director, Office of Financial Stability
Policy and Research, Board of Governors
PRESENT:
Ben Bernanke, Chairman William Nelson, Deputy Director, Division of
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
James Bullard
Elizabeth Duke Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Thomas M. Hoenig Board Members, Board of Governors
Sandra Pianalto
Sarah Bloom Raskin Charles S. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director,
Eric Rosengren Office of the Staff Director, Board of Gover-
Daniel K. Tarullo nors
Kevin Warsh
Janet L. Yellen Seth B. Carpenter and Andrew T. Levin, Senior
Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Af-
Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Richard W. fairs, Board of Governors; Michael Leahy, Sen-
Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Charles I. ior Associate Director, Division of Interna-
Plosser, Alternate Members of the Federal tional Finance, Board of Governors; David
Open Market Committee Reifschneider, Senior Associate Director, Divi-
sion of Research and Statistics, Board of Gov-
Jeffrey M. Lacker and Dennis P. Lockhart, Presi- ernors
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Rich-
mond and Atlanta, respectively Stephen A. Meyer, Senior Adviser, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
John F. Moore, First Vice President, Federal Re-
serve Bank of San Francisco Daniel M. Covitz and David E. Lebow, Deputy
Associate Directors, Division of Research and
William B. English, Secretary and Economist Statistics, Board of Governors; Gretchen C.
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary Weinbach, Deputy Associate Director, Divi-
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Brian J. Gross, Special Assistant to the Board, Of-
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel fice of Board Members, Board of Governors
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Nathan Sheets, Economist Mark A. Carlson, Economist, Division of Mone-
David J. Stockton, Economist tary Affairs, Board of Governors
James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Jeff Fuhrer, Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analyst,
Steven B. Kamin, Simon Potter, Lawrence Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gov-
Slifman, Christopher J. Waller, and David W. ernors
Wilcox, Associate Economists
Sarah G. Green, First Vice President, Federal Re-
Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Ac- serve Bank of Richmond
count

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Loretta J. Mester, Harvey Rosenblum, Daniel G. that have been accepted as counterparties for such op-
Sullivan, and John C. Williams, Executive Vice erations; these transactions, which the Desk conducted
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadel- to ensure continuing operational and systems readiness,
phia, Dallas, Chicago, and San Francisco, re- used Treasury securities, agency debt, and agency-
spectively guaranteed MBS as collateral. In addition, the Federal
Reserve conducted another small-value auction of term
David Altig, Richard P. Dzina, Mark E. Schweitzer, deposits to ensure the continued operational readiness
and Kei-Mu Yi, Senior Vice Presidents, Feder- of the term deposit facility and to increase the familiari-
al Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, Cleve- ty of eligible depository institutions with the auction
land, and Minneapolis, respectively procedures. There were no open market operations in
foreign currencies for the System’s account over the
Todd E. Clark, Vice President, Federal Reserve intermeeting period. By unanimous vote, the Commit-
Bank of Kansas City tee ratified the Desk’s transactions over the intermeet-
ing period.
Robert L. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Re-
The Manager described the tentative plans the Desk
serve Bank of Richmond
had prepared for implementing a possible Committee
decision to expand further the System’s holdings of
longer-term Treasury securities. Purchases would con-
tinue to be concentrated in nominal Treasury securities
The meeting opened with a short discussion regarding
with remaining maturities between 2 and 10 years, with
communicating with the public about monetary policy
some purchases of shorter- and longer-term securities
deliberations and decisions. Meeting participants sup-
and of TIPS; with this maturity distribution, newly pur-
ported a review of the Committee’s communication
chased securities would be expected to have an average
guidelines with the aim of ensuring that the public is
duration of 5 to 6 years, essentially the same as the av-
well informed about monetary policy issues while pre-
erage duration of the System’s existing holdings of
serving the necessary confidentiality of policy discus-
Treasury securities. The Desk planned to publish addi-
sions until their scheduled release. Governor Yellen
tional information about its transactions to increase the
agreed to chair a subcommittee to conduct such a re-
transparency of, and encourage wider participation in,
view.
future purchase operations. The Desk judged that if it
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed- continued reinvesting principal payments from the
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet Federal Reserve System’s holdings of agency debt and
The Manager of the System Open Market Account agency MBS in longer-term Treasury securities, then it
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and could purchase additional longer-term Treasury securi-
foreign financial markets since the Committee met on ties at a pace of about $75 billion per month while
September 21, 2010. He also reported on System open avoiding disruptions in market functioning. The Man-
market operations, including the continuing reinvest- ager indicated that implementing a sizable increase in
ment into longer-term Treasury securities of principal the System’s holdings of Treasury securities most effec-
payments received on the SOMA’s holdings of agency tively likely would entail a temporary relaxation of the
debt and agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities 35 percent per-issue limit on SOMA holdings under
(MBS). The Open Market Desk at the Federal Reserve which the Desk had been operating; whether, and to
Bank of New York purchased a total of about $65 bil- what extent, the System’s holdings of some issues
lion of Treasury securities since the Committee de- would exceed 35 percent would depend on the specific
cided, on August 10, to begin reinvesting such principal securities that dealers choose to offer at future auc-
payments. Purchases were concentrated in nominal tions. Finally, the Manager summarized the implica-
Treasury securities with maturities of 2 to 10 years, tions for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and in-
though some shorter-term and some longer-term secu- come statement of alternative decisions that the Com-
rities were purchased along with some Treasury infla- mittee might make about the size and maturity distribu-
tion-protected securities (TIPS). Over the intermeeting tion of the SOMA’s securities holdings. Participants
period, the Desk also conducted a number of small- discussed the Desk’s tentative operational plans; they
value tri-party reverse repurchase operations with the also discussed the potential effects of an expansion of
primary dealers and with money market mutual funds the System’s holdings of longer-term securities on fi-

--- Page 3 ---

_____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ N__o_v_e_m_b_e_r_ 2_-_3_, _2_0_1_0_______________________P_a_g_e_ _3
nancial markets and institutions and on the economy, new orders received by manufacturers suggested that
and the channels through which those effects could demand for factory goods had continued to increase.
occur.
Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose at
Staff Review of the Economic Situation a moderate rate in the third quarter. Rising equity pric-
The information reviewed at the November 2–3 meet- es likely resulted in some further improvement in net
ing indicated that the economic recovery proceeded at worth over the same period. However, real disposable
a modest rate in recent months, with only a gradual personal income, which rose strongly in the first half of
improvement in labor market conditions, and was ac- the year, increased only slightly in the third quarter. As
companied by a continued low rate of inflation. Con- a result, the personal saving rate dropped back some-
sumer spending, business investment in equipment and what in the third quarter, although it remained near the
software, and exports posted further gains in the third high levels that have prevailed since late 2008. Bank
quarter, and nonfarm inventory investment stepped up. lending standards were still relatively tight, and house-
But construction activity in both the residential and hold borrowing remained low. Surveys taken in Sep-
nonresidential sectors remained depressed, and a signif- tember and October indicated that consumers were
icant portion of the rise in domestic demand was again slightly more pessimistic about the economic outlook
met by imports. U.S. industrial production slowed no- than earlier in the year.
ticeably in August and September, hiring at private
Activity in the housing market remained exceptionally
businesses remained modest, and the unemployment
weak. Although sales of new and existing homes
rate stayed elevated. Headline consumer price infla-
turned up in August and September, the still-low level
tion was subdued in recent months, despite a rise in
of demand suggested that the payback for the earlier
energy prices, as core consumer price inflation trended
boost to sales from the homebuyer tax credit had not
lower.
yet faded. Moreover, despite further declines in mort-
Private businesses continued to increase their demand gage interest rates in recent months, other factors con-
for labor only modestly. In September, private non- tinued to restrain housing demand, including consumer
farm payroll employment remained on a gradual up- pessimism about the outlook for jobs and income, the
trend, and the average workweek of all private-sector depressed rate of household formation, and tight un-
employees was unchanged for a third month. In addi- derwriting standards for mortgages. In addition, the
tion, the number of individuals working part time for moratoriums recently announced by some banks on the
economic reasons moved back up for a second month, sale of properties they had seized in foreclosures were
and the available measures of job openings and hiring likely to damp home sales further in the near term.
were still low. The unemployment rate remained at Starts of new single-family houses rose somewhat in
9.6 percent in September, leaving the average rate for August and September, but the pace of construction
the third quarter only slightly below its average over the was still noticeably below the already-depressed level of
first half of the year. Long-duration unemployment the preceding year. New homebuilding appeared to be
continued to recede somewhat but was still very high. weighed down by the backlog of unsold existing homes
Indicators of layoffs remained elevated, although initial and tight lending conditions for acquisition, develop-
claims for unemployment insurance drifted down a ment, and construction loans.
little during October. The labor force participation rate
After a very strong increase in the first half of the year,
in September was unchanged at a level lower than earli-
business investment in equipment and software posted
er in the year.
a smaller, but still solid, gain in the third quarter. No-
After rising rapidly from mid-2009 to mid-2010, indus- minal shipments of nondefense capital goods from
trial production decelerated in August and edged domestic manufacturers remained on a moderate up-
down in September. In the manufacturing sector, out- trend through September. But rising demand for
put gains across a wide range of industries were smaller equipment and software during the third quarter was
in recent months, and capacity utilization leveled off at also satisfied in part by a further rise in imports of capi-
a rate still well below its longer-run average. Produc- tal goods. Near-term indicators of business spending
tion of motor vehicles picked up during the third quar- on equipment and software were generally positive.
ter as automakers replenished dealers’ stocks, but mo- New orders for nondefense capital goods, excluding
tor vehicle assemblies were scheduled to drop back in aircraft, continued to outpace shipments through Sep-
coming months. More broadly, October surveys of tember. Credit conditions improved further in the

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
third quarter, particularly for larger firms with access to concentrated in agricultural goods, partly boosted by
the capital markets. Financing flows to smaller firms, rising prices, and in services; most other major catego-
which are more dependent on banks, were more sub- ries either declined or were flat.
dued.
Recent indicators of foreign economic activity sug-
Real nonfarm inventory investment was estimated to gested that growth abroad had slowed appreciably after
have picked up during the third quarter. Rebuilding of midyear. Following an unsustainably high rate of ex-
dealers’ stocks of motor vehicles accounted for part of pansion in the second quarter, growth of real gross
the step-up, but some of it likely reflected another large domestic product (GDP) in the emerging market econ-
increase in imports. In August, inventory-to-sales ra- omies appeared to have slowed markedly, notwith-
tios for most industries remained well below their pre- standing an apparent acceleration in economic activity
vious peaks. Surveys of purchasing managers in Sep- in China. Real GDP growth apparently moderated in
tember and October indicated that most did not per- the advanced foreign economies as well. In the euro
ceive their customers’ inventories to be too high. area, industrial production rose sharply in August, but
Business investment in nonresidential structures was purchasing managers indexes moved down in recent
about flat in the third quarter as another strong increase months. The German economy continued to perform
in spending for drilling and mining structures offset strongly, while recent data showed weakness in the pe-
further declines in outlays on commercial and industrial ripheral euro-area countries. A reacceleration of food
buildings. and energy prices helped push up inflation abroad, al-
beit generally to still-moderate levels, in the third quar-
Consumer price inflation remained low in recent
ter.
months. The total PCE price index increased slightly
in September as consumer energy prices moved up no- Staff Review of the Financial Situation
ticeably for a third month. The core PCE price index The decision by the Federal Open Market Committee
was unchanged in September, and the 12-month in- (FOMC) at its September meeting to maintain the 0 to
crease in this index continued to trend down. At earlier ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate was
stages of processing, the rise in producer prices for in- widely anticipated. However, yields declined as market
termediate materials remained moderate in September, participants reportedly interpreted the language of the
but prices of globally traded industrial and agricultural accompanying statement to imply higher odds of addi-
commodities accelerated considerably in October, re- tional asset purchases and a longer period of excep-
flecting in part the lower foreign exchange value of the tionally low short-term interest rates. Investors took
dollar as well as concerns about supply for certain particular note of the statement’s indication that infla-
commodities. In September and October, survey tion was below the levels consistent with the FOMC’s
measures of households’ short- and long-term expecta- dual mandate for maximum employment and price sta-
tions for inflation remained in the ranges that have bility. In the weeks following the FOMC meeting,
prevailed since the spring of 2009. Federal Reserve communications, along with economic
data releases that continued to point to a tepid eco-
Labor compensation rose at a moderate rate in the
nomic outlook, appeared to reinforce market expecta-
third quarter. Private-sector wage increases, as meas-
tions that additional policy accommodation would be
ured by both average hourly earnings of all employees
forthcoming in the near term.
and the employment cost index (ECI), remained sub-
dued. However, according to the ECI, employer bene- Yields on nominal Treasury coupon securities and
fit costs accelerated this year after posting a very small those on TIPS declined, on net, over the intermeeting
increase in 2009. period, largely in response to Federal Reserve commu-
nications and somewhat weaker-than-expected eco-
The U.S. international trade deficit widened in August,
nomic data releases. Five-year inflation compensation
after narrowing in July, as a modest increase in nominal
increased over the intermeeting period, and forward
exports was more than offset by a strong increase in
inflation compensation 5 to 10 years ahead also rose.
imports. Following widespread declines in July, most
Anecdotal reports pointed to the increased likelihood
major categories of imports rebounded in August, with
of additional asset purchases by the Federal Reserve
imports of consumer goods and capital goods exhibit-
and to FOMC communications noting that the Com-
ing particular strength. Imports of petroleum products
mittee viewed underlying inflation as somewhat below
also increased substantially, reflecting both higher vol-
the levels judged to be most consistent with the Com-
umes and higher prices. The increase in exports was

--- Page 5 ---

_____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ N__o_v_e_m_b_e_r_ 2_-_3_, _2_0_1_0_______________________P_a_g_e_ _5
mittee’s dual mandate as factors contributing to lower Commercial real estate markets remained strained.
yields and to the increase in inflation compensation Commercial mortgage debt in the third quarter was
over the period. Yields on investment- and specula- estimated to have declined at a rate similar to the drop
tive-grade corporate bonds declined somewhat more in the second quarter, and the delinquency rate for se-
than those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities, curitized commercial mortgages continued to climb in
leaving risk spreads slightly lower. In the secondary September. However, some signals offered modest
market for syndicated leveraged loans, prices of loans encouragement. In particular, vacancy rates for com-
continued to move up and bid-asked spreads narrowed mercial buildings stabilized in the third quarter, and the
a bit further. pipeline of new commercial mortgage-backed securities
picked up a bit from very low levels.
Conditions in short-term funding markets were gener-
ally stable over the intermeeting period. In dollar fund- Residential mortgage refinancing activity moved up in
ing markets, spreads of term London interbank offered late September and early October, from an already high
rates (or Libor) over those on overnight index swaps level, as the average interest rate on fixed-rate mortgag-
edged up but remained at levels similar to those ob- es fell further over the intermeeting period. In con-
served prior to the emergence of euro-area concerns trast, the level of applications for mortgages to pur-
earlier this year. Spreads on unsecured financial com- chase homes remained anemic. Total consumer credit
mercial paper and on asset-backed commercial paper contracted in August at a pace roughly in line with the
remained low. Rates on repurchase agreements (repos) declines posted earlier in the year. Issuance of con-
involving various types of collateral were little changed sumer asset-backed securities was solid in September.
on net. Bid-asked spreads in most repo transactions Consumer credit quality generally continued to im-
generally declined while changes in haircuts on differ- prove, though delinquency rates remained elevated.
ent types of repo collateral were mixed.
Bank credit edged up in September and October, as
Broad U.S. stock price indexes rose, on balance, over brisk growth in banks’ holdings of securities more than
the intermeeting period, reflecting investor expecta- offset a further decline in total loans. Commercial and
tions of further monetary policy accommodation and industrial (C&I) loans turned down in September after
better-than-expected third-quarter earnings news; op- having increased slightly over the two previous months.
tion-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index was little A moderate net fraction of banks reported, in their res-
changed. The spread between the staff’s estimate of ponses to the October Senior Loan Officer Opinion
the expected real return on equities over the next Survey on Bank Lending Practices, that they had eased
10 years and an estimate of the expected real return on standards on C&I loans and narrowed spreads of C&I
a 10-year Treasury note—a rough measure of the equi- loan rates over their cost of funds; demand for such
ty risk premium—narrowed a bit but remained at an loans reportedly declined, on net, over the preceding
elevated level. Bank stocks generally underperformed three months. Commercial real estate loans, home eq-
the broader market amid concerns about the handling uity loans, and consumer loans contracted. However,
of mortgage foreclosure documents and possible lack closed-end residential mortgage loans on banks’ books
of compliance with securitization agreements. increased modestly for the second month in a row.
Net debt financing by U.S. nonfinancial corporations Over September and October, M2 expanded at an av-
was very strong in September, with sizable gross corpo- erage annual rate that was noticeably above its pace
rate bond issuance across the credit spectrum and a earlier in the year. The growth rate of liquid deposits
substantial increase in commercial paper outstanding, moved up, while small time deposits and retail money
but data for October pointed to a moderation in these market mutual funds continued to contract. The com-
flows. Issuance of syndicated leveraged loans in the positional shift likely reflected the relatively attractive
third quarter remained near the average pace recorded yields on liquid deposits. Currency growth streng-
in the first half of the year. Measures of the credit thened, with indicators suggesting strong demand from
quality of nonfinancial corporations remained solid. abroad.
The pace of gross public equity issuance from seasoned
The dollar declined about 3 percent against a broad
and initial public offerings by nonfinancial firms re-
array of other currencies during the intermeeting pe-
mained moderate in September and appeared to slow in
riod, depreciating even more against the euro and the
October.
yen. In addition, Chinese authorities allowed the ren-
minbi to appreciate slightly against the dollar. Market

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
commentary highlighted the possibility that major cen- slack in resource utilization was expected to be slightly
tral banks would further ease monetary policy, and the less than previously projected, and prices of imported
Bank of Japan expanded its asset purchase program goods were anticipated to rise somewhat faster. As in
and reduced its policy target rate to a range of 0 to previous forecasts, further disinflation was expected to
10 basis points. Benchmark 10-year sovereign yields be checked by the ongoing stability of inflation expec-
generally declined in the major advanced foreign econ- tations.
omies, but the overnight rate in the euro area increased
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
as the European Central Bank continued to allow the
Economic Outlook
amount of liquidity provided to the banking system to
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, all meeting
decline. Spreads relative to German bunds on the 10-
participants—the six members of the Board of Gover-
year sovereign bonds of most peripheral euro-area
nors and the heads of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks—
countries either declined or were little changed over the
provided projections of output growth, the unemploy-
period, but Irish sovereign spreads moved higher on
ment rate, and inflation for each year from 2010
concerns over the fiscal burdens associated with losses
through 2013 and over the longer run. Longer-run
in the Irish banking sector. Major equity indexes in the
projections represent each participant’s assessment of
euro area and in the United Kingdom increased mod-
the rate to which each variable would be expected to
erately, whereas the Nikkei index declined.
converge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy
Several emerging market central banks tightened mone- and in the absence of further shocks. Participants’
tary policy, including the People’s Bank of China. forecasts are described in the Summary of Economic
Against the backdrop of interest rate declines in many Projections, which is attached as an addendum to these
of the advanced economies, as well as heavy capital minutes.
flows toward emerging market countries, many emerg-
In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
ing market currencies strengthened, reportedly prompt-
look, meeting participants generally agreed that the in-
ing further official intervention in foreign exchange
coming data indicated that output and employment
markets.
were continuing to increase, but only slowly. Progress
Staff Economic Outlook toward the Committee’s dual objectives of maximum
Because the recent data on production and spending employment and price stability was described as disap-
were broadly in line with the staff’s expectations, the pointingly slow. Participants variously noted a number
forecast for economic activity that was prepared for the of factors that were restraining growth, including low
November FOMC meeting showed little change to the levels of household and business confidence, concerns
staff’s near-term outlook relative to the forecast pre- about the durability of the economic recovery, continu-
pared for the September FOMC meeting. However, ing uncertainty about the future tax and regulatory en-
the staff revised up its forecast for economic activity in vironment, still-weak financial conditions of some
2011 and 2012. In light of asset market developments households and small businesses, the depressed hous-
over the intermeeting period, which in large part ap- ing market, and waning fiscal stimulus. Although par-
peared to reflect heightened expectations among inves- ticipants considered it quite unlikely that the economy
tors that the Federal Reserve would undertake addi- would slide back into recession, some noted that con-
tional purchases of longer-term securities, the Novem- tinued slow growth and high levels of resource slack
ber forecast was conditioned on lower long-term inter- could leave the economic expansion vulnerable to neg-
est rates, higher stock prices, and a lower foreign ex- ative shocks. In the absence of such shocks, and as-
change value of the dollar than was the staff’s previous suming appropriate monetary policy, participants’ eco-
forecast. These factors were expected to provide addi- nomic projections generally showed growth picking up
tional support to the recovery in economic activity. to a moderate pace and the unemployment rate declin-
Accordingly, the unemployment rate was anticipated to ing somewhat next year. Participants generally ex-
recede somewhat more than in the previous forecast, pected growth to strengthen further and unemploy-
although the margin of slack at the end of 2011 was ment to decline somewhat more rapidly in 2012 and
still expected to be substantial. 2013.
The staff’s forecast continued to show subdued rates of Indicators of spending by households and businesses
headline and core inflation during 2011 and 2012. remained mixed. Consumer spending was expanding
However, the downward pressure on inflation from gradually. Participants noted that households were

--- Page 7 ---

_____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ N__o_v_e_m_b_e_r_ 2_-_3_, _2_0_1_0_______________________P_a_g_e_ _7
continuing their efforts to repair their balance sheets, a tors alone, noting, for example, reports from business
process that was restraining growth in consumer contacts indicating that weak growth in demand for
spending. Sluggish employment growth and elevated their firms’ products remained a key reason why they
uncertainty about job prospects also continued to were reluctant to add employees, and job vacancy rates
weigh on household spending. With respect to busi- that were low relative to historical experience. A num-
ness spending, contacts generally reported that they ber of participants noted that continued high unem-
were investing to reduce costs but were refraining from ployment, particularly with large numbers of workers
adding workers or expanding capacity in the United suffering very long spells of unemployment, would lead
States. Energy producers were an exception. Partici- to an erosion of workers’ skills that would have adverse
pants observed that firms had generated rising profits, consequences for those workers and for the economy’s
but that business contacts indicated those gains largely potential level of output in the longer term.
reflected cost-cutting rather than top-line growth in
Participants saw financial conditions as having become
revenues. A number of businesses continued to report
more supportive of growth over the course of the in-
that they were holding back on hiring and capital
termeeting period; most, though not all, of the change
spending because of uncertainty about future taxes,
appeared to reflect investors’ increasing anticipation of
health-care costs, and regulations. But concerns about
a further easing of monetary policy. Most longer-term
actual and anticipated demand also were important fac-
nominal interest rates declined, real interest rates fell
tors limiting investment and hiring. Firms continued to
even more, credit spreads tightened, and equity prices
report strong foreign demand for their products, par-
rose, in part reflecting better-than-expected corporate
ticularly from Asia.
earnings reports. Inflation compensation rose noticea-
Participants noted that the housing sector, including bly, returning to a level more typical of recent years.
residential construction and home sales, remained de- Participants noted that credit remained readily availa-
pressed. Foreclosures were adding to the elevated ble—in debt markets and from banks—for larger cor-
supply of available homes and putting downward pres- porations, and there were some signs that credit condi-
sure on home prices and housing construction. Some tions had begun to improve for smaller firms that ob-
participants saw disputes over mortgage and foreclo- tain credit primarily from banks. Banking institutions
sure documents as likely to delay the eventual recovery reported signs of improving credit quality. Improve-
in housing markets. Commercial real estate markets ments in household financial conditions were contri-
also were weak, and the availability of credit for com- buting to better performance of consumer loans.
mercial real estate transactions remained limited, but However, banks continued to report elevated losses on
low interest rates were helping stabilize prices. commercial real estate loans, especially construction
and land development loans. Participants noted the
Participants agreed that progress in reducing unem-
risk of losses at financial institutions stemming from
ployment was disappointing; indeed, several noted that
investors putting mortgages back to sellers if the quality
the recent rate of output growth, if continued, would
of the loans was misrepresented when the mortgages
more likely be associated with an increase than a de-
were sold into securitization vehicles.
crease in the unemployment rate. Participants again
discussed the extent to which employment was being Measures of price inflation had generally trended lower
held down, and the unemployment rate boosted, by since the start of the recession; the same was true of
structural factors such as mismatches between the skills nominal wage growth. Most participants indicated that
of the workers who had lost their jobs and the skills underlying inflation was somewhat low relative to levels
needed in the sectors of the economy with vacancies, that they judged to be consistent with the Committee’s
the inability of the unemployed to relocate because statutory mandate to foster maximum employment and
their homes were worth less than the principal they price stability. While underlying inflation remained
owed on their mortgages, and the effects of extended subdued, meeting participants generally saw only small
unemployment benefits on the duration of unemployed odds of deflation, given the stability of longer-term
workers’ search for a new job. Participants agreed that inflation expectations and the anticipated recovery in
such factors were contributing to continued high un- economic activity. They generally did not expect ap-
employment but differed in their assessments of the preciably higher inflation, either. While prices of some
magnitude of such effects. Many participants saw evi- commodities and imported goods had risen recently,
dence that the current unemployment rate was well business contacts reported that they currently had little
above levels that could be explained by structural fac- pricing power and that they would continue to seek

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
productivity gains to offset higher input costs. Small the economy’s slow growth largely reflected the effects
wage increases, coupled with productivity gains, meant of factors that were not likely to respond to additional
that unit labor costs were lower than a year earlier. monetary policy stimulus and thought that additional
Many participants pointed to substantial slack in re- action would be warranted only if the outlook wor-
source utilization, along with well-anchored inflation sened and the odds of deflation increased materially.
expectations, as likely to contribute to subdued infla- Some participants noted concerns that additional ex-
tion for some time. A few participants expected that pansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet could
continuing resource slack would lead to some further put unwanted downward pressure on the dollar’s value
disinflation in coming years. However, a few others in foreign exchange markets. Several participants saw a
thought that the exceptionally accommodative stance risk that a further increase in the size of the Federal
of monetary policy, coupled with rising prices of energy Reserve’s asset portfolio, with an accompanying in-
and other commodities as well as rising prices of other crease in the supply of excess reserves and in the
imports, made it more likely that inflation would in- monetary base, could cause an undesirably large in-
crease, within a year or two, to levels they judged con- crease in inflation. However, it was noted that the
sistent with the Committee’s dual mandate. Committee had in place tools that would enable it to
remove policy accommodation quickly if necessary to
Participants generally agreed that the most likely eco-
avoid an undesirable increase in inflation.
nomic outcome would be a gradual pickup in growth
with slow progress toward maximum employment. Committee Policy Action
They also generally expected that inflation would re- Though the economic recovery was continuing, mem-
main, for some time, below levels the Committee con- bers considered progress toward meeting the Commit-
siders most consistent, over the longer run, with maxi- tee’s dual mandate of maximum employment and price
mum employment and price stability. However, partic- stability as having been disappointingly slow. More-
ipants held a range of views about the risks to that out- over, members generally thought that progress was
look. Most saw the risks to growth as broadly bal- likely to remain slow. Accordingly, most members
anced, but many saw the risks as tilted to the downside. judged it appropriate to take action to promote a
Similarly, a majority saw the risks to inflation as bal- stronger pace of economic recovery and to help ensure
anced; some, however, saw downside risks predominat- that inflation, over time, is at levels consistent with the
ing while a couple saw inflation risks as tilted to the Committee’s mandate. In their discussion of monetary
upside. Participants also differed in their assessments policy for the period immediately ahead, nearly all
of the likely benefits and costs associated with a pro- Committee members agreed to keep the federal funds
gram of purchasing additional longer-term securities in rate at its effective lower bound by maintaining the tar-
an effort to provide additional monetary stimulus, get range for that rate at 0 to ¼ percent and to expand
though most saw the benefits as exceeding the costs in the Federal Reserve’s holdings of longer-term securi-
current circumstances. Most participants judged that a ties. To increase its securities holdings, the Committee
program of purchasing additional longer-term securities decided to continue its existing policy of reinvesting
would put downward pressure on longer-term interest principal payments from its securities holdings into
rates and boost asset prices; some observed that it longer-term Treasury securities and intended to pur-
could also lead to a reduction in the foreign exchange chase a further $600 billion of longer-term Treasury
value of the dollar. Most expected these changes in securities at a pace of about $75 billion per month
financial conditions to help promote a somewhat through the second quarter of 2011. One member
stronger recovery in output and employment while also dissented from this action, judging that the risks of ad-
helping return inflation, over time, to levels consistent ditional securities purchases outweighed the benefits.
with the Committee’s mandate. In addition, several Members agreed that the Committee will regularly re-
participants argued that the stimulus provided by addi- view the pace of its securities purchases and the overall
tional securities purchases would help protect against size of the asset-purchase program in light of incoming
further disinflation and the small probability that the information and will adjust the program as needed to
U.S. economy could fall into persistent deflation—an best foster its goals of maximum employment and price
outcome that they thought would be very costly. Some stability.
participants, however, anticipated that additional pur-
With respect to the statement to be released following
chases of longer-term securities would have only a lim-
the meeting, members agreed that it was appropriate to
ited effect on the pace of the recovery; they judged that
adjust the statement to make it clear that the unem-

--- Page 9 ---

_____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ N__o_v_e_m_b_e_r_ 2_-_3_, _2_0_1_0_______________________P_a_g_e_ _9
ployment rate was elevated, and that measures of un- on equipment and software is rising, though
derlying inflation were somewhat low, relative to levels less rapidly than earlier in the year, while in-
that the Committee judged to be consistent, over the vestment in nonresidential structures contin-
longer run, with its dual mandate. Nearly all members ues to be weak. Employers remain reluctant
agreed that the statement should reiterate the expecta- to add to payrolls. Housing starts continue
tion that economic conditions were likely to warrant to be depressed. Longer-term inflation ex-
exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an pectations have remained stable, but meas-
extended period. Members agreed that the statement ures of underlying inflation have trended
should note that the Committee will employ its policy lower in recent quarters.
tools as necessary to support the economic recovery
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
and to help ensure that inflation, over time, is at levels
Committee seeks to foster maximum em-
consistent with its mandate.
ployment and price stability. Currently, the
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee unemployment rate is elevated, and measures
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank of underlying inflation are somewhat low,
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex- relative to levels that the Committee judges
ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance to be consistent, over the longer run, with its
with the following domestic policy directive: dual mandate. Although the Committee an-
ticipates a gradual return to higher levels of
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
resource utilization in a context of price sta-
monetary and financial conditions that will
bility, progress toward its objectives has been
foster price stability and promote sustainable
disappointingly slow.
growth in output. To further its long-run
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions To promote a stronger pace of economic re-
in reserve markets consistent with federal covery and to help ensure that inflation, over
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. time, is at levels consistent with its mandate,
The Committee directs the Desk to execute the Committee decided today to expand its
purchases of longer-term Treasury securities holdings of securities. The Committee will
by the end of June 2011 in order to increase maintain its existing policy of reinvesting
the total face value of domestic securities principal payments from its securities hold-
held in the System Open Market Account to ings. In addition, the Committee intends to
approximately $2.6 trillion. The Committee purchase a further $600 billion of longer-
also directs the Desk to reinvest principal term Treasury securities by the end of the
payments from agency debt and agency second quarter of 2011, a pace of about
mortgage-backed securities in longer-term $75 billion per month. The Committee will
Treasury securities. The System Open Mar- regularly review the pace of its securities pur-
ket Account Manager and the Secretary will chases and the overall size of the asset-
keep the Committee informed of ongoing purchase program in light of incoming in-
developments regarding the System’s balance formation and will adjust the program as
sheet that could affect the attainment over needed to best foster maximum employment
time of the Committee’s objectives of maxi- and price stability.
mum employment and price stability.”
The Committee will maintain the target
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be- range for the federal funds rate at 0 to
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: ¼ percent and continues to anticipate that
economic conditions, including low rates of
“Information received since the Federal
resource utilization, subdued inflation trends,
Open Market Committee met in September
and stable inflation expectations, are likely to
confirms that the pace of recovery in output
warrant exceptionally low levels for the fed-
and employment continues to be slow.
eral funds rate for an extended period.
Household spending is increasing gradually,
but remains constrained by high unemploy- The Committee will continue to monitor the
ment, modest income growth, lower housing economic outlook and financial develop-
wealth, and tight credit. Business spending ments and will employ its policy tools as ne-

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
cessary to support the economic recovery Participants agreed that greater public understanding of
and to help ensure that inflation, over time, the Committee’s interpretation of its statutory objec-
is at levels consistent with its mandate.” tives could contribute to better macroeconomic out-
comes. Participants expressed a range of views about
Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C.
the potential costs and benefits of quantifying the
Dudley, James Bullard, Elizabeth Duke, Sandra Pianal-
Committee’s interpretation of its statutory mandate to
to, Sarah Bloom Raskin, Eric Rosengren, Daniel K.
promote price stability by adopting a numerical infla-
Tarullo, Kevin Warsh, and Janet L. Yellen.
tion objective or a target path for the price level. In the
Voting against this action: Thomas M. Hoenig. end, participants noted that the longer-run projections
contained in the Summary of Economic Projections,
Mr. Hoenig dissented because he judged that additional
which is released once per quarter in conjunction with
accommodation would do little to accelerate the econ-
the minutes of four of the Committee’s meetings, con-
omy’s continuing, gradual recovery. In his assessment,
vey considerable information about participants’ as-
the risks of additional purchases of Treasury securities
sessments of their statutory objectives. Participants
outweighed the benefits. Mr. Hoenig believed that ad-
discussed whether it might be useful for the Chairman
ditional purchases would risk a further misallocation of
to hold occasional press briefings to provide more de-
resources and future financial imbalances that could
tailed information to the public regarding the Commit-
destabilize the economy. He also saw a potential for
tee’s assessment of the outlook and its policy deci-
additional purchases to undermine the Federal Re-
sionmaking than is included in Committee’s short post-
serve’s independence and cause long-term inflation
meeting statements.
expectations to rise. Mr. Hoenig also believed it was
not appropriate to indicate that economic and financial In their discussion of the relative merits of smaller and
conditions were “likely to warrant exceptionally low more frequent adjustments versus larger and less fre-
levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period” quent adjustments in the Federal Reserve’s intended
or to reinvest principal payments from agency debt and securities holdings, participants generally agreed that
mortgage-backed securities in long-term Treasury se- large adjustments had been appropriate when economic
curities. In his assessment, this continued high level of activity was declining sharply in response to the finan-
monetary policy accommodation could put at risk the cial crisis. In current circumstances, however, most
achievement of the Committee’s long-run policy objec- saw advantages to a more incremental approach that
tives. would involve smaller changes in the Committee’s
holdings of securities calibrated to incoming data.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
would be held on Tuesday, December 14, 2010. The Finally, participants discussed the potential benefits and
meeting adjourned at 1:15 p.m. on November 3, 2010. costs of setting a target for a term interest rate. Some
noted that targeting the yield on a term security could
Notation Vote
be an effective way to reduce longer-term interest rates
By notation vote completed on October 8, 2010, the
and thus provide additional stimulus to the economy.
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
But participants also noted potentially large risks, in-
FOMC meeting held on September 21, 2010.
cluding the risk that the Federal Reserve might find
Videoconference Meeting of October 15 itself buying undesirably large amounts of the relevant
The Committee met by videoconference on October security in order to keep its yield close to the target
15 to discuss issues associated with its monetary policy level.
framework, including alternative ways to express and
communicate the Committee’s objectives, possibilities
for supplementing the Committee’s communication
about its policy decisions, the merits of smaller and
more frequent adjustments in the Federal Reserve’s
intended securities holdings versus larger and less fre-
quent adjustments, and the potential costs and benefits
_____________________________
of targeting a term interest rate. The agenda did not
William B. English
contemplate any policy decisions and none were taken.
Secretary

--- Page 11 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the November 2–3, 2010, FOMC ployment rate would slowly decline over the forecast
meeting, the members of the Board of Governors and horizon, while the rate of inflation would edge up but
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of stay subdued. Participants generally indicated that the
whom participate in the deliberations of the FOMC, pace of expansion in real gross domestic product
submitted projections for output growth, unemploy- (GDP) would rise over the projection period to one
ment, and inflation for the years 2010 to 2013 and over that was somewhat above their assessment of the
the longer run. The projections were based on infor- economy’s longer-run rate of growth. They judged that
mation available through the end of the meeting and on the pickup in economic activity would be spurred in
each participant’s assumptions about factors likely to part by accommodative monetary policy and a gradual
affect economic outcomes, including his or her assess- easing in credit conditions that would help buoy spend-
ment of appropriate monetary policy. “Appropriate ing by consumers and businesses. Stronger spending,
monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy in turn, would lead to improved confidence in the
that each participant deems most likely to foster out- economy, a pickup in hiring, and a further improve-
comes for economic activity and inflation that best sa- ment in credit conditions—forces that would continue
tisfy his or her interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s to support spending. But participants thought that
dual objectives of maximum employment and stable several factors would likely continue to restrain eco-
prices. Longer-run projections represent each partici- nomic growth for a while, including a high degree of
pant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable caution exhibited by consumers and businesses, persis-
would be expected to converge over time under appro- tent weakness in the residential and commercial real
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further estate sectors of the economy, and still-tight credit
shocks. conditions. Somewhat more than half of the partici-
pants judged that, in the absence of any additional
As depicted in figure 1, FOMC participants’ projections
shocks to the economy, the economy would converge
of economic activity over the next several years indi-
fully to its longer-run rates of output growth, unem-
cated that they expected the economic recovery to con-
ployment, and inflation within about five or six years;
tinue, with unemployment declining slowly and infla-
the rest indicated that it could take longer for unem-
tion remaining subdued. As indicated in table 1, rela-
ployment to fall back to its longer-run rate or for infla-
tive to their previous projections in June, participants
tion to rise back to the level they deemed desirable in
saw weaker real activity this year and expected a some-
the longer run. Participants continued to attach an un-
what more gradual economic recovery over the next
usually high degree of uncertainty to their projections
several years. Most participants expected the unem-
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Governors and Reserve Bank presidents, November 2010
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2010 2011 2012 2013 Longer run 2010 2011 2012 2013 Longer run
Change in real GDP . . 2.4 to 2.5 3.0 to 3.6 3.6 to 4.5 3.5 to 4.6 2.5 to 2.8 2.3 to 2.5 2.5 to 4.0 2.6 to 4.7 3.0 to 5.0 2.4 to 3.0
June projection. . . 3.0 to 3.5 3.5 to 4.2 3.5 to 4.5 n.a. 2.5 to 2.8 2.9 to 3.8 2.9 to 4.5 2.8 to 5.0 n.a. 2.4 to 3.0
Unemployment rate. . . 9.5 to 9.7 8.9 to 9.1 7.7 to 8.2 6.9 to 7.4 5.0 to 6.0 9.4 to 9.8 8.2 to 9.3 7.0 to 8.7 5.9 to 7.9 5.0 to 6.3
June projection. . . 9.2 to 9.5 8.3 to 8.7 7.1 to 7.5 n.a. 5.0 to 5.3 9.0 to 9.9 7.6 to 8.9 6.8 to 7.9 n.a. 5.0 to 6.3
PCE inflation. . . . . . . . 1.2 to 1.4 1.1 to 1.7 1.1 to 1.8 1.2 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0 1.1 to 1.5 0.9 to 2.2 0.6 to 2.2 0.4 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0
June projection. . . 1.0 to 1.1 1.1 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.7 n.a. 1.7 to 2.0 0.9 to 1.8 0.8 to 2.4 0.5 to 2.2 n.a. 1.5 to 2.0
Core PCE inflation3. . 1.0 to 1.1 0.9 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.6 1.1 to 2.0 0.9 to 1.4 0.7 to 2.0 0.6 to 2.0 0.5 to 2.0
June projection. . . 0.8 to 1.0 0.9 to 1.3 1.0 to 1.5 n.a. 0.7 to 1.5 0.6 to 2.4 0.4 to 2.2 n.a.
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and in inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of
the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expendi-
tures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the
fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections
represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of
further shocks to the economy. The June projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on June 22–23, 2010.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year consists of all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2010–13 and over the longer run
Percent
Change in real GDP 5
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections 4
3
Actual 2
1
+
_0
1
2
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual.

--- Page 13 ---

__________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _N_o_v_e_m__b_e_r _2_-3_,_ 2_0_1_0_____________P_a_g_e_ _3
relative to longer-run norms. While many participants absence of further shocks, the economy would con-
judged the risks surrounding their projections of each verge over time to a longer-run rate of real GDP
variable to be broadly balanced, a similar number indi- growth of 2.5 to 2.8 percent, unchanged from June.
cated that the combination of downside risks to growth
Participants expected that conditions in labor markets
and upside risks to unemployment predominated.
would improve gradually beginning next year. The cen-
The Outlook tral tendency of their projections of the average unem-
The central tendency of participants’ projections of real ployment rate in the fourth quarter of this year was
GDP growth in 2010 was a narrow band from 2.4 to 9.5 to 9.7 percent. Uncertainty on the part of employ-
2.5 percent, down from 3.0 to 3.5 percent in June. Par- ers about the sustainability of the recovery was general-
ticipants stated that incoming economic data had ly anticipated to ebb over the forecast period, and par-
weighed heavily on their forecasts for growth this year. ticipants expected that hiring would gradually pick up
The Bureau of Economic Analysis published its com- and unemployment would decline slowly. The central
prehensive annual revisions and advance estimate of tendency of their unemployment rate projections for
second-quarter GDP after participants submitted their the end of the forecast period in 2013 was 6.9 to
June projections, and these data showed that the ex- 7.4 percent. On the whole, the projections suggest a
pansion in real GDP in the first half of the year had more gradual decline in unemployment over the next
been slower than the participants had expected. The few years than had been expected in June, consistent
most recent data on output growth in the third quarter with the participants’ assessments of somewhat weaker
indicated that the economy had continued to expand growth prospects. Participants noted that the more
modestly. Participants noted that consumer spending gradual recovery was reflected in improvements in the
appeared restrained by lower household wealth, rela- labor market to date that had been slower to materialize
tively tight credit conditions in some markets, and than previously anticipated. Some participants attri-
households’ ongoing desire to repair their balance buted a portion of the upward revision in their projec-
sheets. In addition, participants generally viewed the tions of unemployment over the next two years to
incoming data on housing, manufacturing, trade, and longer-lived structural adjustments in labor markets,
labor market activity as weaker than they had expected and they raised their estimates of the unemployment
at the time of the June meeting. Participants also noted rate that would prevail in the longer run accordingly.
that the support to growth from earlier fiscal stimulus As a result, participants’ longer-run projections of un-
and inventory investment had waned. employment exhibited a central tendency of 5.0 to
6.0 percent, substantially wider than the central tenden-
Participants continued to expect a modest pickup in the
cy of 5.0 to 5.3 percent reported in June.
pace of the recovery over the next couple of years. The
central tendency of their projections for output growth Participants’ inflation projections edged up since June
in 2011 was 3.0 to 3.6 percent, followed by central ten- but continued to indicate that inflation was expected to
dencies of 3.6 to 4.5 percent in 2012 and 3.5 to 4.6 per- remain subdued over the next several years. Partici-
cent in 2013. Participants noted that factors such as pants noted that the high degree of slack in resource
previously deferred spending on consumer durables markets would help keep inflation relatively low over
and business equipment and software, stabilization in the forecast horizon. At the same time, appropriate
residential investment, accommodative conditions in monetary policy, combined with well-anchored infla-
financial markets, and some easing in credit conditions tion expectations, was seen as likely to result in a mod-
would likely provide impetus to economic growth est level of inflation, avoiding either an undesirable in-
going forward. However, participants cited several crease or a further decrease in inflation. The central
forces that were likely to weigh on the pace of the eco- tendency of participants’ projections for personal con-
nomic expansion over the next few years, including the sumption expenditures (PCE) inflation was 1.2 to
ongoing poor performance of the commercial real es- 1.4 percent in 2010, 1.1 to 1.7 percent in 2011, 1.1 to
tate sector, the uneven pace of the recovery in housing 1.8 percent in 2012, and 1.2 to 2.0 percent in 2013.
markets, the potential effects of the home mortgage Increases in energy and other commodity prices were
documentation problems that had recently surfaced, expected to boost headline PCE inflation over the
the restraint in government spending resulting from the forecast period, with core inflation likely to run at a
strained fiscal conditions of many states and municipal- somewhat lower pace. Most participants’ projections
ities, and credit conditions at banks that were likely to of inflation over the next several years did not exceed
ease fairly slowly. Participants anticipated that, in the the rate of longer-run inflation that they individually

--- Page 14 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
considered most consistent with the Federal Reserve’s
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
dual mandate for maximum employment and stable Percentage points
prices. Participants’ projections of this mandate- Variable 2010 2011 2012 2013
consistent rate of inflation exhibited a central tendency Change in real GDP1 . . . . . ±0.6 ±1.4 ±1.8 ±1.8
of 1.6 to 2.0 percent, little changed from June.
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . ±0.2 ±0.9 ±1.4 ±1.5
Uncertainty and Risks Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.5 ±1.0 ±1.1 ±1.1
As they did in June, most participants attached a higher
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the
degree of uncertainty to their projections of output root mean squared error of projections for 1990 through 2009 that
were released in the fall by various private and government forecas-
growth and unemployment over the forecast horizon
ters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain
than is historically typical.1 While a majority of partici- assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual out-
pants judged the risks to output growth as broadly bal- comes for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in
ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the
anced, many participants viewed the risks to their fore-
past. Further information is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip
cast of output growth as weighted to the downside, the (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from
risks to their forecast of unemployment as tilted to the Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion
Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal
upside, or both. Some of these participants noted that
Reserve System, November).
it would be more difficult than usual to address future 1. For definitions, refer to general note in table 1.
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
negative shocks to the real economy, should they mate-
that has been most widely used in government and private economic
rialize, because the Federal Reserve had already moved forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the pre-
nominal short-term interest rates close to zero, and vious year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.
because they saw the likelihood of further fiscal stimu- Diversity of Views
lus as being quite limited. In addition, some of these Information about the diversity of participants’ views
participants noted that the anticipated recovery of the regarding the likely outcomes for real GDP growth and
housing market might take longer than expected. the unemployment rate over the next few years is pro-
vided in figures 2.A and 2.B, respectively. The disper-
Regarding inflation, a few participants judged that the
sion in these projections reflects differences in partici-
uncertainty surrounding their projections was broadly
pants’ assessments of many factors, including the cur-
similar to historical norms, but most continued to at-
rent degree of underlying momentum in economic ac-
tach an unusually high degree of uncertainty to these
tivity, the amount of restraint on economic activity like-
projections. Most participants continued to assess the
ly to result from low readings on consumer and busi-
risks to their inflation forecasts as broadly balanced,
ness sentiment and relatively tight credit conditions,
although some judged that downside risks predomi-
how quickly and to what degree particularly hard-hit
nated and a couple judged that upside risks predomi-
sectors of the economy will recover, the degree of sup-
nated. Participants citing downside risks noted con-
port for economic activity from conditions in financial
cerns about the degree to which lingering resource
markets, and the form and degree of appropriate future
slack in the economy was putting downward pressure
monetary policy and its effects on economic activity.
on inflation, or about the possible effects that an ex-
With much of the data for 2010 now in hand, the dis-
tended period of low readings on actual inflation might
persion of participants’ projections of output growth
have in reducing inflation expectations. Those who
this year narrowed quite a bit relative to June. While
indicated upside risks to inflation generally pointed to
the distributions of participants’ projections of real
concerns relating to the unusual size of the Federal Re-
GDP growth in 2011 and 2012 shifted lower since
serve’s balance sheet, which, if left in place for too
June, the degree of dispersion displayed in these projec-
long, might eventually begin to erode the stability of
tions was little changed. The dispersion associated with
longer-term inflation expectations.
participants’ longer-run projections of output growth
also changed little from June. Regarding unemploy-
ment, the distributions of participants’ projections of
this variable for 2010 through 2012 generally shifted up
1 Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for the
somewhat, and the distribution of their forecasts for
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con-
sumer price inflation over the period from 1989 to 2009. At 2012 widened noticeably, relative to June. The distri-
the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” bution of their estimates of the longer-run rate of un-
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in employment showed modest changes since June, and,
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess
the uncertainty and risks attending participants’ projections.

--- Page 15 ---

__________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _N_o_v_e_m__b_e_r _2_-3_,_ 2_0_1_0_____________P_a_g_e_ _5
as noted previously, the central tendency of these pro- of inflation over the next few years exhibit dispersion
jections widened. because of differences in their judgments regarding the
determinants of inflation, including their estimates of
Figures 2.C and 2.D provide corresponding informa-
the degree of resource slack and their assessments of
tion about the diversity of participants’ outlooks for
the extent to which such slack influences inflation out-
inflation. The distributions of participants’ projections
comes and expectations. By contrast, the relatively
for overall and core PCE inflation in 2010 narrowed
concentrated distribution of participants’ longer-run
somewhat and moved a bit higher compared with the
inflation projections shows the substantial similarity in
patterns these projections displayed in June. Most of
the participants’ assessments of the approximate level
the distributions of the participants’ inflation projec-
of inflation that is most consistent with the Federal
tions for 2011 and 2012 also became somewhat more
Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum employment and
concentrated relative to June. Participants’ forecasts of
stable prices.
overall inflation over the longer run remained in a rela-
tively narrow band. In general, participants’ projections

--- Page 16 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2010–13 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2010 November projections 16
June projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2011 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2012 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2013 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 17 ---

__________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _N_o_v_e_m__b_e_r _2_-3_,_ 2_0_1_0_____________P_a_g_e_ _7
Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2010–13 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2010 16
November projections 14
June projections 12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2011 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2012 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2013 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 18 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2010–13 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2010 16
November projections 14
June projections 12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2011 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2012 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2013 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 19 ---

__________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _N_o_v_e_m__b_e_r _2_-3_,_ 2_0_1_0_____________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure 2.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inflation, 2010–13
Number of participants
2010 16
November projections 14
June projections 12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2011 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2012 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2013 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 20 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the projections are broadly balanced, the num-
the members of the Board of Governors and bers reported in table 2 would imply a proba-
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks bility of about 70 percent that actual GDP
inform discussions of monetary policy among would expand within a range of 2.4 to 3.6 per-
policymakers and can aid public understand- cent in the current year, 1.6 to 4.4 percent in
ing of the basis for policy actions. Considera- the second year, and 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the
ble uncertainty attends these projections, third and fourth years. The corresponding
however. The economic and statistical models 70 percent confidence intervals for overall in-
and relationships used to help produce eco- flation would be 1.5 to 2.5 percent in the cur-
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de- rent year, 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second year,
scriptions of the real world. And the future and 0.9 to 3.1 percent in the third and fourth
path of the economy can be affected by myr- years.
iad unforeseen developments and events. Because current conditions may differ
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, from those that prevailed, on average, over his-
participants consider not only what appears to tory, participants provide judgments as to
be the most likely economic outcome as em- whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
bodied in their projections, but also the range jections of each variable is greater than, smaller
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
their occurring, and the potential costs to the forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in
economy should they occur. table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
Table 2 summarizes the average historical to whether the risks to their projections are
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including weighted to the upside, are weighted to the
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
and those prepared by Federal Reserve Board participants judge whether each variable is
staff in advance of meetings of the Federal more likely to be above or below their projec-
Open Market Committee. The projection tions of the most likely outcome. These judg-
error ranges shown in the table illustrate the ments about the uncertainty and the risks at-
considerable uncertainty associated with eco- tending each participant’s projections are dis-
nomic forecasts. For example, suppose a par- tinct from the diversity of participants’ views
ticipant projects that real gross domestic about the most likely outcomes. Forecast un-
product (GDP) and total consumer prices will certainty is concerned with the risks associated
rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, with a particular projection rather than with
3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty divergences across a number of different pro-
attending those projections is similar to that jections.
experienced in the past and the risks around

# Tables

## Page_11_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |      |      |      |            |      |      |      |      |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|------|------------|------|------|------|------|
| 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 2011 | 2012 | 2013 | Longer run | 2010 | 2011 | 2012 | 2013 |
| 2.4 to 2.5 3.0 to 3.6 3.6 to 4.5 3.5 to 4.6 2.5 to 2.8
3.0 to 3.5 3.5 to 4.2 3.5 to 4.5 n.a. 2.5 to 2.8
9.5 to 9.7 8.9 to 9.1 7.7 to 8.2 6.9 to 7.4 5.0 to 6.0
9.2 to 9.5 8.3 to 8.7 7.1 to 7.5 n.a. 5.0 to 5.3
1.2 to 1.4 1.1 to 1.7 1.1 to 1.8 1.2 to 2.0 1.6 to 2.0
1.0 to 1.1 1.1 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.7 n.a. 1.7 to 2.0
1.0 to 1.1 0.9 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.6 1.1 to 2.0
0.8 to 1.0 0.9 to 1.3 1.0 to 1.5 n.a. |      |      |      |            |      |      |      |      |