# 20100623_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:36:24*
*Pages: 21, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Page 1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
June 22-23, 2010
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit- Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Bank
tee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover-
System was held in the offices of the Board of Gover- nors
nors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, June 22, 2010,
at 2:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, June 23, Robert deV. Frierson,¹ Deputy Secretary, Office of
2010, at 9:00 a.m. the Secretary, Board of Governors
PRESENT: Charles S. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director,
Ben Bernanke, Chairman Office of the Staff Director for Management,
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Board of Governors
James Bullard
Elizabeth Duke James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of
Thomas M. Hoenig Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Donald L. Kohn
Sandra Pianalto Linda Robertson,² Assistant to the Board, Office
Eric Rosengren of Board Members, Board of Governors
Daniel K. Tarullo
Kevin Warsh Nellie Liang, David Reifschneider, and William
Wascher, Senior Associate Directors, Division
Charles L. Evans, Richard W. Fisher, Narayana of Research and Statistics, Board of Gover-
Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, Alternate nors; William Nelson, Senior Associate Direc-
Members of the Federal Open Market Com- tor, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
mittee Governors
Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and Janet L. Seth B. Carpenter, Associate Director, Division of
Yellen, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francis-
co, respectively Christopher J. Erceg, Deputy Associate Director,
Division of International Finance, Board of
Brian F. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Governors; Michael G. Palumbo and Joyce K.
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary Zickler, Deputy Associate Directors, Division
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Thomas Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Brian J. Gross, Special Assistant to the Board, Of-
Richard M. Ashton, Assistant General Counsel fice of Board Members, Board of Governors
Nathan Sheets, Economist
David J. Stockton, Economist Fabio M. Natalucci, Assistant Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Thomas A. Connors, William B. English, Jeff
Fuhrer, Steven B. Kamin, Simon Potter, Law- David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of
rence Slifman, Christopher J. Waller, and Da- Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
vid W. Wilcox, Associate Economists
Beth Anne Wilson, Section Chief, Division of In-
Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Ac- ternational Finance, Board of Governors
count
Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office ¹ Attended Tuesday’s session only.
of the Secretary, Board of Governors ² Attended Wednesday’s session only.

--- Page 2 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
John C. Driscoll and Jennifer E. Roush, Senior reported on System open market operations during the
Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, intermeeting period. By unanimous vote, the Commit-
Board of Governors; Andrea L. Kusko, Senior tee ratified those transactions. There were no open
Economist, Division of Research and Statis- market operations in foreign currencies for the Sys-
tics, Board of Governors; John W. Schindler, tem’s account over the intermeeting period.
Senior Economist, Division of International
In his presentation to the Committee, the Manager
Finance, Board of Governors
noted that “fails to deliver” in the mortgage-backed
securities (MBS) market had reached very high levels in
Penelope A. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Of-
recent months. Under these conditions, dealers had
fice of the Secretary, Board of Governors
experienced difficulty in arranging delivery of a small
amount—including about $9 billion of securities with
Valerie Hinojosa and Randall A. Williams, Records
5.5 percent coupons issued by Fannie Mae—of the
Management Analysts, Division of Monetary
$1.25 trillion of MBS that the Desk at the Federal Re-
Affairs, Board of Governors
serve Bank of New York had purchased between Janu-
ary 2009 and March 2010. The Desk had postponed
Patrick K. Barron and John F. Moore, First Vice
settlement of some of these transactions through the
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta
use of dollar rolls. The Manager discussed alternative
and San Francisco, respectively
methods of settling the outstanding transactions and
recommended that the Committee authorize the Desk
Loretta J. Mester, Harvey Rosenblum, and John C.
to engage in coupon swap transactions to facilitate the
Williams, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal
settlement of these purchases. The Manager noted that
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and San
a coupon swap is a common transaction in the market
Francisco, respectively
for MBS in which the two counterparties exchange se-
curities at market prices. By engaging in a coupon
David Altig, Richard P. Dzina, Arthur Rolnick, and
swap, the Federal Reserve would effectively sell the
Mark E. Schweitzer, Senior Vice Presidents,
scarce securities that it had not yet received and pur-
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York,
chase instead securities that are more readily available
Minneapolis, and Cleveland, respectively
in the market. After discussing various approaches,
meeting participants agreed that coupon swaps were an
Daniel Aaronson, Todd E. Clark, and Andreas L.
appropriate method to achieve settlement of outstand-
Hornstein, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
ing transactions.
Banks of Chicago, Kansas City, and Rich-
mond, respectively As background for the Committee’s continuing consid-
eration of its portfolio management policies, the Man-
Joshua L. Frost, Assistant Vice President, Federal ager gave a presentation on alternative strategies for
Reserve Bank of New York reinvesting the proceeds from maturing Treasury secur-
ities. Under current practice, the Desk reinvests the
proceeds of maturing Treasury coupon securities in
new Treasury securities that are issued on the date the
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed- older securities mature, allocating the investments
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet across the new securities in proportion to the issuance
The Manager of the System Open Market Account amounts. The Manager presented two alternatives to
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and the status quo. First, the Committee could consider
foreign financial markets during the period since the halting all reinvestment of the proceeds of maturing
Committee met on April 27–28, 2010. He also briefed securities. Such a strategy would shrink the size of the
the Committee on the System’s progress in developing Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and reduce the quantity
tools for managing the supply of reserves, including of reserve balances in the banking system gradually
reverse repurchase agreements and the Term Deposit over time. Second, the Committee could reinvest the
Facility. In preparation for possible future reserve proceeds of maturing securities only in new issues of
draining operations, in June the Federal Reserve con- Treasury securities with relatively short maturities—
ducted the first of several small-value auctions to test bills only, or bills as well as coupon issues with terms of
the Term Deposit Facility. In addition, the Manager three years or less. This strategy would maintain the

--- Page 3 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 2 - 2 3 , 2 0 1 0 Page 3
size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet but would Staff Review of the Economic Situation
reduce somewhat the average maturity of the portfolio The information reviewed at the June 22–23 meeting
and increase its liquidity. One participant favored halt- suggested that the economic recovery was proceeding
ing all reinvestment, and many saw benefits to even- at a moderate pace in the second quarter. Businesses
tually adopting an approach of reinvesting in bills and continued to increase employment and lengthen work-
shorter-term coupon issues to shift the maturity com- weeks in April and May, but the unemployment rate
position of the portfolio toward the structure that had remained elevated. Industrial production registered
prevailed prior to the financial crisis. However, the strong and widespread gains, and business investment
Committee made no change to its reinvestment policy in equipment and software rose rapidly. Consumer
at this meeting. spending appeared to have moved up further in April
and May. However, housing starts dropped in May,
Continuing a discussion from previous meetings, par-
and nonresidential construction remained depressed.
ticipants again addressed issues regarding asset sales.
Falling energy prices held down headline consumer
Participants continued to agree that gradual sales of
prices in April and May while core consumer prices
MBS should be undertaken, at some point, to speed the
edged up.
return to a Treasury-securities-only portfolio. A few
participants supported beginning such sales fairly soon; Labor demand continued to firm in recent months.
they noted that, given the evident demand in the mar- While the change in total nonfarm payroll employment
ket for safe, longer-term assets, modest sales of MBS in May was boosted significantly by the hiring of tem-
might not put much, if any, upward pressure on long- porary workers for the decennial census, private em-
term interest rates or be disruptive to the functioning ployment posted only a small increase. This increase,
of financial markets. However, many participants still however, followed sizable gains in March and April,
saw asset sales as potentially tightening financial condi- and the average workweek of all private-sector em-
tions to some extent. Most participants continued to ployees increased over the March-to-May period. As a
judge it appropriate to defer asset sales for some time; result, aggregate hours worked by employees on private
several noted the modest weakening in the economic nonfarm payrolls rose substantially through May. The
outlook since the Committee’s last meeting as an addi- unemployment rate moved up in April but dropped
tional reason to do so. A majority of participants con- back in May to 9.7 percent, its first-quarter average.
tinued to anticipate that asset sales would start after the The labor force participation rate was, on average,
Committee had begun to firm policy by increasing higher in recent months than in the first quarter, as
short-term interest rates; such an approach would rising employment was accompanied by an increasing
postpone asset sales until the economic recovery was number of jobseekers. Although the number of work-
well established and maintain short-term interest rates ers who were employed part time for economic reasons
as the Committee’s key monetary policy tool. A few leveled off in recent months, the proportion of unem-
participants suggested selling MBS and using the ployed workers who were jobless for more than 26
proceeds to purchase Treasury securities of comparable weeks continued to move up. Initial claims for unem-
duration, arguing that doing so would hasten the move ployment insurance were little changed over the inter-
toward a Treasury-securities-only portfolio without meeting period, remaining at a still-elevated level.
tightening financial conditions. Participants agreed that
Industrial production rose at a robust rate in April and
it would be important to maintain flexibility regarding
May, with production increases broadly based across
the appropriate timing and pace of asset sales, given the
industries. Firming domestic demand, rising exports,
uncertainties associated with the unprecedented size
and business inventory restocking appeared to have
and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet
provided upward impetus to factory production. In
and its effects on financial conditions. Overall, partici-
April and May, production in high-technology indus-
pants emphasized that any decision to engage in asset
tries again rose strongly, with substantial gains in the
sales would need to be communicated well in advance
output of semiconductors and further solid increases in
of the initiation of such transactions, and that sales
the production of computers and communications
should be conducted at a gradual pace and potentially
equipment. The production of other types of business
be adjusted in response to developments in economic
equipment continued to rebound, and the output of
and financial conditions.
construction supplies advanced further. Production of
light motor vehicles turned up in May; nonetheless,
dealers’ inventories remained lean. Capacity utilization

--- Page 4 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
in manufacturing rose in May to a rate noticeably above recent months, improved financial conditions over the
the low reached in mid-2009, but it was still substantial- first part of the year, and the positive readings from
ly below its longer-run average. surveys on business conditions and earnings reports for
producers of capital goods. Business outlays for non-
The rise in consumer spending slowed in recent
residential construction appeared to be contracting fur-
months after a brisk increase in the first quarter. Al-
ther, on balance, in March and April, although the rate
though sales of light motor vehicles continued to trend
of decline seemed to be moderating. Outlays for new
higher, nominal sales of non-auto consumer goods and
power plants and for manufacturing facilities firmed,
food services were little changed in April and May.
and investment in drilling and mining structures con-
The moderation in spending appeared, on balance, to
tinued to rise strongly. However, spending on office
be aligning the pace of consumption with recent trends
and commercial structures was still falling steeply
in income, wealth, and consumer sentiment. Real dis-
through April, with the weakness likely related to high
posable personal income moved up at a solid rate in
vacancy rates, falling property prices, and the light vo-
March and April, reflecting increases in employment
lume of sales.
and hours worked as well as slightly higher real wages,
but home values declined in recent months and equity Businesses appeared to have begun to restock their
prices moved down since the April meeting. Measures inventories. Real nonfarm inventory investment turned
of consumer sentiment improved in May and early June positive in the first quarter, and data for April pointed
but were still at relatively low levels. to further modest accumulation. Ratios of inventories
to sales for most industries looked to be within com-
The anticipated expiration of the homebuyer tax credit
fortable ranges.
appeared to have pulled home sales forward, boosting
their level in recent months. Sales of existing single- Consumer price inflation remained low in April and
family homes rose strongly in April, and, although they May. The core consumer price index rose only slightly
moved down in May, these sales were still above their over the period, and the year-over-year change in the
level earlier in the year. Purchases of new single-family index was lower than earlier this year. Core goods
homes also jumped in April, but then fell steeply in prices continued to decline, on net, and prices of non-
May. On net, the upswing in the volume of real estate energy services remained soft. The headline consumer
transactions in recent months was likely to boost the price index edged down in both months, as the drop in
brokers’ commissions component of residential in- the price of crude oil since April led consumer energy
vestment in the second quarter. However, starts of prices to retrace a portion of the run-up that occurred
new single-family homes, which had trended higher in during the nine months ending in January. At earlier
the first four months of the year, declined sharply in stages of processing, producer prices of core interme-
May. In addition, the number of permits for new diate materials rose moderately in May after five
homes, which tends to lead starts, fell for a second months of large increases. Inflation compensation
month in May. House prices declined somewhat in based on Treasury inflation-protected securities de-
recent months, reversing some of the modest increases creased recently in response to low readings on infla-
that occurred in the spring and summer of 2009. After tion and falling oil prices. Survey measures of both
changing little on net during the preceding year, interest short- and long-term inflation expectations remained
rates for 30-year fixed-rate conforming mortgages relatively stable.
moved lower in May and June.
Unit labor costs continued to be restrained by weak-
Real spending on equipment and software increased ness in hourly compensation and further gains in prod-
further early in the second quarter. Business outlays uctivity. Revised estimates of labor compensation indi-
for computing equipment and software continued to cated that hourly compensation in the nonfarm busi-
rise at a brisk pace through April, and shipments of ness sector was about flat, on net, during the fourth
aircraft to domestic carriers rebounded. Orders and quarter of 2009 and the first quarter of 2010. The em-
shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding ployment cost index showed a moderate rise over the
transportation and high-tech equipment stayed on a period, boosted by a sizable increase in benefit costs in
noticeable uptrend, on net, in March and April, with the first quarter. The year-over-year increase in average
the increases broadly based by type of equipment. The hourly earnings of all employees was also moderate
recovery in equipment and software spending was con- through May. Output per hour in the nonfarm busi-
sistent with the relatively strong gains in production in

--- Page 5 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 2 - 2 3 , 2 0 1 0 Page 5
ness sector, which rose rapidly in 2009, posted a more velopment reflected a contraction in Mexico that more-
moderate but still-solid gain in the first quarter of 2010. favorable monthly indicators suggested should prove
temporary. In contrast, the increase in Brazilian real
The U.S. international trade deficit widened slightly in
GDP was very strong. Consumer price inflation in the
April, as nominal exports fell a bit more than nominal
foreign economies in aggregate was buoyed by higher
imports. The April declines in both exports and im-
food and energy prices in the first quarter, while core
ports followed robust increases in March. The April
inflation generally remained subdued. More recent in-
fall in exports reflected declines in exports of consumer
formation suggested some moderation in foreign infla-
goods, primarily due to a drop in pharmaceuticals, and
tion in the second quarter.
in agricultural goods. Exports of industrial supplies
moved up while exports of capital goods were flat after Staff Review of the Financial Situation
increasing strongly in March. Imports in April were The FOMC’s decision at its April meeting to maintain
pulled down by lower imports of consumer goods, the 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds
which more than offset sharply higher imports of capi- rate and the wording of the accompanying statement
tal goods, particularly computing equipment. Imports were largely in line with expectations and prompted
of automotive products and non-oil industrial supplies little market reaction. Economic data releases were
declined slightly, and imports of petroleum products mixed, on balance, over the intermeeting period, but
were flat following a large increase in March. market participants were especially attentive to incom-
ing information on the labor market—most notably,
Incoming data suggested that economic activity abroad
the private payroll figures in the employment report for
continued to expand at a strong pace in the first half of
May, which were considerably weaker than investors
the year. Among the advanced foreign economies,
expected. Those data, combined with heightened con-
growth of real gross domestic product (GDP) in the
cerns about the global economic outlook stemming in
first quarter was particularly strong in Canada and Ja-
part from Europe’s sovereign debt problems, contri-
pan, and recent indicators for those countries pointed
buted to a downward revision in the expected path of
to continued solid increases in the second quarter. In
policy implied by money market futures rates.
contrast, the rise in economic activity in the euro area
was subdued, as favorable readings for the manufactur- In the market for Treasury coupon securities, 2- and
ing sector were counterbalanced by weakness in do- 10-year nominal yields fell considerably over the inter-
mestic demand. Since the time of the April meeting of meeting period. Market participants pointed to flight-
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), con- to-quality flows and greater concern about the econom-
cerns about the fiscal situation of several euro-area ic outlook as factors boosting the demand for Treasury
countries intensified sharply. In response, European securities. The drop in Treasury yields was accompa-
authorities announced a number of policy measures, nied by a small widening of swap spreads.
including acceleration of fiscal consolidation plans in
Conditions in short-term funding markets deteriorated
some countries, finalization of an International Mone-
somewhat, particularly for European financial institu-
tary Fund (IMF) and European Union (EU) assistance
tions. Spreads of the term London interbank offered
package for Greece, and the introduction of a broader
rate, or Libor, over rates on overnight index swaps wid-
€500 billion financial assistance program that could be
ened noticeably, with the availability of funding at ma-
complemented by bilateral IMF lending. The Euro-
turities longer than one week reportedly quite limited.
pean Central Bank (ECB) also announced further
Market participants also reduced holdings of commer-
measures to improve liquidity conditions in impaired
cial paper sponsored by entities thought to have expo-
markets, including a program to purchase sovereign
sures to peripheral European financial institutions and
and private debt.
governments. Even so, spreads of high-grade unse-
Economic activity in emerging market economies con- cured financial commercial paper to nonfinancial
tinued to expand briskly in the first half of this year. commercial paper widened only modestly over the in-
Growth of economic activity was particularly robust in termeeting period. In secured funding markets, spreads
emerging Asia, driven in part by strong increases in on asset-backed commercial paper also widened mod-
industrial production and exports associated with solid estly, while rates on repurchase agreements involving
gains in final demand as well as the turn in the invento- Treasury and agency collateral changed little. In the
ry cycle. The rise of real GDP in Latin America ap- inaugural Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on
peared to have stalled in the first quarter, but this de- Dealer Financing Terms, which was conducted by the

--- Page 6 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Federal Reserve between May 24 and June 4, dealers Gross equity issuance fell a bit, on net, in April and
generally reported that the terms on which they pro- May, likely due in part to recent declines in equity pric-
vided credit remained tight relative to those at the end es and elevated market volatility. Measures of the cred-
of 2006. However, they noted some loosening of it quality of nonfinancial firms generally continued to
terms for both securities financing and over-the- improve, and first-quarter profits for firms in the S&P
counter derivatives transactions, on net, over the pre- 500 jumped substantially, primarily reflecting an upturn
vious three months for certain classes of clients— in financial sector profits from quite depressed levels.
including hedge funds, institutional investors, and non- The outlook in commercial real estate markets stayed
financial corporations—and intensified efforts by those weak; prices of commercial properties fell a bit further
clients to negotiate more-favorable terms. At the same in the first quarter, and the volume of commercial
time, they reported a pickup in demand for financing property sales remained light. The delinquency rate for
across several collateral types over the past three securitized commercial mortgages continued to climb
months. in May, and indexes of prices of credit default swaps on
commercial mortgages declined, on net, over the in-
Broad U.S. stock price indexes fell over the intermeet-
termeeting period.
ing period, in part reflecting deepening concerns about
the European fiscal situation and its potential for ad- Consumer credit contracted again in recent months, as
verse spillovers to global economic growth. Option- revolving credit continued on a steep downtrend. Is-
implied volatility on the S&P 500 index spiked in mid- suance of consumer credit asset-backed securities
May, to more than double its value at the time of the (ABS) increased in May, although the pace was still well
April FOMC meeting, but largely reversed its run-up by below that observed before the onset of the financial
the time of the June meeting. The spread between the crisis. Credit card ABS issuance remained subdued,
staff’s estimate of the expected real return on equities partly reflecting regulatory changes that made financing
over the next 10 years and an estimate of the expected credit card receivables via securitization less desirable.
real return on a 10-year Treasury note—a measure of In primary markets, spreads of credit card interest rates
the equity risk premium—increased from its already over those on Treasury securities remained extremely
elevated level. high in April, while interest rate spreads on auto loans
stayed near their average level of the past decade. Con-
Investors’ attitudes toward financial institutions deteri-
sumer credit quality improved further, with delinquency
orated somewhat, as the equity of financial firms un-
rates on credit cards and auto loans moving down a bit
derperformed the broader market amid uncertainty
in April.
about the implications of developments in Europe and
the potential effects of financial regulatory reform. Bank credit declined, on average, in April and May at
Yields on investment- and speculative-grade corporate about the same pace as in the first quarter. Commer-
bonds moved higher over the intermeeting period, and cial and industrial loans, after dropping rapidly in April,
high-yield bond mutual funds recorded substantial net decreased at a slower pace in May. While commercial
outflows. Spreads on corporate bonds widened, al- real estate and home equity loans fell at a slightly faster
though they remained within the range prevailing since rate than in recent quarters, the contraction in closed-
last summer. Secondary-market bid prices on syndi- end residential loans abated, partly because of a re-
cated leveraged loans fell, while bid-asked spreads in duced pace of sales to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
that market widened. Consumer loans declined again, on average, in April
and May. The amount of Treasury and agency securi-
Net debt financing by nonfinancial corporations in-
ties held by large domestic banks and foreign-related
creased in April and May relative to its pace in the first
institutions declined in May, contributing to a sizable
quarter. Gross bond issuance by investment-grade
drop in banks’ securities holdings.
nonfinancial corporations in the United States re-
mained solid, on average, over those two months; non- On a seasonally adjusted basis, M2 contracted in April
financial commercial paper outstanding increased as but surged in May, with much of the month-to-month
well. High-yield corporate bond issuance in the United variation apparently associated with the effects of fed-
States briefly paused in May, reflecting the market’s eral tax payments and refunds. Averaging across the
pullback from risky assets, although speculative-grade two months, M2 expanded moderately after having
U.S. firms continued to issue bonds abroad and a few been about unchanged in the first quarter; liquid depos-
placed issues domestically in the first half of June. its accounted for most of the net change.

--- Page 7 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 2 - 2 3 , 2 0 1 0 Page 7
The threat to global economic growth and financial preciated slightly immediately following the announce-
stability posed by the fiscal situation in some European ment.
nations sparked widespread flight-to-quality flows over
Staff Economic Outlook
most of the intermeeting period. This retreat led to a
In the economic forecast prepared for the June FOMC
broad appreciation of the dollar as well as declines in
meeting, the staff continued to anticipate a moderate
equity prices abroad and in yields on benchmark sover-
recovery in economic activity through 2011, supported
eign bonds. However, investor sentiment improved
by accommodative monetary policy, an attenuation of
near the end of the period, leading to a partial reversal
financial stress, and strengthening consumer and busi-
in some of these movements, despite Moody’s down-
ness confidence. While the recent data on production
grade of Greece to below-investment-grade status in
and spending were broadly in line with the staff’s ex-
mid-June. On net, the dollar ended the intermeeting
pectations, the pace of the expansion over the next year
period up, most headline equity indexes fell, and
and a half was expected to be somewhat slower than
benchmark government bond yields declined. Strains
previously predicted. The intensifying concerns among
in euro-area bank funding markets reemerged during
investors about the implications of the fiscal difficulties
the period. In response, the ECB announced some
faced by some European countries contributed to an
changes to its liquidity operations that would provide
increase in the foreign exchange value of the dollar and
greater market access to term funding in euros.3 Diffi-
a drop in equity prices, which seemed likely to damp
culties also appeared in corporate debt markets as both
somewhat the expansion of domestic demand. The
nonfinancial and financial corporate debt issuance
implications of these less-favorable factors for U.S.
dropped substantially in May. In addition, pressures in
economic activity appeared likely to be only partly off-
dollar funding markets reappeared for foreign financial
set by lower interest rates on Treasury securities, other
institutions, especially those thought to have significant
highly rated securities, and mortgages, as well as by a
exposure to Greece and other peripheral euro-area
lower price for crude oil. The staff still expected that
countries. To help contain these pressures and to pre-
the pace of economic activity through 2011 would be
vent their spread to other institutions and regions, the
sufficient to reduce the existing margins of economic
Federal Reserve reestablished dollar liquidity swap ar-
slack, although the anticipated decline in the unem-
rangements with the ECB, the Bank of England, the
ployment rate was somewhat slower than in the pre-
Bank of Japan, the Bank of Canada, and the Swiss Na-
vious projection.
tional Bank.
The staff’s forecasts for headline and core inflation
Yields on the sovereign obligations of peripheral Euro-
were also reduced slightly. The changes were a re-
pean countries declined noticeably following a May 10
sponse to the lower prices of oil and other commodi-
announcement of a framework established by the EU
ties, the appreciation of the dollar, and the greater
for providing financial aid to euro-area governments
amount of economic slack in the forecast. Despite
and of the ECB’s intention to purchase euro-area sov-
these developments, inflation expectations had re-
ereign debt. However, yields remained high even after
mained stable, likely limiting movements in inflation.
these announcements and moved up subsequently,
On balance, core inflation was expected to continue at
notwithstanding the ECB’s purchases of government
a subdued rate over the projection period. As in earlier
debt. Amid a weakening outlook for economic growth
forecasts, headline inflation was projected to move into
in Europe, central banks in several emerging European
line with the core rate by 2011.
economies began to decrease policy rates. By contrast,
brighter economic prospects in Canada and China Participants’ Views of Current Conditions and the
prompted the Bank of Canada to raise its target for the Economic Outlook
overnight rate to 50 basis points at its June meeting and In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, all meeting
Chinese authorities to raise banks’ reserve requirement participants—the five members of the Board of Gov-
further in May. In addition, the People’s Bank of Chi- ernors and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve
na announced late in the period that it would allow the Banks—provided projections of economic growth, the
renminbi to move more flexibly, and the currency ap- unemployment rate, and consumer price inflation for
each year from 2010 through 2012 and over a longer
horizon. Longer-run projections represent each partic-
3 The ECB reinstituted a six-month lending operation and
switched its three-month lending operations from fixed- ipant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable
quantity auctions to full-allotment offerings at a fixed rate of would be expected to converge over time under appro-
1 percent.

--- Page 8 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further ing some tentative signs of stabilizing. Moreover, sev-
shocks. Participants’ forecasts through 2012 and over eral participants observed that the decline in yields on
the longer run are described in the Summary of Eco- Treasury securities resulting from the global flight to
nomic Projections, which is attached as an addendum quality was positive for the domestic economy; in par-
to these minutes. ticular, the associated decline in mortgage rates was
seen as potentially helpful in supporting the housing
In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
sector.
look, meeting participants generally saw the incoming
data and information received from business contacts Supporting the view of a continued recovery, incoming
as consistent with a continued, moderate recovery in data and anecdotal reports pointed to strength in a
economic activity. Participants noted that the labor number of business sectors, particularly manufacturing
market was improving gradually, household spending and transportation. Policymakers noted that firms’
was increasing, and business spending on equipment investment in equipment and software had advanced
and software had risen significantly. With private final rapidly of late, and they anticipated that such spending
demand having strengthened, inventory adjustments would continue to rise, though perhaps at a somewhat
and fiscal stimulus were no longer the main factors slower pace. Business contacts suggested that invest-
supporting economic expansion. In light of stable in- ment spending had been supported by the replacement
flation expectations and incoming data indicating low and upgrading of existing capital, making up for some
rates of inflation, policymakers continued to anticipate spending that had been postponed in the downturn,
that both overall and core inflation would remain sub- and this component of investment demand was seen as
dued through 2012. However, financial markets were unlikely to remain robust. In addition, inventory ac-
generally seen as recently having become less suppor- cumulation, which had been a significant contributor to
tive of economic growth, largely reflecting international recent gains in production, appeared likely to provide
spillovers from European fiscal strains. In part as a less impetus to growth in coming quarters. Participants
result of the change in financial conditions, most par- also noted that several uncertainties, including those
ticipants revised down slightly their outlook for eco- related to legislative changes and to developments in
nomic growth, and about one-half of the participants global financial markets, were generating a heightened
judged the balance of risks to growth as having moved level of caution that could lead some firms to delay
to the downside. Most participants continued to see hiring and planned investment outlays.
the risks to inflation as balanced. A number of partici-
Participants commented that household spending con-
pants expressed the view that, over the next several
tinued to advance, with notable increases in auto sales
years, both employment and inflation would likely be
and expenditures on other durable goods. Going for-
below levels they consider to be consistent with their
ward, consumption spending was expected to continue
dual mandate, but they anticipated that, with appropri-
to post moderate gains, with the effects of income
ate monetary policy, both would rise over time to levels
growth and improved confidence as the economy re-
consistent with the Federal Reserve’s objectives.
covers more than offsetting the effects of lower stock
Financial markets had become somewhat less suppor- prices and housing wealth. However, continued labor
tive of economic growth since the April meeting, with market weakness could weigh on consumer sentiment,
the developments in Europe cited as a leading cause of and households were still repairing their balance sheets;
greater global financial market tensions. Risk spreads both factors could restrain consumer spending going
for many corporate borrowers had widened noticeably, forward. Although readings from the housing sector
equity prices had fallen appreciably, and the dollar had had been strong through mid-spring, participants noted
risen in value against a broad basket of other curren- that the strength likely reflected the effects of the tem-
cies. Participants saw these changes as likely to weigh porary tax credits for homebuyers. Indeed, data for the
to some degree on household and business spending most recent month suggested that, with the expiration
over coming quarters. Participants also noted ongoing of those provisions, home sales and starts had stepped
difficulties in financing commercial real estate. None- down noticeably and could remain weak in the near
theless, reports suggested that more-creditworthy busi- term; with lower demand and a continuing supply of
ness borrowers were still able to obtain funding in the foreclosed houses coming to market, participants
open markets on fairly attractive terms, and a couple of judged that house prices were likely to remain flat or
participants noted that credit from the banking sector, decline somewhat further in the near term.
which had been contracting for some time, was show-

--- Page 9 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 2 - 2 3 , 2 0 1 0 Page 9
Meeting participants interpreted the data on the labor possibility that inflation expectations could begin to
market as consistent with their outlook for gradual re- decline in response to low actual inflation. A few par-
covery. Employers were adding hours to the workweek ticipants cited some risk of deflation. Other partici-
and hiring temporary workers, suggesting a pickup in pants, however, thought that inflation was unlikely to
labor demand; however, the most recent data on em- fall appreciably further given the stability of inflation
ployment had been disappointing, and new claims for expectations in recent years and very accommodative
unemployment insurance remained elevated. Report- monetary policy. Over the medium term, participants
edly, employers were still cautious about adding to pay- saw both upside and downside risks to inflation. Sev-
rolls, given uncertainties about the outlook for the eral participants noted that a continuation of lower-
economy and government policies. Participants ex- than-expected inflation and high unemployment could
pected the pace of hiring to remain low for some time. eventually lead to a downward movement in inflation
Indeed, the unemployment rate was generally expected expectations that would reinforce disinflationary pres-
to remain noticeably above its long-run sustainable lev- sures. By contrast, a few participants noted the possi-
el for several years, and participants expressed concern bility that a potentially unsustainable fiscal position and
about the extended duration of unemployment spells the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet could
for a large number of workers. Participants also noted boost inflation expectations and actual inflation over
a risk that continued rapid growth in productivity, time.
though clearly beneficial in the longer term, could in
Committee Policy Action
the near term act to moderate growth in the demand
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
for labor and thus slow the pace at which the unem-
ahead, members agreed that it would be appropriate to
ployment rate normalizes.
maintain the target range of 0 to ¼ percent for the fed-
A broad set of indicators suggested that underlying in- eral funds rate. The economic outlook had softened
flation remained subdued and was, on net, trending somewhat and a number of members saw the risks to
lower. The latest readings on core inflation—which the outlook as having shifted to the downside. None-
excludes the relatively volatile prices of food and ener- theless, all saw the economic expansion as likely to be
gy—had slowed, and other measures of the underlying strong enough to continue raising resource utilization,
trajectory of inflation, such as median and trimmed- albeit more slowly than they had previously anticipated.
mean measures, also had moved down this year. Crude In addition, they saw inflation as likely to stabilize near
oil prices declined somewhat over the intermeeting pe- recent low readings in coming quarters and then gradu-
riod, a factor that was likely to damp headline inflation ally rise toward more desirable levels. In sum, the
at the consumer level in coming months. Other com- changes to the outlook were viewed as relatively mod-
modity prices were moderating, and nominal wages est and as not warranting policy accommodation
appeared to be rising only slowly. Some participants beyond that already in place. However, members
indicated that they viewed the substantial slack in labor noted that in addition to continuing to develop and test
and resource markets as likely to reduce inflation. The instruments to exit from the period of unusually ac-
financial strains in Europe had led to an increase in the commodative monetary policy, the Committee would
foreign exchange value of the dollar, and the resulting need to consider whether further policy stimulus might
downward pressure on import prices also was expected become appropriate if the outlook were to worsen ap-
to weigh on consumer prices for a time. However, preciably. Given the slightly softer cast of recent data
inflation expectations were seen by most participants as and the shift to less accommodative financial condi-
well anchored, which would tend to curb any tendency tions, members agreed that some changes to the state-
for actual inflation to decline. On balance, meeting ment’s characterization of the economic and financial
participants revised down modestly their outlook for situation were necessary. Nearly all members judged
inflation over the next couple of years; they generally that it was appropriate to reiterate the expectation that
expected inflation to be quite low in the near term and economic conditions—including low levels of resource
to trend slightly higher over time. utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation
expectations—were likely to warrant exceptionally low
Some participants judged the risks to the outlook for
levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period.
inflation as tilted to the downside, particularly in the
One member, however, believed that continuing to
near term, in light of the large amount of resource slack
communicate an expectation in the Committee’s state-
already prevailing in the economy, the significant
ment that the federal funds rate would remain at an
downside risks to the outlook for real activity, and the

--- Page 10 ---

Page 10 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
exceptionally low level for an extended period would Prices of energy and other commodities have
create conditions that could lead to macroeconomic declined somewhat in recent months, and
and financial imbalances. underlying inflation has trended lower. With
substantial resource slack continuing to re-
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
strain cost pressures and longer-term infla-
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
tion expectations stable, inflation is likely to
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
be subdued for some time.
ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance
with the following domestic policy directive: The Committee will maintain the target
range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
percent and continues to anticipate that eco-
monetary and financial conditions that will
nomic conditions, including low rates of re-
foster price stability and promote sustainable
source utilization, subdued inflation trends,
growth in output. To further its long-run
and stable inflation expectations, are likely to
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions
warrant exceptionally low levels of the feder-
in reserve markets consistent with federal
al funds rate for an extended period.
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.
The Committee directs the Desk to engage The Committee will continue to monitor the
in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions economic outlook and financial develop-
as necessary to facilitate settlement of the ments and will employ its policy tools as ne-
Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions. cessary to promote economic recovery and
The System Open Market Account Manager price stability.”
and the Secretary will keep the Committee
Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C.
informed of ongoing developments regard-
Dudley, James Bullard, Elizabeth Duke, Donald L.
ing the System’s balance sheet that could af-
Kohn, Sandra Pianalto, Eric Rosengren, Daniel K. Ta-
fect the attainment over time of the Commit-
rullo, and Kevin Warsh.
tee’s objectives of maximum employment
and price stability.” Voting against this action: Thomas M. Hoenig.
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be- Mr. Hoenig dissented because he believed that, as the
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.: economy completed its first year of modest recovery, it
was no longer advisable to indicate that economic and
“Information received since the Federal
financial conditions were likely to warrant “exceptional-
Open Market Committee met in April sug-
ly low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended
gests that the economic recovery is proceed-
period.” Although risks to the forecast remained, Mr.
ing and that the labor market is improving
Hoenig was concerned that communicating such an
gradually. Household spending is increasing
expectation would limit the Committee’s flexibility to
but remains constrained by high unemploy-
begin raising rates modestly in a timely fashion and
ment, modest income growth, lower housing
could result in a buildup of future financial imbalances
wealth, and tight credit. Business spending
and increase the risks to longer-run macroeconomic
on equipment and software has risen signifi-
and financial stability.
cantly; however, investment in nonresidential
structures continues to be weak and employ- By unanimous vote, the Committee selected William B.
ers remain reluctant to add to payrolls. English to serve as Secretary and Economist, and
Housing starts remain at a depressed level. James A. Clouse to serve as Associate Economist, ef-
Financial conditions have become less sup- fective July 23, 2010, until the selection of their succes-
portive of economic growth on balance, sors at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the
largely reflecting developments abroad. Committee in 2011.
Bank lending has continued to contract in
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
recent months. Nonetheless, the Committee
would be held on Tuesday, August 10, 2010. The
anticipates a gradual return to higher levels
meeting adjourned at 12:10 p.m. on June 23, 2010.
of resource utilization in a context of price
stability, although the pace of economic re-
covery is likely to be moderate for a time.

--- Page 11 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 2 - 2 3 , 2 0 1 0 Page 11
Conference Call emphasized that a reestablishment of the lines should
On May 9, 2010, the Committee met by conference call be contingent on strong and effective actions by au-
to discuss developments in global financial markets and thorities in Europe to address fiscal sustainability and
possible policy responses. Over the previous several support financial markets.
months, market concerns about the ability of Greece
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
and some other euro-area countries to contain their
voted unanimously to approve the following resolution:
sizable budget deficits and finance their debt had in-
creased. By early May, financial strains had intensified, “The Committee authorizes the Chairman to
reflecting investors’ uncertainty about whether fiscally agree to establish swap lines with the Euro-
stronger euro-area governments would provide finan- pean Central Bank, the Bank of England, the
cial support to the weakest members, the extent of the Swiss National Bank, the Bank of Japan, and
drag on euro-area economies that could result from the Bank of Canada, as discussed by the
efforts at fiscal consolidation, and the degree of expo- Committee today.”
sure of major European banks and financial institutions
Secretary’s note: Later on May 9, 2010, the
to vulnerable countries. Conditions in short-term
Federal Reserve, in coordination with the
funding markets in Europe had also deteriorated, and
Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the
global financial markets more generally had been vola-
European Central Bank (ECB), and the
tile and less supportive of economic growth.
Swiss National Bank, announced that U.S.
The Chairman indicated that European authorities were dollar liquidity swap facilities had been rees-
considering a number of measures to promote fiscal tablished with those central banks. The ar-
sustainability and to provide increased liquidity and rangements with the Bank of England, the
support to money markets and markets for European ECB, and the Swiss National Bank provide
sovereign debt. In connection with the possible im- these central banks with the capacity to con-
plementation of these measures, some major central duct tenders of U.S. dollars in their local
banks had requested that dollar liquidity swap lines markets at fixed rates for full allotment, simi-
with the Federal Reserve be reestablished. These swap lar to arrangements that had been in place
lines would enhance the ability of these central banks previously. The arrangement with the Bank
to provide support for dollar funding markets in their of Canada would support drawings of up to
jurisdictions. The terms and conditions of the swap $30 billion, as was the case previously. On
lines would generally be similar to those in place prior May 10, the Federal Reserve and the Bank of
to their expiration earlier in the year. Japan (BOJ) announced that a temporary
U.S. dollar liquidity swap arrangement had
The Committee discussed considerations surrounding
been established that would provide the BOJ
the possible reestablishment of dollar liquidity swap
with the capacity to conduct tenders of U.S.
lines. Participants agreed that such arrangements could
dollars at fixed rates for full allotment.
be helpful in limiting the strains in dollar funding mar-
kets and the adverse implications of recent develop- Notation Vote
ments for the U.S. economy. Participants observed
By notation vote completed on May 17, 2010, the
that, in current circumstances, the dollar swap lines
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
should be made available to a smaller number of major
FOMC meeting held on April 27–28, 2010.
foreign central banks than previously. In order to
promote the transparency of these arrangements, par-
ticipants agreed that it would be appropriate for the
Federal Reserve to publish the swap contracts and to
release on a weekly basis the amounts of draws under
the swap lines by central bank counterparty. It was
recognized that the Committee would need to consider
the implications of swap lines for bank reserves and _____________________________
overall management of the Federal Reserve’s balance Brian F. Madigan
sheet. Participants noted the importance of appropri- Secretary
ate consultation with U.S. government officials and

--- Page 12 ---

Page 1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the June 22–23, 2010, FOMC pants’ assessment of its longer-run sustainable growth
meeting, the members of the Board of Governors and rate and the unemployment rate slowly trending lower
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of over the next few years. Most participants also antic-
whom participate in deliberations of the FOMC, sub- ipated that inflation would remain relatively low over
mitted projections for output growth, unemployment, the forecast period. As indicated in table 1, participants
and inflation for the years 2010 to 2012 and over the generally made modest downward revisions to their
longer run. The projections were based on information projections for real GDP growth for the years 2010 to
available through the end of the meeting and on each 2012, as well as modest upward revisions to their pro-
participant’s assumptions about factors likely to affect jections for the unemployment rate for the same pe-
economic outcomes, including his or her assessment of riod. Participants also revised down a little their pro-
appropriate monetary policy. “Appropriate monetary jections for inflation over the forecast period. Several
policy” is defined as the future path of policy that the participants noted that these revisions were largely the
participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for result of the incoming economic data and the antic-
economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or ipated effects of developments abroad on U.S. financial
her interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objec- markets and the economy. Overall, participants con-
tives of maximum employment and stable prices. tinued to expect the pace of the economic recovery to
Longer-run projections represent each participant’s be held back by a number of factors, including house-
assessment of the rate to which each variable would be hold and business uncertainty, persistent weakness in
expected to converge over time under appropriate real estate markets, only gradual improvement in labor
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks. market conditions, waning fiscal stimulus, and slow
easing of credit conditions in the banking sector. Par-
FOMC participants’ forecasts for economic activity and
ticipants generally anticipated that, in light of the se-
inflation suggested that they expected the recovery to
verity of the economic downturn, it would take some
continue and inflation to remain subdued, but with, on
time for the economy to converge fully to its longer-
balance, slightly weaker real activity and a bit lower in-
run path as characterized by sustainable rates of output
flation than in the projections they made in conjunction
growth, unemployment, and inflation consistent with
with the April 2010 FOMC meeting. As depicted in
participants’ interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s
figure 1, the economic recovery was anticipated to be
dual objectives; most expected the convergence process
gradual, with real gross domestic product (GDP) ex-
to take no more than five to six years. About one-half
panding at a pace only moderately above the partici-
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Governors and Reserve Bank presidents, June 2010
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2010 2011 2012 Longer run 2010 2011 2012 Longer run
Change in real GDP. . . . . . 3.0 to 3.5 3.5 to 4.2 3.5 to 4.5 2.5 to 2.8 2.9 to 3.8 2.9 to 4.5 2.8 to 5.0 2.4 to 3.0
April projection. . . . . . 3.2 to 3.7 3.4 to 4.5 3.5 to 4.5 2.5 to 2.8 2.7 to 4.0 3.0 to 4.6 2.8 to 5.0 2.4 to 3.0
Unemployment rate. . . . . . 9.2 to 9.5 8.3 to 8.7 7.1 to 7.5 5.0 to 5.3 9.0 to 9.9 7.6 to 8.9 6.8 to 7.9 5.0 to 6.3
April projection. . . . . . 9.1 to 9.5 8.1 to 8.5 6.6 to 7.5 5.0 to 5.3 8.6 to 9.7 7.2 to 8.7 6.4 to 7.7 5.0 to 6.3
PCE inflation. . . . . . . . . . . 1.0 to 1.1 1.1 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.7 1.7 to 2.0 0.9 to 1.8 0.8 to 2.4 0.5 to 2.2 1.5 to 2.0
April projection. . . . . . 1.2 to 1.5 1.1 to 1.9 1.2 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 1.1 to 2.0 0.9 to 2.4 0.7 to 2.2 1.5 to 2.0
Core PCE inflation3. . . . . . 0.8 to 1.0 0.9 to 1.3 1.0 to 1.5 0.7 to 1.5 0.6 to 2.4 0.4 to 2.2
April projection. . . . . . 0.9 to 1.2 1.0 to 1.5 1.2 to 1.6 0.7 to 1.6 0.6 to 2.4 0.6 to 2.2
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and in inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of
the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expendi-
tures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in
the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projec-
tions represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the
absence of further shocks to the economy. The April projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on April
27–28, 2010.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year consists of all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

--- Page 13 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2010–12 and over the longer run
Percent
Change in real GDP 5
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections 4
3
Actual 2
1
+
_0
1
2
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual.

--- Page 14 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o je c t i o n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 2 - 2 3 , 2 0 1 0 Page 3
of the participants now judged the risks to the growth the part of households and businesses about the
outlook to be tilted to the downside, while most con- strength of the recovery, spillovers from fiscal strains
tinued to see balanced risks surrounding their inflation abroad to U.S. financial markets and the U.S. economy,
projections. Participants generally continued to judge and continued weakness in residential construction.
the uncertainty surrounding their projections for both Moreover, despite improvements in the condition of
economic activity and inflation to be unusually high banking institutions, strains in the commercial real es-
relative to historical norms. tate sector were seen as posing risks to the balance
sheets of such institutions for some time. Terms and
The Outlook
standards on bank loans continued to be restrictive,
Participants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2010
and participants anticipated only a gradual loosening of
had a central tendency of 3.0 to 3.5 percent, slightly
credit conditions for many households and smaller
lower than in April. Participants noted that the eco-
firms. In the absence of further shocks, participants
nomic recovery was proceeding. Consumer spending
generally expected that real GDP growth would even-
was increasing, supported by rising disposable income
tually settle down at an annual rate of 2.5 to 2.8 per-
as labor markets gradually improved. Business outlays
cent, a pace that appeared to be sustainable in view of
on equipment and software were also rising, driven by
expected long-run trends in the labor force and labor
replacement spending, the low cost of capital, and in-
productivity.
creased production. Participants pointed to a number
of factors that would provide ongoing support to eco- Participants anticipated that labor market conditions
nomic activity, including accommodative monetary would improve slowly over the next several years. The
policy and still generally supportive conditions in finan- central tendency of their projections for the average
cial markets. Fiscal policy was also seen as currently unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2010 was
contributing to economic growth, although participants 9.2 to 9.5 percent. Consistent with their expectations
expected that the effects of fiscal stimulus would di- of a gradual economic recovery, participants generally
minish going forward and also anticipated that budget- anticipated that the unemployment rate would decline
ary pressures would continue to weigh on spending at to 7.1 to 7.5 percent by the end of 2012, remaining well
the state and local levels. Participants noted that finan- above their assessments of its longer-run sustainable
cial conditions had tightened somewhat because of de- rate. Although a few participants were concerned
velopments abroad. The effects of a stronger dollar, a about a possible decrease in the sustainable level of
lower stock market, and wider corporate credit spreads employment resulting from ongoing structural adjust-
were expected to be offset only partially by lower oil ments in product and labor markets, participants’ long-
and commodity prices and a decline in Treasury yields. er-term unemployment projections had a central ten-
Many participants anticipated that the economic expan- dency of 5.0 to 5.3 percent, the same as in April.
sion would be held back by firms’ caution in hiring and
Participants noted that prices of energy and other
spending in light of the considerable uncertainty re-
commodities declined somewhat in recent months, and
garding the economic outlook, by households’ focus on
underlying inflation trended lower. They generally ex-
repairing balance sheets weakened by equity and house
pected inflation to remain subdued over the next sever-
price declines, and by tight credit conditions for small
al years. Indeed, most of the participants marked down
businesses and households.
a bit their projections for inflation over the forecast
Looking further ahead, the central tendencies of partic- period: The central tendency of their projections for
ipants’ projections for real GDP growth were 3.5 to 4.2 personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation
percent in 2011 and 3.5 to 4.5 percent in 2012. Partici- was 1.0 to 1.1 percent for 2010, 1.1 to 1.6 percent for
pants generally expected a rebound in spending on 2011, and 1.0 to 1.7 percent for 2012, generally about
housing, consumer durables, and business capital ¼ percentage point lower than in April. The central
equipment as household income and balance sheets tendencies of participants’ projections for core PCE
strengthen, credit becomes more widely available, and inflation followed a broadly similar path, although
the recovery is seen by households and firms as more headline PCE inflation was expected to run slightly
firmly established. Nevertheless, participants cited sev- above core PCE inflation over the forecast period, re-
eral factors that could restrain the pace of expansion flecting somewhat more rapid increases in food and
over the next two years, including a rising household energy prices. Most participants anticipated that, with
saving rate as households seek to make further progress appropriate monetary policy, inflation would rise grad-
in repairing balance sheets, persistent uncertainty on ually toward the inflation rate that they individually

--- Page 15 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
consider most consistent with the Federal Reserve’s Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
dual mandate for maximum employment and stable Percentage points
prices. The central tendency of participants’ projec- Variable 2010 2011 2012
tions of the longer-run, mandate-consistent inflation Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . ±1.0 ±1.6 ±1.8
rate was 1.7 to 2.0 percent, unchanged from April. A
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . ±0.4 ±1.2 ±1.5
majority of participants anticipated that inflation in
Total consumer prices2 . . . . . ±0.9 ±1.0 ±1.1
2011 and 2012 would continue to be below their as-
sessments of the mandate-consistent inflation rate.
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root
mean squared error of projections for 1990 through 2009 that were
released in the summer by various private and government forecasters.
Uncertainty and Risks
As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assump-
Most participants judged that their projections of fu- tions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for
ture economic activity and unemployment continued to real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied
by the average size of projection errors made in the past. Further infor-
be subject to greater-than-average uncertainty, while a
mation is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the
few viewed the uncertainty surrounding their outlook Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting
Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washing-
for growth and unemployment as in line with typical
ton: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).
levels.1 About one-half of the participants saw the risks 1. For definitions, refer to general note in table 1.
to their growth outlook as tilted to the downside; in 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
that has been most widely used in government and private economic
contrast, in April a large majority of participants saw
forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous
the risks to growth as balanced. In the current survey, year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.
a substantial number of participants also viewed the
for too long as one reason that growth could prove
risks to unemployment as tilted to the upside. The re-
stronger than expected.
maining participants saw the risks to the projections for
economic growth and unemployment as roughly bal- As in April, most participants continued to see the un-
anced. Participants pointed to developments abroad certainty surrounding their inflation projections as
and their possible ramifications for U.S. financial mar- above average. Still, a few judged that uncertainty in
kets and the U.S. economy as suggesting somewhat the outlook for inflation was about in line with or lower
greater uncertainty about the path of economic growth. than typical levels. Most participants judged the risks
In addition, some participants cited the unusual rise in to the inflation outlook as roughly balanced. As factors
the unemployment rate last year, which was associated accounting for elevated uncertainty regarding the out-
with rapid growth in labor productivity, as contributing look for inflation, participants pointed to the extraordi-
to increased uncertainty regarding the outlook for em- nary degree of monetary policy accommodation, the
ployment and economic activity. Participants who uncertain timing of the exit from accommodation, and
judged that the risks to their growth outlook were tilted the unusually large gap between expected inflation, as
to the downside pointed to recent developments measured by surveys of households and businesses, and
abroad and the risk of further contagion, together with current inflation. Participants noted that, despite the
the potential for an increase in risk aversion among downward trend in underlying inflation in recent
investors, as important factors contributing to their months, inflation expectations continued to be well
assessment. Participants noted that problems in the anchored. Nonetheless, the possibility that inflation
commercial real estate market and the effects of finan- expectations might start to decline in response to per-
cial regulatory reform could lead to greater constraints sistently low levels of actual inflation and the potential
on credit availability, thereby restraining growth of out- effects of continued weakness of the economy on price
put and employment. However, some participants trends were seen by a few participants as posing some
viewed the downside risks to the growth outlook as downside risks to the inflation outlook.
roughly balanced by upside risks; they saw the possibili-
Diversity of Views
ty that monetary policy might remain accommodative
Figures 2.A and 2.B provide further details on the di-
versity of participants’ views regarding the likely out-
1 Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for the comes for real GDP growth and the unemployment
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con- rate. The distribution of participants’ projections for
sumer price inflation over the period from 1990 to 2009. At real GDP growth this year was slightly narrower than
the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” the distribution in April, but the distributions for real
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in GDP growth in 2011 and 2012 were about unchanged.
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess
As in earlier projections, the dispersion in forecasts for
the uncertainty and risk attending participants’ projections.

--- Page 16 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o je c t i o n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 2 - 2 3 , 2 0 1 0 Page 5
output growth appeared to reflect the diversity of their shifted lower relative to the distributions in April, and
assessments regarding the current degree of underlying the distributions were noticeably more tightly concen-
momentum in economic activity, the evolution of con- trated. The distributions of overall and core inflation
sumer and business sentiment, the degree of support to for 2011 and 2012, however, were generally little
economic growth provided by financial markets, the changed and remained fairly wide. The dispersion in
effects of monetary policy accommodation, and other participants’ projections over the next few years was
factors. Regarding participants’ projections for the un- mainly due to differences in their judgments regarding
employment rate, the distributions shifted somewhat the determinants of inflation, including their estimates
higher for the years 2010 to 2012. The distributions of of prevailing resource slack and their assessments of
their estimates of the longer-run sustainable rates of the extent to which such slack affects actual and ex-
output growth and unemployment were little changed pected inflation. In contrast, the relatively tight distri-
from April. bution of participants’ projections for longer-run infla-
tion illustrates their substantial agreement about the
Corresponding information about the diversity of par-
measured rate of inflation that is most consistent with
ticipants’ views regarding the inflation outlook is pro-
the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum em-
vided in figures 2.C and 2.D. The distributions of pro-
ployment and stable prices.
jections for overall and core PCE inflation for 2010

--- Page 17 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2010–12 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2010
14
June projections
April projections 12
10
8
6
4
2
2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2011
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2012
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 18 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o je c t i o n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 2 - 2 3 , 2 0 1 0 Page 7
Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2010–12 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2010
14
June projections
April projections 12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2011
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2012
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8-
5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 19 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2010–12 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2010
14
June projections
April projections 12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2011
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2012
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 20 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o je c t i o n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 2 - 2 3 , 2 0 1 0 Page 9
Figure 2.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inflation, 2010–12
Number of participants
2010
14
June projections
April projections 12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2011
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2012
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 21 ---

Page 10 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by experienced in the past and the risks around
the members of the Board of Governors and the projections are broadly balanced, the num-
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks bers reported in table 2 would imply a proba-
inform discussions of monetary policy among bility of about 70 percent that actual GDP
policymakers and can aid public understand- would expand within a range of 2.0 to 4.0 per-
ing of the basis for policy actions. Consider- cent in the current year, 1.4 to 4.6 percent in
able uncertainty attends these projections, the second year, and 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the
however. The economic and statistical models third year. The corresponding 70 percent con-
and relationships used to help produce eco- fidence intervals for overall inflation would be
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de- 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the current year, 1.0 to 3.0
scriptions of the real world. And the future percent in the second year, and 0.9 to 3.1 per-
path of the economy can be affected by myr- cent in the third year.
iad unforeseen developments and events. Because current conditions may differ
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, from those that prevailed, on average, over his-
participants consider not only what appears to tory, participants provide judgments as to
be the most likely economic outcome as em- whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
bodied in their projections, but also the range jections of each variable is greater than, smaller
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
their occurring, and the potential costs to the forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in
economy should they occur. table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
Table 2 summarizes the average historical to whether the risks to their projections are
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including weighted to the upside, are weighted to the
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
and those prepared by Federal Reserve Board participants judge whether each variable is
staff in advance of meetings of the Federal more likely to be above or below their projec-
Open Market Committee. The projection tions of the most likely outcome. These judg-
error ranges shown in the table illustrate the ments about the uncertainty and the risks at-
considerable uncertainty associated with eco- tending each participant’s projections are dis-
nomic forecasts. For example, suppose a par- tinct from the diversity of participants’ views
ticipant projects that real gross domestic about the most likely outcomes. Forecast un-
product (GDP) and total consumer prices will certainty is concerned with the risks associated
rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, with a particular projection rather than with
3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty divergences across a number of different pro-
attending those projections is similar to that jections.

# Tables

## Page_12_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |      |      |            |      |      |      |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|------------|------|------|------|
| 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 2011 | 2012 | Longer run | 2010 | 2011 | 2012 |
| 3.0 to 3.5 3.5 to 4.2 3.5 to 4.5 2.5 to 2.8
3.2 to 3.7 3.4 to 4.5 3.5 to 4.5 2.5 to 2.8
9.2 to 9.5 8.3 to 8.7 7.1 to 7.5 5.0 to 5.3
9.1 to 9.5 8.1 to 8.5 6.6 to 7.5 5.0 to 5.3
1.0 to 1.1 1.1 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.7 1.7 to 2.0
1.2 to 1.5 1.1 to 1.9 1.2 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0
0.8 to 1.0 0.9 to 1.3 1.0 to 1.5
0.9 to 1.2 1.0 to 1.5 1.2 to 1.6 |      |      |            |      |      |      |