# 20100921_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:36:19*
*Pages: 9, Tables: 4*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
September 21, 2010
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit- Charles S. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director,
tee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Office of the Staff Director, Board of Gover-
System was held in the offices of the Board of Gover- nors
nors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, September 21,
2010, at 8:00 a.m. Maryann F. Hunter, Deputy Director, Division of
Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of
PRESENT: Governors; William Nelson, Deputy Director,
Ben Bernanke, Chairman Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gov-
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman ernors
James Bullard
Elizabeth Duke Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Thomas M. Hoenig Board Members, Board of Governors
Sandra Pianalto
Eric Rosengren David Reifschneider and William Wascher, Senior
Daniel K. Tarullo Associate Directors, Division of Research and
Kevin Warsh Statistics, Board of Governors
Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Richard W. Eric M. Engen and Michael G. Palumbo, Deputy
Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Associate Directors, Division of Research and
Plosser, Alternate Members of the Federal Statistics, Board of Governors
Open Market Committee
Brian J. Gross, Special Assistant to the Board, Of-
Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and Janet L. fice of Board Members, Board of Governors
Yellen, Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francis- David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of
co, respectively Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
William B. English, Secretary and Economist Jennifer E. Roush, Senior Economist, Division of
Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Penelope A. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Of-
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary fice of the Secretary, Board of Governors
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analyst,
Nathan Sheets, Economist Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gov-
David J. Stockton, Economist ernors
Alan D. Barkema, James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Gordon Werkema, First Vice President, Federal
Connors, Jeff Fuhrer, Steven B. Kamin, Law- Reserve Bank of Chicago
rence Slifman, Mark S. Sniderman, Christopher
J. Waller, and David W. Wilcox, Associate Harvey Rosenblum and Daniel G. Sullivan, Execu-
Economists tive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Dallas and Chicago, respectively
Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Ac-
count David Altig, John A. Weinberg, and Kei-Mu Yi,
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of Atlanta, Richmond, and Minneapolis, re-
of the Secretary, Board of Governors spectively

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Chris Burke, John Fernald, James M. Nason, Vice mutual funds that have been accepted as counterparties
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New for reverse repurchase operations. The Manager also
York, San Francisco, and Philadelphia, respec- discussed plans to publish a new set of criteria that
tively would allow a broader set of money market funds to
become eligible counterparties. There were no open
Gauti B. Eggertsson, Research Officer, Federal Re- market operations in foreign currencies for the Sys-
serve Bank of New York tem’s account over the intermeeting period. By unan-
imous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s transac-
tions over the intermeeting period.
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
By unanimous vote, the Committee selected Deborah J.
The information reviewed at the September 21 meeting
Danker to serve as Deputy Secretary until the selection
indicated that the pace of the economic expansion
of a successor at the first regularly scheduled meeting
slowed in recent months and that inflation remained
of the Committee in 2011.
low. Private businesses increased employment modest-
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed- ly in August, but the length of the workweek was un-
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet changed and the unemployment rate remained elevated.
The Manager of the System Open Market Account Industrial production advanced at a solid pace in July
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and and rose further in August. Consumer spending con-
foreign financial markets during the period since the tinued to increase at a moderate rate in July and ap-
Committee met on August 10, 2010. He also reported peared to move up again in August. The rise in busi-
on System open market operations during the inter- ness outlays for equipment and software looked to
meeting period, including the implementation of the have moderated recently following outsized gains in the
Committee’s decision at the August meeting to reinvest first half of the year. Housing activity weakened fur-
principal payments on agency debt and agency ther, and nonresidential construction remained de-
mortgage-backed securities (MBS) in longer-term Trea- pressed. After falling in the previous three months,
sury securities. Following the August meeting, the headline consumer prices rose in July and August as
Open Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of energy prices retraced some of their earlier decline
New York announced that purchase operations would while prices for core goods and services edged up
follow a schedule that would be released in the middle slightly.
of each month, with the amounts calibrated to offset
The labor market situation continued to improve only
the amount of principal payments from agency debt
slowly. The average monthly increase in private payroll
and agency MBS expected to be received from the
employment over the three months ending in August
middle of the month to the middle of the following
was small and was less than the average gain earlier in
month. The Desk conducted 12 such operations over
the year. Moreover, average weekly hours of all em-
the intermeeting period and purchased about $28 bil-
ployees were little changed, on net, in recent months
lion of Treasury securities, with maturities concentrated
after rising during the first half of the year. The unem-
in the 2- to 10-year sector of the nominal Treasury
ployment rate ticked up in August and remained close
curve, although purchases were made across both the
to the level that has prevailed since the beginning of
nominal and inflation-protected Treasury coupon yield
this year. The labor force participation rate moved up
curves. The Manager also briefed the Committee on
a little in August but was still low. Initial claims for
progress in developing temporary reserve draining
unemployment insurance remained at an elevated level
tools. Over the intermeeting period, the Federal Re-
over the intermeeting period. In addition, other indica-
serve announced a schedule for ongoing small-value
tors of labor demand, such as measures of hiring and
auctions of term deposits. The auctions, which will be
job vacancies, did not improve.
held about every other month, are intended to ensure
the operational readiness of the term deposit facility Industrial production increased solidly in July and then
and to increase the familiarity of eligible participants rose more moderately in August. Manufacturing pro-
with the auction procedures. In addition, the Desk duction was boosted in July by a pickup in motor ve-
continued to conduct small-scale tri-party reverse re- hicle assemblies as automakers replenished lean stocks
purchase operations using MBS collateral with the pri- at dealers. However, the production of motor vehicles
mary dealers, and it published a list of money market was pared back in August. More broadly, the output of

--- Page 3 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _21_,_ 2_0_1_0________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
high-technology items and other business equipment clines in outlays for other types of nonresidential build-
expanded at a solid pace in July and August. The out- ings. Despite some indications that the difficult finan-
put of utilities declined over the past two months after cial conditions in commercial real estate markets might
it was boosted by unseasonably hot weather in the pre- be stabilizing, credit was still tight and vacancy rates for
ceding two months. Capacity utilization in manufactur- office and commercial space remained high. In the
ing ticked up further in August from its mid-2009 low, second quarter, businesses appeared to build their in-
but it was still substantially below its longer-run aver- ventories at a faster pace than earlier in the year, but
age. ratios of inventories to sales for most industries did not
point to any sizable overhangs.
Real personal consumption expenditures rose modestly
in July, similar to the average increase over the preced- Inflation remained subdued in recent months. Head-
ing two months. Data for retail sales and the sales of line consumer prices rose in July and August as energy
light motor vehicles pointed to a moderate gain in real prices rebounded after their decline over the previous
consumer spending in August. Real disposable person- three months. At the same time, prices for core goods
al income declined a bit in July after increasing at a sol- and services moved up slightly. At earlier stages of
id pace in the second quarter. The personal saving rate production, producer prices of core intermediate mate-
edged down in July but remained near the high level rials moved down, on net, during July and August while
registered in the second quarter. Indicators of house- most indexes of spot commodity prices increased.
hold net worth were mixed; home prices moved down Survey measures of short- and long-term inflation ex-
in July, while equity prices inched up, on balance, over pectations were essentially unchanged.
the intermeeting period. After falling back in July, con-
Unit labor costs at the end of the second quarter re-
sumer confidence remained downbeat in August and
mained below their level one year earlier, as labor com-
early September, with households more pessimistic
pensation continued to increase only slowly and labor
about the outlook for their personal financial situations
productivity stayed near its recent high level. Hourly
and general economic conditions.
labor compensation—as measured by compensation
Housing activity, which had been supported earlier in per hour in the nonfarm business sector and the em-
the year by the availability of homebuyer tax credits, ployment cost index—rose modestly during the year
softened further in July. Sales of new single-family ending in the second quarter. More recently, the year-
homes remained at a depressed level. Sales of existing over-year change in average hourly earnings of all em-
homes fell substantially in July, and the index of pend- ployees in July and August remained subdued. While
ing home sales suggested that sales were muted in Au- output per hour in the nonfarm business sector de-
gust. Starts of new single-family houses in July and clined in the second quarter following large increases in
August were below the low level seen in June, and the the preceding three quarters, productivity was still well
number of new permits issued in August appeared to above its level one year earlier.
signal that little improvement in new homebuilding was
The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in July
likely in September. House prices declined modestly in
after widening in June. The rise in exports in July more
July after changing little, on net, in recent months. The
than offset their decline in June, as overseas sales of
interest rate for 30-year fixed-rate conforming mort-
capital goods rose sharply. Most other major categories
gages remained essentially unchanged over the inter-
of exports were little changed in July, although exports
meeting period at a historically low level.
of automotive products posted their first decline since
Real business spending on equipment and software May 2009. The narrowing of the trade deficit in July
appeared to have slowed in July after expanding rapidly also reflected a broad-based decline in imports follow-
over the preceding three quarters. Both new orders ing their large increase in June. Imports of consumer
and shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding goods fell substantially in July, while imports of indus-
aircraft dipped in July. Moreover, survey indicators of trial supplies, capital goods, and automotive products
business conditions softened further in August. In- also moved down. In contrast, imports of petroleum
coming construction data indicated that business in- products remained about flat in July.
vestment in nonresidential structures decreased in the
Increases in foreign economic activity were robust, on
second quarter but at a slower pace than over the pre-
average, in the second quarter. In particular, gross do-
ceding year. Increases in spending for drilling and min-
mestic product (GDP) grew strongly in the emerging
ing structures were more than offset by continued de-
market economies, even though gains in China appar-

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
ently moderated. Among the advanced foreign econ- inflation-protected securities (TIPS) fell, while forward
omies, Europe posted a notable rise in economic activi- inflation compensation 5 to 10 years ahead edged up,
ty in the second quarter; rapid expansion in Germany on net, over the intermeeting period but remained at a
more than offset weaker outcomes in other euro-area lower level than in the spring. Treasury auctions over
economies, particularly those experiencing financial the intermeeting period were generally well received.
stress related to concerns about their fiscal situations Yields on investment- and speculative-grade corporate
and potential vulnerabilities in their banking sectors. In bonds moved roughly in line with those on compara-
Canada and Japan, the rise in real GDP slowed notice- ble-maturity Treasury securities, leaving risk spreads
ably in the second quarter. Recent indicators of foreign little changed. Measures of liquidity in secondary mar-
economic activity for the third quarter, including data kets for corporate bonds remained stable. In the sec-
on exports, production, and purchasing managers in- ondary market for syndicated leveraged loans, the aver-
dexes, generally pointed to a slowing in the pace of ex- age bid price moved up and bid-asked spreads edged
pansion in economic activity abroad. Headline infla- down.
tion rates in foreign economies generally were re-
Conditions in short-term funding markets continued to
strained in the second quarter by a deceleration in food
improve following the recent stresses related to con-
and energy prices, but prices appeared to be rising a bit
cerns about financial stability in Europe. In dollar
more rapidly of late.
funding markets, spreads of term London interbank
Staff Review of the Financial Situation offered rates (or Libor) over those on overnight index
The decision by the Federal Open Market Committee swaps fell further at most horizons over the intermeet-
(FOMC) at its August meeting to maintain the 0 to ing period. Spreads on unsecured financial commercial
¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate was paper were little changed at low levels. In secured
widely anticipated, but Treasury yields declined as in- funding markets, spreads on asset-backed commercial
vestors reportedly focused on the indication in the ac- paper remained narrow, and rates on repurchase
companying statement that principal payments from agreements involving various types of collateral held
agency debt and MBS in the Federal Reserve’s portfolio steady. In the September Senior Credit Officer Opin-
would be reinvested in longer-term Treasury securities ion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms (SCOOS), deal-
and also on the characterization of the economic out- ers indicated, on net, that they loosened credit terms
look, which was seen as somewhat more downbeat applicable to several important classes of counterparties
than expected. The expected path of the federal funds and types of collateral over the past three months amid
rate moved down early in the intermeeting period in increased demand for funding for most types of securi-
response to weaker-than-expected economic data. The ties covered in the survey.
Chairman’s Jackson Hole speech was reportedly viewed
Broad U.S. stock price indexes edged up, on balance,
by market participants as more encouraging about eco-
over the intermeeting period, and option-implied vola-
nomic prospects and as providing more clarity about
tility on the S&P 500 index was little changed on net.
the policy options available to the FOMC, but it did
The spread between the staff’s estimate of the expected
not have a sustained effect on policy expectations. The
real return on equities over the next 10 years and an
expected path of the federal funds rate rose for a time
estimate of the expected real return on a 10-year Trea-
following the more-positive-than-expected data on
sury note—a rough measure of the equity risk pre-
manufacturing activity and the labor market released in
mium—remained at an elevated level. Bank stocks
early September, but the path ended the intermeeting
underperformed the broader equity market and contin-
period down on balance.
ued to be more volatile, while credit default swap
Yields on nominal Treasury coupon securities were spreads for large banking organizations edged up. The
volatile and ended the period somewhat lower, particu- greater volatility in bank stocks reportedly reflected, in
larly for intermediate- and longer-term maturities. In part, the effects of domestic and international financial
addition to Federal Reserve communications and news regulatory reform efforts.
about the economic outlook, market participants
Net debt financing by U.S. nonfinancial corporations
pointed to strong demand for long-duration assets by
remained robust in August. Gross bond issuance was
institutional investors and speculation about additional
strong, a pattern that appeared to persist into the first
large-scale asset purchases by the Federal Reserve as
part of September. Meanwhile, nonfinancial commer-
factors contributing to the drop in longer-term yields.
cial paper outstanding contracted as very low yields on
Five-year inflation compensation based on Treasury

--- Page 5 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _21_,_ 2_0_1_0________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
corporate bonds led to some substitution toward On average over July and August, M2 expanded at a
longer-term debt. Measures of the credit quality of rate slightly above its pace in the second quarter. Liq-
nonfinancial corporations remained solid. The pace of uid deposits grew fairly rapidly over the two months,
initial public offerings and seasoned equity offerings by reflecting in part a compositional shift from other
nonfinancial firms slowed in August, partly reflecting lower-yielding M2 assets. Currency trended higher,
typical seasonal patterns. while small time deposits and retail money market mu-
tual funds contracted further, as yields on these assets
Commercial real estate markets continued to face diffi-
remained at extremely low levels.
cult financial conditions, although some further signs
emerged that this sector might be stabilizing. The pric- In foreign markets, concerns about the global econom-
es of commercial properties appeared to have edged up ic outlook prompted substantial drops in equity prices
in the first half of the year, and the volume of commer- and benchmark sovereign bond yields in many coun-
cial real estate sales rose again in August. A few small tries in August, and the dollar appreciated broadly on
commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) deals safe-haven demands. In September, however, as better
were issued over the intermeeting period and were re- economic news led to some improvement in investor
portedly well received by investors, consistent with an sentiment, equity prices and bond yields moved back
easing of conditions and renewed interest in the CMBS up, and the dollar retraced its earlier appreciation.
market since the beginning of the year that was re- Yield spreads relative to German bunds on the 10-year
ported in the SCOOS. Nonetheless, the volume of sovereign bonds of Greece, Ireland, and Portugal wi-
CMBS issuance in 2010 remained quite low compared dened to near-record levels over the period. Moreover,
with the levels seen before the onset of the financial euro-area bank stock prices fell on continued concerns
crisis, and total commercial mortgage debt continued to about the condition of some troubled institutions.
contract amid further increases in delinquency rates on
With the yen at a 15-year high against the dollar in
commercial mortgages.
nominal terms, Japan’s Ministry of Finance intervened
For households, record-low mortgage rates supported a in currency markets on September 15 to buy dollars
relatively high level of refinancing activity, but many against yen, and the Bank of Japan (BOJ) noted that it
borrowers reportedly remained unable to refinance be- would continue to provide ample liquidity. In reaction,
cause of insufficient home equity or poor credit histo- the yen depreciated about 3 percent against the dollar,
ries. Consumer credit declined in the second quarter essentially reversing its rise over the preceding part of
and appeared to contract further in July. Issuance of the intermeeting period. The European Central Bank
consumer asset-backed securities in August proceeded (ECB) said that it would continue to provide term li-
at a moderate pace that was similar to that posted in quidity by offering several more full-allotment three-
July. Spreads of interest rates on consumer loans rela- month refinancing operations through the end of the
tive to the yield on the two-year Treasury note were year. In contrast to the continued accommodative
little changed on balance. The credit quality of con- stance of the ECB and the BOJ, the Bank of Canada
sumer loans continued to improve; delinquency and increased its target for the overnight rate by 25 basis
charge-off rates for most types of loans dropped fur- points to 1 percent, its third hike since June. Several
ther in recent months, although they remained elevated. other central banks tightened monetary policy over the
intermeeting period, including those of Chile, India,
Bank credit expanded in August, reflecting significant
Indonesia, Sweden, and Thailand.
purchases of Treasury securities and agency MBS by
large banks. Bank loans continued to contract, but the Staff Economic Outlook
pace of contraction slowed noticeably from earlier in In the economic forecast prepared for the September
the year. Commercial and industrial loans rose slightly FOMC meeting, the staff lowered its projection for the
in July, the first increase on a monthly basis since late increase in real economic activity over the second half
2008, and held steady in August. In addition, holdings of 2010. The staff also reduced slightly its forecast of
of closed-end residential mortgage loans expanded growth next year but continued to anticipate a mod-
moderately in August, reportedly spurred by refinanc- erate strengthening of the expansion in 2011 as well as
ing activity. However, both home equity loans and a further pickup in economic growth in 2012. The sof-
commercial real estate loans contracted further in Au- ter tone of incoming economic data suggested that the
gust, while consumer loans fell sharply. underlying level of demand was weaker than projected
at the time of the August meeting. Moreover, the out-

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
look for foreign economic activity also appeared a bit what more than they did a year ago. Households were
weaker. In the medium term, the recovery in economic continuing efforts to repair their balance sheets by sav-
activity was expected to receive support from accom- ing more and paying down debt. Participants noted
modative monetary policy, further improvements in that elevated uncertainty about employment prospects
financial conditions, and greater household and busi- continued to weigh on consumption spending. Many
ness confidence. Over the forecast period, the increase businesses had built up large reserves of cash, in part
in real GDP was projected to be sufficient to slowly by issuing long-term debt, but were refraining from
reduce economic slack, although resource slack was adding workers or expanding plants and equipment. A
anticipated to still remain elevated at the end of 2012. number of business contacts indicated that they were
holding back on hiring and spending plans because of
Overall inflation was projected to remain subdued, with
uncertainty about future fiscal and regulatory policies.
the staff’s forecasts for headline and core inflation little
However, businesses also indicated that concerns about
changed from the previous projection. The current
actual and anticipated demand were important factors
and projected wide margins of economic slack were
limiting investment and hiring. Businesses reported
expected to contribute to a small slowing in core infla-
continued strong foreign demand for their products,
tion in 2011, which was anticipated to be tempered by
particularly from Asia.
stable inflation expectations. Inflation was projected to
change little in 2012, as considerable economic slack Participants noted that the housing sector, including
was expected to remain even as economic activity was residential construction and home sales, continued to
anticipated to strengthen. be very weak. Despite efforts aimed at mitigation,
fore-closures continued to add to the elevated supply
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
of available homes, putting downward pressure on
Economic Outlook
home prices and housing construction.
In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
look, meeting participants generally agreed that the in- Financial developments were mixed over the intermeet-
coming data indicated that output and employment ing period. Banks remained generally cautious and un-
were increasing only slowly and at rates well below certain about the regulatory outlook, although investors
those recorded earlier in the year. Although partici- appeared confident that U.S. banks could meet the new
pants considered it unlikely that the economy would international standards for bank capital and liquidity
reenter a recession, many expressed concern that out- that were announced over the intermeeting period.
put growth, and the associated progress in reducing the Improving household financial conditions were contri-
level of unemployment, could be slow for some time. buting to better consumer loan performance, and credit
Participants noted a number of factors that were re- problems more broadly appeared to have mostly
straining growth, including low levels of household and peaked, although banks continued to report elevated
business confidence, heightened risk aversion, and the losses on commercial real estate loans, especially con-
still weak financial conditions of some households and struction and land development loans. Credit remained
small firms. A few participants noted that economic readily available for larger corporations with access to
recoveries were often uneven and were typically slow financial markets, and there were some signs that credit
following downturns triggered by financial crises. A conditions had begun to improve for smaller firms.
number of participants observed that the sluggish pace Asset prices had been relatively sensitive to incoming
of growth and continued high levels of slack left the economic data over the intermeeting period but gener-
economy exposed to potential negative shocks. Never- ally ended the period little changed on net. Stresses in
theless, participants judged the economic recovery to European financial markets remained broadly con-
be continuing and generally expected growth to pick up tained but bore watching going forward.
gradually next year.
A number of participants noted that the current slug-
Indicators of spending by businesses and households gish pace of employment growth was insufficient to
were mixed. Several participants observed that data on reduce unemployment at a satisfactory pace. Several
retail sales had been a bit stronger than expected over participants reported feedback from business contacts
the intermeeting period, although business contacts who were delaying hiring until the economic and regu-
indicated that shoppers remained very price sensitive. latory outlook became more certain. Participants dis-
There were some reports of retailers cautiously boost- cussed the possible extent to which the unemployment
ing inventories ahead of the holiday season by some- rate was being boosted by structural factors such as

--- Page 7 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _21_,_ 2_0_1_0________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
mismatches between the skills of the workers who had additional longer-term assets—with some noting that
lost their jobs and the skills needed in the sectors of the the economic benefits could be small in current cir-
economy with vacancies, the inability of the unem- cumstances—as well as the best means to calibrate and
ployed to relocate because their homes were worth less implement such purchases. A number of participants
than their mortgages, and the effects of extended un- commented on the important role of inflation expecta-
employment benefits. Participants agreed that factors tions for monetary policy: With short-term nominal
like these were pushing the unemployment rate up, but interest rates constrained by the zero bound, a decline
they differed in their assessments of the extent of such in short-term inflation expectations increases short-
effects. Nevertheless, many participants saw evidence term real interest rates (that is, the difference between
that the current unemployment rate was considerably nominal interest rates and expected inflation), thereby
above levels that could be explained by structural fac- damping aggregate demand. Conversely, in such cir-
tors alone, pointing, for example, to declines in em- cumstances, an increase in inflation expectations lowers
ployment across a wide range of industries during the short-term real interest rates, stimulating the economy.
recession, job vacancy rates that were relatively low, Participants noted a number of possible strategies for
and reports that weak demand for goods and services affecting short-term inflation expectations, including
remained a key reason why firms were adding em- providing more detailed information about the rates of
ployees only slowly. inflation the Committee considered consistent with its
dual mandate, targeting a path for the price level rather
Inflation had declined since the start of the recession,
than the rate of inflation, and targeting a path for the
and most participants indicated that underlying infla-
level of nominal GDP. As a general matter, partici-
tion was at levels somewhat below those that they
pants felt that any needed policy accommodation
judged to be consistent with the Committee’s dual
would be most effective if enacted within a framework
mandate for maximum employment and price stability.
that was clearly communicated to the public. The mi-
Although prices of some commodities and imported
nutes of FOMC meetings were seen as an important
goods had risen recently, many business contacts re-
channel for communicating participants’ views about
ported that they currently had little pricing power and
monetary policy.
that they anticipated limited, if any, increases in labor
costs. Meeting participants noted that several measures Committee Policy Action
of inflation expectations had changed little, on net, In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
over the intermeeting period and that analysis of the immediately ahead, nearly all of the Committee mem-
components of price indexes suggested disinflation bers agreed that it would be appropriate to maintain the
might be abating. However, TIPS-based inflation target range for the federal funds rate of 0 to ¼ percent
compensation had declined, on balance, in recent quar- and to leave unchanged the level of the combined hold-
ters. While underlying inflation remained subdued, ings of Treasury, agency debt, and agency mortgage-
participants saw only small odds of deflation. backed securities in the SOMA. Although many mem-
bers considered the recent and anticipated progress
Participants discussed the medium-term outlook for
toward meeting the Committee’s mandate of maximum
monetary policy and issues related to monetary policy
employment and price stability to be unsatisfactory,
implementation. Many participants noted that if eco-
members observed that incoming data over the inter-
nomic growth remained too slow to make satisfactory
meeting period indicated that the economic recovery
progress toward reducing the unemployment rate or if
was continuing, albeit slowly. Moreover, the data had
inflation continued to come in below levels consistent
been mixed, with readings early in the period generally
with the FOMC’s dual mandate, it would be appropri-
weaker than anticipated but the more-recent data com-
ate to provide additional monetary policy accommoda-
ing in on the strong side of expectations. In light of
tion. However, others thought that additional accom-
the considerable uncertainty about the current trajecto-
modation would be warranted only if the outlook wor-
ry for the economy, some members saw merit in accu-
sened and the odds of deflation increased materially.
mulating further information before reaching a decision
Meeting participants discussed several possible ap-
about providing additional monetary stimulus. In addi-
proaches to providing additional accommodation but
tion, members wanted to consider further the most
focused primarily on further purchases of longer-term
effective framework for calibrating and communicating
Treasury securities and on possible steps to affect infla-
any additional steps to provide such stimulus. Several
tion expectations. Participants reviewed the likely ben-
members noted that unless the pace of economic re-
efits and costs associated with a program of purchasing

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
covery strengthened or underlying inflation moved sheet that could affect the attainment over
back toward a level consistent with the Committee’s time of the Committee’s objectives of maxi-
mandate, they would consider it appropriate to take mum employment and price stability.”
action soon.
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
With respect to the statement to be released following low to be released at 2:15 p.m.:
the meeting, members agreed that it was appropriate to
“Information received since the Federal
adjust the statement to make it clear that underlying
Open Market Committee met in August in-
inflation had been running below levels that the Com-
dicates that the pace of recovery in output
mittee judged to be consistent with its mandate for
and employment has slowed in recent
maximum employment and price stability, in part to
months. Household spending is increasing
help anchor inflation expectations. Nearly all members
gradually, but remains constrained by high
agreed that the statement should reiterate the expecta-
unemployment, modest income growth, low-
tion that economic conditions were likely to warrant
er housing wealth, and tight credit. Business
exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an
spending on equipment and software is ris-
extended period. One member, however, believed that
ing, though less rapidly than earlier in the
continuing to communicate that expectation in the
year, while investment in nonresidential
Committee’s statement would create conditions that
structures continues to be weak. Employers
could lead to macroeconomic and financial imbalances.
remain reluctant to add to payrolls. Housing
Members generally thought that the statement should
starts are at a depressed level. Bank lending
note that the Committee was prepared to provide addi-
has continued to contract, but at a reduced
tional accommodation if needed to support the eco-
rate in recent months. The Committee antic-
nomic recovery and to return inflation, over time, to
ipates a gradual return to higher levels of re-
levels consistent with its mandate. Such an indication
source utilization in a context of price stabili-
accorded with the members’ sense that such accom-
ty, although the pace of economic recovery is
modation may be appropriate before long, but also
likely to be modest in the near term.
made clear that any decisions would depend upon fu-
ture information about the economic situation and out- Measures of underlying inflation are current-
look. ly at levels somewhat below those the Com-
mittee judges most consistent, over the long-
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
er run, with its mandate to promote maxi-
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
mum employment and price stability. With
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
substantial resource slack continuing to re-
ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance
strain cost pressures and longer-term infla-
with the following domestic policy directive:
tion expectations stable, inflation is likely to
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks remain subdued for some time before rising
monetary and financial conditions that will to levels the Committee considers consistent
foster price stability and promote sustainable with its mandate.
growth in output. To further its long-run
The Committee will maintain the target
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions
range for the federal funds rate at 0 to
in reserve markets consistent with federal
¼ percent and continues to anticipate that
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.
economic conditions, including low rates of
The Committee directs the Desk to maintain
resource utilization, subdued inflation trends,
the total face value of domestic securities
and stable inflation expectations, are likely to
held in the System Open Market Account at
warrant exceptionally low levels for the fed-
approximately $2 trillion by reinvesting prin-
eral funds rate for an extended period. The
cipal payments from agency debt and agency
Committee also will maintain its existing pol-
mortgage-backed securities in longer-term
icy of reinvesting principal payments from its
Treasury securities. The System Open Mar-
securities holdings.
ket Account Manager and the Secretary will
keep the Committee informed of ongoing The Committee will continue to monitor the
developments regarding the System’s balance economic outlook and financial develop-

--- Page 9 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _21_,_ 2_0_1_0________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
ments and is prepared to provide additional period” language and thereafter moving the federal
accommodation if needed to support the funds rate upward, consistent with his views at past
economic recovery and to return inflation, meetings that it approach 1 percent, before pausing to
over time, to levels consistent with its determine what further policy actions were needed.
mandate.” Also, given current economic and financial conditions,
Mr. Hoenig did not believe that continuing to reinvest
Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C.
principal payments from SOMA securities holdings was
Dudley, James Bullard, Elizabeth Duke, Sandra Pianal-
required to support the Committee’s policy objectives.
to, Eric Rosengren, Daniel K. Tarullo, and Kevin
Warsh. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, November 2-3,
Voting against this action: Thomas M. Hoenig.
2010. The meeting adjourned at 1:10 p.m. on Septem-
Mr. Hoenig dissented, emphasizing that the economy ber 21, 2010.
was entering the second year of moderate recovery and
Notation Vote
that, while the zero interest rate policy and “extended
By notation vote completed on August 30, 2010, the
period” language were appropriate during the crisis and
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
its immediate aftermath, they were no longer appropri-
FOMC meeting held on August 10, 2010.
ate with the recovery under way. Mr. Hoenig also em-
phasized that, in his view, the current high levels of
unemployment were not caused by high interest rates
but by an extended period of exceptionally low rates
earlier in the decade that contributed to the housing
bubble and subsequent collapse and recession. He be- _____________________________
lieved that holding rates artificially low would invite the
William B. English
development of new imbalances and undermine long-
Secretary
run growth. He would prefer removing the “extended

# Tables

## Page_8_Table_1


| “Information received since the Federal           |
|---------------------------------------------------|
| Open Market Committee met in August in-           |
| dicates that the pace of recovery in output       |
| and employment has slowed in recent               |
| months. Household spending is increasing          |
| gradually, but remains constrained by high        |
| unemployment, modest income growth, low-          |
| er housing wealth, and tight credit. Business     |
| spending on equipment and software is ris-        |
| ing, though less rapidly than earlier in the      |
| year, while investment in nonresidential          |
| structures continues to be weak. Employers        |
| remain reluctant to add to payrolls. Housing      |
| starts are at a depressed level. Bank lending     |
| has continued to contract, but at a reduced       |
| rate in recent months. The Committee antic-       |
| ipates a gradual return to higher levels of re-   |
| source utilization in a context of price stabili- |
| ty, although the pace of economic recovery is     |
| likely to be modest in the near term.             |
| Measures of underlying inflation are current-     |
| ly at levels somewhat below those the Com-        |
| mittee judges most consistent, over the long-     |
| er run, with its mandate to promote maxi-         |
| mum employment and price stability. With          |
| substantial resource slack continuing to re-      |
| strain cost pressures and longer-term infla-      |
| tion expectations stable, inflation is likely to  |
| remain subdued for some time before rising        |
| to levels the Committee considers consistent      |
| with its mandate.                                 |
| The Committee will maintain the target            |
| range for the federal funds rate at 0 to          |
| ¼ percent and continues to anticipate that        |
| economic conditions, including low rates of       |
| resource utilization, subdued inflation trends,   |
| and stable inflation expectations, are likely to  |
| warrant exceptionally low levels for the fed-     |
| eral funds rate for an extended period. The       |
| Committee also will maintain its existing pol-    |
| icy of reinvesting principal payments from its    |
| securities holdings.                              |
| The Committee will continue to monitor the        |
| economic outlook and financial develop-           |


## Page_9_Table_1


| ments and is prepared to provide additional   |
|-----------------------------------------------|
| accommodation if needed to support the        |
| economic recovery and to return inflation,    |
| over time, to levels consistent with its      |
| mandate.”                                     |


## Page_9_Table_2


| period” language and thereafter moving the federal     |
|--------------------------------------------------------|
| funds rate upward, consistent with his views at past   |
| meetings that it approach 1 percent, before pausing to |
| determine what further policy actions were needed.     |
| Also, given current economic and financial conditions, |
| Mr. Hoenig did not believe that continuing to reinvest |
| principal payments from SOMA securities holdings was   |
| required to support the Committee’s policy objectives. |


## Page_9_Table_3


| Voting against this action: Thomas M. Hoenig.               |
|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| Mr. Hoenig dissented, emphasizing that the economy          |
| was entering the second year of moderate recovery and       |
| that, while the zero interest rate policy and “extended     |
| period” language were appropriate during the crisis and     |
| its immediate aftermath, they were no longer appropri-      |
| ate with the recovery under way. Mr. Hoenig also em-        |
| phasized that, in his view, the current high levels of      |
| unemployment were not caused by high interest rates         |
| but by an extended period of exceptionally low rates        |
| earlier in the decade that contributed to the housing       |
| bubble and subsequent collapse and recession. He be-        |
| lieved that holding rates artificially low would invite the |
| development of new imbalances and undermine long-           |
| run growth. He would prefer removing the “extended          |