# 20100810_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:36:13*
*Pages: 10, Tables: 0*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Page 1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
August 10, 2010
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit- Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Bank
tee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover-
System was held in the offices of the Board of Gover- nors
nors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 10,
2010, at 8:00 a.m. Robert deV. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of
the Secretary, Board of Governors
PRESENT:
Ben Bernanke, Chairman Charles S. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director,
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Office of the Staff Director for Management,
James Bullard Board of Governors
Elizabeth Duke
Thomas M. Hoenig William Nelson, Deputy Director, Division of
Donald L. Kohn Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Sandra Pianalto
Eric Rosengren Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Daniel K. Tarullo Board Members, Board of Governors
Kevin Warsh
Seth B. Carpenter, Senior Associate Director, Divi-
Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Richard W. sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors;
Fisher, Narayana Kocherlakota, and Charles I. David Reifschneider and William Wascher,
Plosser, Alternate Members of the Federal Senior Associate Directors, Division of Re-
Open Market Committee search and Statistics, Board of Governors
Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and Janet L. Stephen A. Meyer, Senior Adviser, Division of
Yellen, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Ste-
Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francis- phen D. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of
co, respectively Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
William B. English, Secretary and Economist Brian J. Gross, Special Assistant to the Board, Of-
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary fice of Board Members, Board of Governors
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Eric M. Engen, Assistant Director, Division of Re-
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel search and Statistics, Board of Governors
Richard M. Ashton, Assistant General Counsel
Nathan Sheets, Economist David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Steven B.
Kamin, Lawrence Slifman, Mark S. Sniderman, John C. Driscoll and Jennifer E. Roush, Senior
and David W. Wilcox, Associate Economists Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Ac-
count Penelope A. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Of-
fice of the Secretary, Board of Governors
Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office
of the Secretary, Board of Governors Kimberley E. Braun, Records Project Manager,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gov-
ernors

--- Page 2 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
veloping plans for additional small-value tests of the
Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Term Deposit Facility. In early August, the Federal
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gov- Reserve successfully executed a few small-value term
ernors reverse repurchase operations, including the first the
Federal Reserve conducted using agency MBS as collat-
David Sapenero, First Vice President, Federal Re- eral, to ensure operational readiness for such transac-
serve Bank of St. Louis tions at the Federal Reserve, the clearing banks, and the
primary dealers. There were no open market opera-
Loretta J. Mester and Robert H. Rasche, Executive tions in foreign currencies for the System’s account
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of over the intermeeting period. By unanimous vote, the
Philadelphia and St. Louis, respectively Committee ratified the Desk’s transactions over the
intermeeting period.
David Altig, Ron Feldman, Craig S. Hakkio, Glenn
The Manager also noted the staff’s projection that, if
D. Rudebusch, Daniel G. Sullivan, and Geoff
mortgage rates were to remain near their levels at the
Tootell, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Re-
time of the meeting, repayments of principal on the
serve Banks of Atlanta, Minneapolis, Kansas
agency MBS held in the SOMA likely would reduce the
City, San Francisco, Chicago, and Boston, re-
face value of those holdings by roughly $340 billion
spectively
from August 2010 through the end of 2011. The level
of repayments would be expected to increase further if
Linda Goldberg, Vice President, Federal Reserve
mortgage rates were to decline from those levels. In
Bank of New York
addition, about $55 billion of agency debt held in the
SOMA portfolio would mature over the same time
Annmarie S. Rowe-Straker, Assistant Vice Presi-
frame.
dent, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
Pia Orrenius, Research Officer, Federal Reserve The information reviewed at the August 10 meeting
Bank of Dallas indicated that the pace of the economic recovery
slowed in recent months and that inflation remained
Robert L. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Re- subdued. In addition, revised data for 2007 through
serve Bank of Richmond 2009 from the Bureau of Economic Analysis showed
that the recent recession was deeper than previously
thought, and, as a result, the level of real gross domes-
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed- tic product (GDP) at the end of 2009 was noticeably
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet lower than estimated earlier. Private employment in-
The Manager of the System Open Market Account creased slowly in June and July, and industrial produc-
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and tion was little changed in June after a large increase in
foreign financial markets during the period since the May. Consumer spending continued to rise at a mod-
Committee met on June 22–23, 2010. He also reported est rate in June, and business outlays for equipment and
on System open market operations during the inter- software moved up further. However, housing activity
meeting period, noting that the Desk at the Federal dropped back, and nonresidential construction re-
Reserve Bank of New York had engaged in coupon mained weak. Additionally, the trade deficit widened
swap transactions in agency mortgage-backed securities sharply in May. A further decline in energy prices and
(MBS) to substantially reduce the number of the unchanged prices for core goods and services led to a
Committee’s earlier agency MBS purchases that re- fall in headline consumer prices in June.
mained to be settled. In addition, the Manager briefed
Private nonfarm employment expanded slowly in re-
the Committee on the System’s progress in developing
cent months. The average monthly gain in private pay-
tools for possible future reserve draining operations.
roll employment during the three months ending in
The Federal Reserve successfully conducted two more
July was small, considerably less than the average in-
small-value auctions of term deposits to confirm opera-
crease over the preceding three months. However,
tional readiness for such auctions at the Federal Re-
average weekly hours of all employees continued to
serve and at the depository institutions that chose to
recover. The net addition of jobs in manufacturing and
participate. The Manager noted that the staff was de-

--- Page 3 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A u g u s t 1 0 , 2 0 1 0 Page 3
related industries, and in nonbusiness services such as July. Starts of new single-family houses, which had
health and education, continued to contribute impor- dropped steeply in May, edged down in June to the
tantly to the net increase in private employment. Em- lowest level since the spring of 2009. The low number
ployment in construction and financial activities fell of new permits issued in June appeared to signal that
further. The unemployment rate moved down in June little improvement in new homebuilding was likely in
from its level earlier in the year, and was unchanged in July. House prices were largely stable, on balance, in
July, as declining civilian employment was accompanied recent months. The interest rate on 30-year fixed-rate
by decreases in labor force participation. Initial claims conforming mortgages fell further during July, reaching
for unemployment insurance remained at an elevated a record low for the 39-year history of the series.
level over the intermeeting period.
Real business spending on equipment and software
Industrial production was little changed in June after rose strongly again in the second quarter, with increases
three months of strong increases. The output of utili- widespread across the categories of spending. New
ties was boosted by unseasonably hot weather while orders for nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft
manufacturing production declined. The drop in man- remained on a solid uptrend, although their three-
ufacturing output included a reduction in motor vehicle month change for the period ending in June was less
assemblies, but they were scheduled to increase notice- rapid than earlier in the year. Survey indicators of
ably in July. The June decrease in factory output also business conditions and sentiment softened in July but
reflected weaker production in industries producing remained consistent with further gains in production
non-automotive consumer goods and construction and and capital spending in the near term. Business in-
business supplies. The output of high-technology vestment in nonresidential structures turned up in the
items and other business equipment continued to rise. second quarter, with spending boosted by the rise in
Capacity utilization in manufacturing in June stood well outlays for drilling and mining structures. The decline
above its mid-2009 low, but it was still substantially in spending for other types of nonresidential buildings
short of its longer-run average. appeared to be slowing, and there were a few signs that
financial conditions in commercial real estate markets,
Revised data indicated that consumer spending fell
though still difficult, were stabilizing. In the second
more sharply in 2008 and in the first half of 2009, and
quarter, businesses appeared to add to inventories at a
subsequently recovered more slowly, than previously
faster rate. However, ratios of inventories to sales for
estimated. Real personal consumption expenditures
most industries did not point to any sizable overhangs.
(PCE) rose gradually during the second quarter. Sales
of light motor vehicles continued to move up, on bal- Inflation remained subdued in recent months. Head-
ance, with the level of sales in July slightly higher than line consumer prices declined in May and June because
the second-quarter average. Real disposable personal of sizable drops in consumer energy prices. At the
income increased at a noticeably stronger pace than same time, the core PCE price index moved up only
spending in recent months, and the personal saving rate slightly, and the year-over-year increase in the index in
moved up further from the upwardly revised level re- June was lower than earlier in the year. In recent
ported in the revisions to the national income and months, prices of core consumer goods continued to
product accounts. Indicators of household net decline while prices of non-energy services rose mod-
worth—such as stock prices and house prices—were erately. At earlier stages of production, producer prices
little changed, on net, over the intermeeting period. of core intermediate materials fell back in June; in con-
Consumer confidence fell back in July, with households trast, most indexes of spot commodity prices moved
expressing greater concern about their personal fi- up during July. Inflation compensation based on
nances and the outlook for the recovery. Treasury inflation-protected securities moved down
further over the intermeeting period, partly in response
The housing market, which had been supported earlier
to softer-than-expected data on economic activity, but
in the year by activity associated with the homebuyer
survey measures of short- and long-term inflation ex-
tax credits, was quite soft for a second consecutive
pectations were largely stable.
month in June. Sales of new single-family homes re-
bounded some in June after their sharp drop in May, Nominal hourly labor compensation—as measured by
but they remained at a depressed level. Sales of existing compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector
homes fell for a second month in June, and the index and the employment cost index—rose modestly during
of pending home sales suggested another decline in the year ending in the second quarter. Average hourly

--- Page 4 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
earnings of all employees rose slowly over the monetary policy in response to weaker-than-expected
12 months ending in July. Output per hour in the non- economic data releases and Federal Reserve communi-
farm business sector declined in the second quarter cations that were read as suggesting that policymakers’
after rising rapidly in the preceding three quarters. On concerns about the economic outlook had increased.
net, unit labor costs remained well below their level one
Reflecting the same factors, yields on nominal Treasury
year earlier.
coupon securities fell noticeably on net. Treasury auc-
The U.S. international trade deficit widened sharply in tions were generally well received, with bid-to-cover
May, as a significant increase in exports was more than ratios mostly exceeding historical averages. Yields on
offset by a surge in imports. The corresponding de- investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds
cline in real net exports made a significant negative decreased, and their spreads relative to yields on com-
contribution to U.S. GDP growth in the second quar- parable-maturity Treasury securities declined moderate-
ter. The increase in exports was broadly based, with ly. Secondary-market bid prices on syndicated lever-
particular strength in exports of capital equipment. aged loans rose a bit, while bid-asked spreads in that
Imports of capital goods also were strong, as were im- market edged down.
ports of consumer goods and automotive products. In
Conditions in short-term funding markets improved
contrast, imports of petroleum products fell in May,
somewhat over the intermeeting period. Spreads of
held back by both lower prices and reduced volumes.
term London interbank offered rates (Libor) over rates
Available data suggested that aggregate GDP growth in on overnight index swaps moved down at most hori-
foreign economies remained strong in the second quar- zons, and liquidity in term funding markets reportedly
ter. Recent indicators of economic activity for the euro increased. Spreads on unsecured commercial paper
area showed little imprint of the fiscal stresses that were little changed. In secured funding markets,
emerged in the spring. Industrial production continued spreads on asset-backed commercial paper moved
to grow in May, with particularly solid gains in Germa- down, while rates and haircuts on collateral for repur-
ny and France, and purchasing managers indexes and chase agreements involving Treasury and agency col-
economic sentiment turned up in July. In Japan, ex- lateral held steady.
ports continued to support economic growth, even as
Broad U.S. equity price indexes increased slightly, on
indicators of household spending remained weak. Ma-
net, as generally positive corporate earnings news and
chinery orders declined in May, however, and industrial
an easing of investors’ worries about the potential ef-
production moved down in June, suggesting some de-
fects of fiscal strains in Europe were partly offset by
celeration in economic activity. In the emerging market
concerns about the strength of the economic recovery.
economies (EMEs), incoming data generally pointed to
Most firms in the S&P 500 reported second-quarter
a moderation of economic growth, albeit to a still-solid
earnings that exceeded analysts’ forecasts. Option-
pace, with a notable slowing in China in the second
implied volatility on the S&P 500 index declined but
quarter. In other EMEs, purchasing managers indexes
remained somewhat elevated by historical standards.
generally still pointed to expansions in manufacturing
The spread between the staff’s estimate of the expected
activity, though industrial production in many countries
real return on equities over the next 10 years and an
began to decelerate. In contrast, Mexican indicators
estimate of the expected real return on a 10-year Treas-
suggested that economic activity rebounded in the
ury note—a rough measure of the equity risk pre-
second quarter after contracting in the first quarter.
mium—was little changed at an elevated level. Finan-
Headline inflation rates generally declined abroad,
cial stock prices moved about in line with broader in-
reflecting prior declines in oil and other commodity
dexes, and credit default swap spreads for large finan-
prices.
cial institutions narrowed moderately.
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
Gross bond issuance by U.S. investment-grade nonfi-
The decision taken by the Federal Open Market Com-
nancial corporations rebounded in July from relatively
mittee (FOMC) at its June meeting to maintain the 0 to
subdued levels in May and June. Nonfinancial com-
¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate was
mercial paper outstanding also increased. Issuance of
about in line with investor expectations and elicited
syndicated leveraged loans rose in the second quarter,
little market reaction; the same was true of the wording
but terms on such deals reportedly tightened some-
of the accompanying statement. Over the intermeeting
what. Measures of the credit quality of nonfinancial
period, investors appeared to mark down the path for

--- Page 5 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A u g u s t 1 0 , 2 0 1 0 Page 5
firms remained solid. Gross equity issuance was mod- In foreign exchange markets, the value of the dollar
erate in June and July. declined on balance over the intermeeting period, likely
reflecting some reversal of flight-to-safety flows, better-
Prices of commercial real estate appeared to have in-
than-expected European economic data, and the softer
creased in the second quarter, though the number of
economic outlook for the United States. The release of
transactions was small. Nonetheless, commercial real
the results of the European Union stress-test exercise,
estate markets remained under pressure. Delinquency
including data on European banks’ exposures to sover-
rates for securitized commercial mortgages continued
eign debt, appeared to ease concerns about the poten-
to rise in June, and commercial mortgage debt was es-
tial for severe financial dislocations in Europe. Inves-
timated to have contracted by a sizable amount again in
tors also seemed to take comfort from several oversub-
the second quarter. However, investor demand for
scribed auctions of government debt by Spain, Portu-
high-quality commercial mortgage-backed securities
gal, Ireland, and Greece. Accordingly, risk spreads on
(CMBS) reportedly was robust, although issuance of
these governments’ bonds, though elevated, generally
CMBS remained muted.
declined, and European banks’ access to dollar funding
Consumer credit contracted again in the second quar- improved somewhat. The lack of any disruption to
ter, as revolving credit continued to decline and nonre- market functioning following the expiration, on July 1,
volving credit edged down. Issuance of consumer as- of the European Central Bank’s first one-year refinanc-
set-backed securities slowed a bit in July, reflecting, in ing operation also supported investor sentiment. Mar-
part, typical seasonal patterns. Consumer credit quality ket indicators of expectations for future overnight rates
continued to show improvement. Delinquency and in the euro area shifted up during the period. No
charge-off rates for most types of consumer loans changes were made to policy interest rates in the euro
moved down in recent months, although these rates area, the United Kingdom, or Japan. The Bank of
remained elevated. Spreads of credit card interest rates Canada tightened policy a step further during the pe-
over those on Treasury securities stayed elevated in riod, raising its target for the overnight rate 25 basis
May, while interest rate spreads on auto loans remained points to ¾ percent.
near their average level over the past decade.
Notwithstanding the improved investor sentiment to-
Commercial banks’ core loans—the sum of commercial ward Europe, data releases pointing to lower-than-
and industrial (C&I), real estate, and consumer loans— expected growth in economic activity in the United
continued to contract in June and July. However, the States and China may have weighed on global sovereign
recent runoff in core loans was appreciably smaller bond yields, which declined on net in Canada, Germa-
than the declines posted earlier in the year, reflecting a ny, the United Kingdom, and Japan. Equity prices,
more modest contraction in C&I loans. The July Se- while up in Europe over the intermeeting period, were
nior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending little changed in Canada and down in Japan. By con-
Practices showed, for the second straight quarter, that a trast, share prices rose in emerging markets and flows
small net fraction of respondents had eased standards into emerging market equity funds continued to be
for C&I loans over the previous three months. Com- strong. The central banks of a number of EMEs, in-
mercial real estate loans continued to decline steeply in cluding Brazil, Chile, India, Malaysia, South Korea,
June and July, and residential real estate loans also de- Taiwan, and Thailand, increased policy interest rates.
creased. Consumer loans at commercial banks were
Staff Economic Outlook
about flat, on balance, as reductions in credit card loans
In the economic forecast prepared for the August
about offset an increase in nonrevolving consumer
FOMC meeting, the staff lowered its projection for the
loans. Securities holdings by banks increased substan-
increase in real economic activity during the second
tially in recent weeks.
half of 2010 but continued to anticipate a moderate
M2 was little changed in July after expanding slightly in strengthening of the expansion in 2011. The softer
the second quarter. Its subdued growth in recent tone of incoming economic data suggested that the
months likely reflected a continued unwinding of earli- pace of the expansion would be slower over the near
er safe-haven flows as well as the very low rates of re- term than previously projected. Financial conditions,
turn on some components of M2, particularly small however, became somewhat more supportive of eco-
time deposits and retail money market mutual funds. nomic growth. Interest rates on Treasury securities,
corporate bonds, and mortgages moved down further
over the intermeeting period; the dollar reversed its

--- Page 6 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
April to June appreciation; and equity prices edged meeting had been partly reversed. Moreover, partici-
higher. Over the medium term, the recovery in eco- pants saw some indications that credit conditions for
nomic activity was expected to receive support from households and smaller businesses were beginning to
accommodative monetary policy, further improvement improve, albeit gradually. Thus, while they saw growth
in financial conditions, and greater household and as likely to be more modest in the near term, partici-
business confidence. Over the forecast period, the in- pants continued to anticipate that growth would pick
crease in real GDP was projected to be sufficient to up in 2011.
slowly reduce economic slack, although resource slack
Revised national income and product account data
was still anticipated to remain quite elevated at the end
showed that the contraction in aggregate output during
of 2011.
the recent recession had been larger than previously
Overall inflation was projected to remain subdued over reported. In particular, consumer spending had con-
the next year and a half. The staff’s forecasts for head- tracted more over the course of 2008 and the first half
line and core inflation in 2010 were revised up slightly of 2009, and recovered less rapidly, than previously
in response to the higher prices of oil and other com- estimated, even as households’ after-tax incomes had
modities and the depreciation of the dollar. Even so, increased more than shown by the earlier data. In
the wide margin of economic slack was projected to combination, these revisions indicated that the personal
contribute to some slowing in core inflation in 2011, saving rate had been higher and had risen somewhat
though the extent of that slowing would be tempered more during the past three years than previously
by stable inflation expectations. thought. Participants recognized that the implications
of these new data for the outlook were unclear. On the
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
one hand, the revised data might indicate that house-
Economic Outlook
holds have made greater progress in repairing their bal-
In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
ance sheets than had been realized, potentially allowing
look, meeting participants generally characterized the
stronger growth in consumer spending as the recovery
economic information received during the intermeeting
proceeds. On the other hand, the revised data might
period as indicating a slowing in the pace of recovery in
signify that households are seeking to raise their net
output and employment in recent months. Real GDP
worth more substantially than previously understood,
growth was noticeably weaker in the second quarter of
or to build greater precautionary balances in what they
2010 than most had anticipated, and monthly data sug-
perceive to be a more uncertain economic environ-
gested that the pace of recovery remained sluggish
ment, with the result that growth in consumer spending
going into the third quarter. Private payrolls and con-
could remain restrained for some time.
sumer spending had risen less than expected. Business
spending on equipment and software had increased Many participants noted that the protracted downturn
strongly but reportedly was concentrated in replace- in house prices and in residential investment seemed to
ments and upgrades that had been postponed during have ended, although ups and downs in housing starts
the economic downturn. Investment in nonresidential and home sales associated with the temporary tax credit
structures continued to be weak. Housing starts and for homebuyers made it difficult to be certain. A few
sales remained at depressed levels, falling back after the commented that home sales and prices appeared to be
expiration of the temporary homebuyer tax credits. edging up in their Districts. While recognizing that the
The incoming data suggested that economic growth housing sector likely had bottomed out, participants
abroad had been somewhat stronger than anticipated observed that large inventories of vacant and unsold
and remained solid, boosting U.S. exports and support- homes, along with continuing foreclosures that would
ing a pickup in U.S. manufacturing output and em- increase the number of houses for sale, likely would
ployment, though a surprising surge in imports in the continue to damp residential construction, indicating
second quarter widened the U.S. trade deficit. Condi- that a sustained upturn from very low levels was not
tions in financial markets had become somewhat more imminent.
supportive of growth over the intermeeting period, in
Business investment in equipment and software had
part reflecting perceptions of diminished risk of finan-
grown at a robust pace, but growth in new orders for
cial dislocations in Europe: Medium- and longer-term
nondefense capital goods, though volatile from month
interest rates had fallen, some risk spreads had nar-
to month, appeared to have stepped down. Many par-
rowed, and the decline in equity prices that had oc-
ticipants noted that capital investment was heavily con-
curred in the months before the Committee’s June

--- Page 7 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A u g u s t 1 0 , 2 0 1 0 Page 7
centrated in replacement investment and upgrades that offset a decline in policy stimulus and a smaller boost
firms had postponed during the economic downturn. from inventory investment. Several participants noted
A number of participants reported that business con- that the same shift in the sources of demand would
tacts again indicated that their uncertainty about the need to take place in the United States: Waning fiscal
fiscal and regulatory environment made them reluctant stimulus on the part of the federal government and
to expand capacity. Other participants cited business continuing retrenchment in spending by state and local
surveys and reports from business contacts indicating governments would weigh on the economic recovery,
that slow growth in sales and uncertainty about the and recent data raised questions as to whether private
strength and durability of the recovery likely were more demand would strengthen enough to increase resource
important factors. Except in the extractive industries utilization.
(drilling and mining), investment in nonresidential
The incoming data on the labor market were weaker
structures had continued to decline. The near-term
than meeting participants had anticipated. Private-
outlook for commercial real estate investment re-
sector payrolls grew sluggishly in recent months. The
mained weak despite a decline in vacancy rates in some
unemployment rate declined a bit, but that reflected a
markets.
decrease in labor force participation rather than an in-
Participants agreed that credit conditions did not ap- crease in employment. Policymakers discussed a vari-
pear to be an important restraint on investment spend- ety of factors that appeared to be contributing to the
ing by larger firms that have access to the capital mar- slow pace of job growth. A number of participants
kets. Such firms were able to borrow readily and at reported that business contacts again indicated that
relatively low rates; moreover, many businesses held uncertainty about future taxes, regulations, and health-
substantial cash balances. In addition, survey results care costs made them reluctant to expand their work-
suggested that a sizable fraction of banks had eased forces. Instead, businesses had continued to meet
loan terms, and a few had eased lending standards, on growth in demand for their products largely through
C&I loans. Some participants observed that small productivity gains and by increasing existing employees’
businesses continued to find credit hard to obtain. hours. Several participants suggested that structural
However, several participants noted recent survey evi- factors such as mismatches between unemployed
dence indicating that most small firms that requested workers’ skills and the needs of employers with job
credit were able to borrow, and that relatively few small openings, or unemployed workers’ inability to move to
firms thought that access to credit was their most im- a new locale, were contributing to the elevated level
portant problem. Standards for commercial real estate and long average duration of unemployment. Other
loans and residential mortgages remained very tight, participants, while agreeing that such factors could re-
and banks did not appear to be easing standards on strain job growth and contribute to high rates of un-
such loans. Some limited easing of lending standards employment, noted that employment was lower than a
was noted for consumer loans, but credit availability year earlier and that job openings were only slightly
remained a constraint and consumer credit continued above their lowest level in 10 years, indicating that few
to contract. However, several participants noted that firms saw a need to add employees. Most participants
with credit quality improving, some bankers were more viewed weak demand for firms’ outputs as the primary
actively seeking loan growth, though the same bankers problem; they saw substantial scope for stronger aggre-
also indicated that the demand for loans remained gate demand for goods and services to spur employ-
weak. ment in a wide range of industries.
Many participants noted that European countries’ ef- Weighing the available information, participants again
forts to address their fiscal imbalances, and the release expected the recovery to continue and to gather
of the results of the stress test of European banks strength in 2011. Nonetheless, most saw the incoming
along with information about their exposures to sover- data as indicating that the economy was operating
eign debt, had reduced investor concern about down- farther below its potential than they had thought, that
side risks in Europe. These factors appeared to have the pace of recovery had slowed in recent months, and
supported improvements in financial markets both here that growth would be more modest during the second
and abroad. Moreover, growth in Europe and Asia half of 2010 than they had anticipated at the time of the
apparently remained solid, boosting U.S. exports. Committee’s June meeting. Some policymakers whose
Nonetheless, a continuation of strong foreign growth forecasts for growth had been in the low end of the
would require a pickup in private demand abroad to range of participants’ earlier projections viewed the

--- Page 8 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
recent data as consistent with their earlier forecasts for had increased somewhat. More broadly, members gen-
a weak recovery. A few participants, observing that erally saw both employment and inflation as likely to
month-to-month data releases are noisy and subject to fall short of levels consistent with the dual mandate for
revision, did not see the recent data as clearly indicating longer than had been anticipated.
a change in the outlook. Many policymakers judged
Against this backdrop, the Committee discussed the
that downside risks to the U.S. recovery had become
implications for financial conditions and the economic
somewhat larger; a few saw the incoming data as sug-
outlook of continuing its policy of not reinvesting prin-
gesting a greater risk that private demand for goods and
cipal repayments received on MBS or maturing agency
services might not grow enough to offset waning fiscal
debt. The decline in mortgage rates since spring was
stimulus and a smaller impetus from inventory restock-
generating increased mortgage refinancing activity that
ing. In contrast, most saw a reduced risk of financial
would accelerate repayments of principal on MBS held
turmoil in Europe and attendant spillovers to U.S. fi-
in the SOMA. Private investors would have to hold
nancial markets.
more longer-term securities as the Federal Reserve’s
Policymakers generally saw the inflation outlook as lit- holdings ran off, making longer-term interest rates
tle changed. They observed that a range of measures somewhat higher than they would be otherwise. Most
continued to indicate subdued underlying inflation and members thought that the resulting tightening of finan-
that growth in wages and compensation remained quite cial conditions would be inappropriate, given the eco-
moderate. Many said they expected underlying infla- nomic outlook. However, members noted that the
tion to stay, for some time, below levels they judged magnitude of the tightening was uncertain, and a few
most consistent with the dual mandate to promote thought that the economic effects of reinvesting prin-
maximum employment and price stability. Participants cipal from agency debt and MBS likely would be quite
viewed the risk of deflation as quite small, but a num- small. Most members judged, in light of current condi-
ber judged that the risk of further disinflation had in- tions in the MBS market and the Committee’s desire to
creased somewhat despite the stability of longer-run normalize the composition of the Federal Reserve’s
inflation expectations. One noted that survey measures portfolio, that it would be better to reinvest in longer-
of longer-run inflation expectations had remained posi- term Treasury securities than in MBS. While reinvest-
tive in Japan throughout that country’s bout of defla- ing in Treasury securities was seen as preferable given
tion. A few saw the continuation of exceptionally ac- current market conditions, reinvesting in MBS might
commodative monetary policy in the United States as become desirable if conditions were to change. A few
posing some upside risk to inflation expectations and members worried that reinvesting principal from agen-
actual inflation in the medium run. cy debt and MBS in Treasury securities could send an
inappropriate signal to investors about the Committee’s
Committee Policy Action
readiness to resume large-scale asset purchases.
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
Another member argued that reinvesting repayments of
ahead, Committee members agreed that it would be
principal from agency debt and MBS, thereby postpon-
appropriate to maintain the target range of 0 to ¼ per-
ing a reduction in the size of the Federal Reserve’s bal-
cent for the federal funds rate. Members still saw the
ance sheet, was likely to complicate the eventual exit
economic expansion continuing, and most believed that
from the period of exceptionally accommodative mon-
inflation was likely to stabilize near recent low readings
etary policy and could have adverse macroeconomic
in coming quarters and then gradually rise toward levels
consequences in future years.
they consider more consistent with the Committee’s
dual mandate for maximum employment and price sta- All but one member concluded that it would be appro-
bility. Nonetheless, members generally judged that the priate to begin reinvesting principal received from
economic outlook had softened somewhat more than agency debt and MBS held in the SOMA by purchasing
they had anticipated, particularly for the near term, and longer-term Treasury securities in order to keep con-
some saw increased downside risks to the outlook for stant the face value of securities held in the SOMA and
both growth and inflation. Some members expressed a thus avoid the upward pressure on longer-term interest
concern that in this context any further adverse shocks rates that might result if those holdings were allowed to
could have disproportionate effects, resulting in a sig- decline. Several members emphasized that in addition
nificant slowing in growth going forward. While no to continuing to develop and test instruments to facili-
member saw an appreciable risk of deflation, some tate an eventual exit from the period of unusually ac-
judged that the risk of further near-term disinflation commodative monetary policy, the Committee would

--- Page 9 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A u g u s t 1 0 , 2 0 1 0 Page 9
need to consider steps it could take to provide addi- cates that the pace of recovery in output and
tional policy stimulus if the outlook were to weaken employment has slowed in recent months.
appreciably further. Given the softer tone of recent Household spending is increasing gradually,
data and the more modest near-term outlook, members but remains constrained by high unemploy-
agreed that some changes to the statement’s characteri- ment, modest income growth, lower housing
zation of the economic and financial situation were wealth, and tight credit. Business spending
necessary. All members but one judged that it was ap- on equipment and software is rising; howev-
propriate to reiterate the expectation that economic er, investment in nonresidential structures
conditions—including low levels of resource utilization, continues to be weak and employers remain
subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expecta- reluctant to add to payrolls. Housing starts
tions—were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels remain at a depressed level. Bank lending
of the federal funds rate for an extended period. One has continued to contract. Nonetheless, the
member argued that the recovery was proceeding about Committee anticipates a gradual return to
as outlined earlier this year and that starting a gradual higher levels of resource utilization in a con-
process of removing policy accommodation fairly soon text of price stability, although the pace of
would better foster the Committee’s long-run objec- economic recovery is likely to be more mod-
tives of maximum employment and price stability. est in the near term than had been antic-
ipated.
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank Measures of underlying inflation have
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex- trended lower in recent quarters and, with
ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance substantial resource slack continuing to re-
with the following domestic policy directive: strain cost pressures and longer-term infla-
tion expectations stable, inflation is likely to
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
be subdued for some time.
monetary and financial conditions that will
foster price stability and promote sustainable The Committee will maintain the target
growth in output. To further its long-run range for the federal funds rate at 0 to
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions ¼ percent and continues to anticipate that
in reserve markets consistent with federal economic conditions, including low rates of
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. resource utilization, subdued inflation trends,
The Committee directs the Desk to maintain and stable inflation expectations, are likely to
the total face value of domestic securities warrant exceptionally low levels of the feder-
held in the System Open Market Account at al funds rate for an extended period.
approximately $2 trillion by reinvesting prin-
To help support the economic recovery in a
cipal payments from agency debt and agency
context of price stability, the Committee will
mortgage-backed securities in longer-term
keep constant the Federal Reserve’s holdings
Treasury securities. The Committee directs
of securities at their current level by reinvest-
the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon
ing principal payments from agency debt and
swap transactions as necessary to facilitate
agency mortgage-backed securities in longer-
settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency
term Treasury securities.¹ The Committee
MBS transactions. The System Open Market
will continue to roll over the Federal Re-
Account Manager and the Secretary will keep
serve’s holdings of Treasury securities as they
the Committee informed of ongoing devel-
mature.
opments regarding the System’s balance
sheet that could affect the attainment over The Committee will continue to monitor the
time of the Committee’s objectives of maxi- economic outlook and financial develop-
mum employment and price stability.” ments and will employ its policy tools as ne-
cessary to promote economic recovery and
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
price stability.
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.:
¹ The Open Market Desk will issue a tech-
“Information received since the Federal
nical note shortly after the statement provid-
Open Market Committee met in June indi-

--- Page 10 ---

Page 10 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
ing operational details on how it will carry was also concerned that these accommodative policy
out these transactions.” positions could result in the buildup of future financial
imbalances and increase the risks to longer-run ma-
Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C.
croeconomic and financial stability.
Dudley, James Bullard, Elizabeth Duke, Donald L.
Kohn, Sandra Pianalto, Eric Rosengren, Daniel K. Ta- It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
rullo, and Kevin Warsh. would be held on Tuesday, September 21, 2010. The
meeting adjourned at 1:35 p.m. on August 10, 2010.
Voting against this action: Thomas M. Hoenig.
Notation Vote
Mr. Hoenig dissented because he thought it was not
appropriate to indicate that economic and financial By notation vote completed on July 13, 2010, the
conditions were “likely to warrant exceptionally low Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period” FOMC meeting held on June 22–23, 2010.
or to reinvest principal payments from agency debt and
agency mortgage-backed securities in longer-term
Treasury securities. Mr. Hoenig felt that the “extended
period” expectation could limit the Committee’s flex-
ibility to begin raising rates modestly in a timely fa-
_____________________________
shion, and he believed that the recovery, which had
William B. English
entered its second year and was expected to continue at
Secretary
a moderate pace, did not require support from addi-
tional accommodation in monetary policy. Mr. Hoenig