# 20100428_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:36:23*
*Pages: 19, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Page 1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
April 27–28, 2010
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit- Brian Sack, Manager, System Open Market Ac-
tee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve count
System was held in the offices of the Board of Gover-
nors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 27, 2010, Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office
at 2:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, April 28, of the Secretary, Board of Governors
2010, at 9:00 a.m.
Patrick M. Parkinson, Director, Division of Bank
PRESENT: Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover-
Ben Bernanke, Chairman nors
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman
James Bullard Robert deV. Frierson,¹ Deputy Secretary, Office of
Elizabeth Duke the Secretary, Board of Governors
Thomas M. Hoenig
Donald L. Kohn Charles S. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director,
Sandra Pianalto Office of the Staff Director for Management,
Eric Rosengren Board of Governors
Daniel K. Tarullo
Kevin Warsh James A. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Christine Cumming, Charles L. Evans, Narayana
Kocherlakota, and Charles I. Plosser, Alternate Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Members of the Federal Open Market Com- Board Members, Board of Governors
mittee
William Nelson, Senior Associate Director, Divi-
Jeffrey M. Lacker, Dennis P. Lockhart, and Janet L. sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors;
Yellen, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Nellie Liang, David Reifschneider, and William
Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francis- Wascher, Senior Associate Directors, Division
co, respectively of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Helen E. Holcomb, First Vice President, Federal Seth B. Carpenter, Associate Director, Division of
Reserve Bank of Dallas Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Brian F. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Christopher J. Erceg, Deputy Associate Director,
Matthew M. Luecke, Assistant Secretary Division of International Finance, Board of
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Governors; Egon Zakrajšek, Deputy Associate
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel of Governors
Thomas C. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Nathan Sheets, Economist Brian J. Gross, Special Assistant to the Board, Of-
David J. Stockton, Economist fice of Board Members, Board of Governors
Alan D. Barkema, Thomas A. Connors, William B. David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of
English, Jeff Fuhrer, Steven B. Kamin, Simon Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Potter, Lawrence Slifman, Mark S. Sniderman,
Christopher J. Waller, and David W. Wilcox, Jennifer E. Roush, Senior Economist, Division of
Associate Economists Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
¹ Attended Tuesday’s session only.

--- Page 2 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Kurt F. Lewis, Economist, Division of Monetary Agreement of 1994. The arrangement with the Bank of
Affairs, Board of Governors Canada is in the amount of $2 billion equivalent, and
the arrangement with the Banco de Mexico is in the
Penelope A. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Of- amount of $3 billion equivalent. The vote to renew the
fice of the Secretary, Board of Governors System’s participation in these swap arrangements was
taken at this meeting because of a provision in the ar-
Kimberley E. Braun, Records Project Manager, rangements that requires each party to provide six
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gov- months’ prior notice of an intention to terminate its
ernors participation.
The staff also briefed the Committee on recent
Randall A. Williams, Records Management Analyst,
progress in the development of reserve draining tools.
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Gov-
The Desk was preparing to conduct small-scale reverse
ernors
repurchase operations to ensure its ability to use agency
MBS collateral. It also continued to work toward ex-
Esther L. George, First Vice President, Federal Re-
pansion of the set of counterparties for reverse repur-
serve Bank of Kansas City
chase operations. The staff noted that the Board had
recently approved changes to Regulation D that would
Loretta J. Mester, Harvey Rosenblum, and John C.
be necessary for the establishment of a term deposit
Williams, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal
facility.
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and San
Francisco, respectively The staff next gave a presentation on potential longer-
run strategies for managing the SOMA. At previous
David Altig, Richard P. Dzina, Daniel G. Sullivan, meetings, Committee participants had expressed sup-
and John A. Weinberg, Senior Vice Presidents, port for steps to reduce the size of the Federal Re-
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, New York, serve’s balance sheet over time and return the composi-
Chicago, and Richmond, respectively tion of the SOMA to only Treasury securities. The
staff discussed the potential portfolio paths and mac-
Warren Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal roeconomic consequences of a number of different
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis strategies for accomplishing these objectives. To date,
the Desk had been reinvesting the proceeds of all ma-
turing Treasury securities in newly issued Treasury se-
curities, but it had not been reinvesting principal and
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed- interest payments on maturing agency debt and agency
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet MBS, nor had it been selling securities. One strategy
The Manager of the System Open Market Account considered in the staff presentation was a continuation
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and of the current practice, which would normalize the bal-
foreign financial markets during the period since the ance sheet very gradually. In addition, the staff pre-
Committee met on March 16, 2010. The Manager also sented information on a number of other strategies that
reported on System open market operations in Trea- included sales of SOMA holdings of agency debt and
sury securities and in agency debt and agency mort- MBS and under which the proceeds of maturing Trea-
gage-backed securities (MBS) during the intermeeting sury securities would not be reinvested; these strategies
period. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified differed by the date and circumstances under which
those transactions. There were no open market opera- sales would be initiated, by the average pace of sales,
tions in foreign currencies for the System’s account and by the degree to which the timing and pace of such
over the intermeeting period. sales would be adjusted in response to financial and
economic developments.
By unanimous vote, the Committee decided to extend
the reciprocal currency (“swap”) arrangements with the Meeting participants agreed broadly on key objectives
Bank of Canada and the Banco de Mexico for an addi- of a longer-run strategy for asset sales and redemptions.
tional year, beginning in mid-December 2010; these The strategy should be consistent with the achievement
arrangements are associated with the Federal Reserve’s of the Committee’s objectives of maximum employ-
participation in the North American Framework ment and price stability. In addition, the strategy

--- Page 3 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 7 - 2 8 , 2 0 1 0 Page 3
should normalize the size and composition of the bal- portfolio be sold at a gradual pace that would complete
ance sheet over time. Reducing the size of the balance the sales about five years after they began. One possi-
sheet would decrease the associated reserve balances to bility would be for the pace to be relatively slow initially
amounts consistent with more normal operations of but to increase over time, allowing markets to adjust
money markets and monetary policy. Returning the gradually. A couple of participants thought faster sales,
portfolio to its historical composition of essentially all conducted over about three years, would be appropri-
Treasury securities would minimize the extent to which ate and felt that such a pace would not put undue strain
the Federal Reserve portfolio might be affecting the on financial markets. In their view, a relatively brisk
allocation of credit among private borrowers and sec- pace of sales would reduce the chance that the elevated
tors of the economy. size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and the as-
sociated high level of reserve balances could raise infla-
Most participants expressed a preference for strategies
tion expectations and inflation beyond levels consistent
that would eventually entail sales of agency debt and
with price stability or could generate excessive growth
MBS in order to return the size and composition of the
of credit when the economy and banking system recov-
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to a more normal con-
er more fully.
figuration more quickly than would be accomplished by
simply letting MBS and agency securities run off. They Participants saw both advantages and disadvantages to
agreed that sales of agency debt and MBS should be not rolling over Treasury securities as they mature. On
implemented in accordance with a framework commu- the one hand, redeeming Treasury securities would
nicated in advance and be conducted at a gradual pace contribute to a more expeditious normalization of the
that potentially could be adjusted in response to size of the balance sheet and the quantity of reserves.
changes in economic and financial conditions. On the other hand, such redemptions could put up-
ward pressure on interest rates and would tend to work
Participants expressed a range of views on some of the
against the objective of returning the SOMA to an all-
details of a strategy for asset sales. Most participants
Treasuries composition.
favored deferring asset sales for some time. A majority
preferred beginning asset sales some time after the first No decisions about the Committee’s longer-run strate-
increase in the Federal Open Market Committee’s gy for asset sales and redemptions were made at this
(FOMC) target for short-term interest rates. Such an meeting. For the time being, participants agreed that
approach would postpone any asset sales until the eco- the Desk should continue the interim approach of al-
nomic recovery was well established and would main- lowing all maturing agency debt and all prepayments of
tain short-term interest rates as the Committee’s key agency MBS to be redeemed without replacement while
monetary policy tool. Other participants favored a rolling over all maturing Treasury securities. Partici-
strategy in which the Committee would soon announce pants agreed to give further consideration to their long-
a general schedule for future asset sales, with a date for er-run strategy at a later date.
the initiation of sales that would not necessarily be
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
linked to the increase in the Committee’s interest rate
The information reviewed at the April 27–28 meeting
target. A few preferred to begin sales relatively soon.
suggested that, on balance, the economic recovery was
Earlier sales would normalize the size and composition
proceeding at a moderate pace and that the deteriora-
of the balance sheet sooner and would unwind at least
tion in the labor market was likely coming to an end.
part of the unconventional policy stimulus put in place
Consumer spending continued to post solid gains in
during the crisis before conventional policy firming got
the first three months of the year, and business invest-
under way. Some participants saw advantages to vary-
ment in equipment and software appeared to have in-
ing the FOMC’s holdings of longer-term assets system-
creased significantly further in the first quarter. In ad-
atically in response to economic and financial devel-
dition, growth of manufacturing output remained brisk,
opments. However, others thought that a pre-
and gains became more broadly based across industries.
announced pace of sales that was unlikely to vary much
However, residential construction, while having edged
would provide a high degree of certainty about sales,
up, was still depressed, construction of nonresidential
helping to limit disruptions in financial markets.
buildings remained on a steep downward trajectory,
The views of participants also differed to some extent and state and local governments continued to retrench.
regarding the appropriate pace of asset sales. Most Consumer price inflation remained low.
preferred that the agency debt and MBS held in the

--- Page 4 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
The labor market showed signs of a nascent recovery in strengthened noticeably, as sales of new single-family
recent months. Private nonfarm payroll employment homes jumped and sales of existing single-family
increased over the first quarter of 2010—the first quar- homes rose as well. However, both new home sales
terly increase since the onset of the recession. The av- and existing home sales were likely boosted, at least in
erage workweek also rose last quarter and data from the part, by the anticipated expiration of the homebuyer tax
household survey pointed to a firming in labor market credit. Interest rates for conforming 30-year fixed-rate
conditions. The unemployment rate held steady at 9.7 mortgages changed little in recent months and re-
percent throughout the first quarter, and the labor mained at levels that were very low by historical stan-
force participation rate increased over the past few dards.
months following sharp declines over the second half
Real spending on equipment and software continued to
of last year. The number of new job losers as a percen-
rebound in the first quarter. Investment in high-tech
tage of household employment continued to drop, and
equipment and transportation advanced further, and
the fraction of workers on part-time schedules for eco-
real spending for equipment other than high-tech and
nomic reasons moved down since the end of last year.
transportation appeared to turn up sharply after falling
Nonetheless, finding a job remained very difficult, and
for more than a year, suggesting that the recovery in
the average duration of unemployment spells increased
equipment and software investment became more
further.
broadly based. The recovery in equipment and soft-
Industrial production continued to expand at a brisk ware spending was consistent with the strengthening in
pace during the first quarter. Recent production gains many indicators of business activity. In contrast, the
remained broadly based across industries, as both for- nonresidential construction sector continued to con-
eign demand and a mild restocking of inventories con- tract. Real outlays on structures outside drilling and
tributed positively to output growth. Capacity utiliza- mining fell steeply last year, and recent data on nominal
tion stood significantly above the trough recorded last expenditures through February suggested a further de-
June but was still well below its long-run average. Light cline in the first quarter. The weakness was widespread
motor vehicle production stepped up in March, and across categories and likely reflected elevated vacancy
assemblies in the first quarter were above their fourth- rates, low levels of property prices, and difficulties in
quarter average as automakers cautiously began to re- obtaining financing for new projects. Real spending on
build dealers’ inventories. Production in high-tech in- drilling and mining structures picked up strongly over
dustries increased solidly, and available indicators the second half of last year in response to the rebound
pointed toward further expansion in this sector in the in oil and natural gas prices.
near term. On balance, indicators of near-term manu-
Available data suggested that the pace of inventory li-
facturing activity remained quite positive.
quidation moderated further in the first quarter after
Consumer spending continued to rise at a solid pace slowing sharply in the fourth quarter of last year. In-
through March, with recent gains pronounced for most ventories appeared to approach comfortable levels rela-
non-auto goods and food services. Despite signs of tive to sales in the aggregate, although inventory posi-
improvement recently, the determinants of spending tions across industries varied. Months’ supply re-
remained subdued. While wages and salaries picked up mained elevated for equipment, materials, and, to a
early this year, real disposable income was flat in Feb- lesser degree, construction supplies. By contrast, in-
ruary after a slight decline in January; housing wealth ventories of consumer goods, business supplies, and
was still well below its level prior to the crisis. Fur- high-tech goods appeared low relative to demand.
thermore, although banks indicated a somewhat greater
Consumer price inflation was low in recent months;
willingness to lend to consumers in recent months,
both headline and core personal consumption expendi-
terms and standards on consumer loans remained re-
tures (PCE) prices were estimated to have risen slightly
strictive. Additionally, consumer sentiment dropped
in March after remaining unchanged in February. On a
back in early April and was little changed, on net, since
12-month change basis, core PCE prices slowed over
the beginning of the year.
the year ending in March, with deceleration widespread
Starts of new single-family homes edged up, on net, across categories of expenditures. In contrast, the cor-
over February and March, but much of this increase responding change in the headline index moved up
likely reflected delayed projects getting under way as noticeably, as energy prices rebounded. Survey meas-
weather conditions returned to normal. Home sales ures of long-term inflation expectations were fairly sta-

--- Page 5 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 7 - 2 8 , 2 0 1 0 Page 5
ble in recent months at levels slightly lower than those Staff Review of the Financial Situation
posted a year ago. Meanwhile, measures of inflation The decision by the FOMC at the March meeting to
compensation based on Treasury inflation-protected keep the target range for the federal funds rate un-
securities (TIPS) edged up slightly. Cost pressures changed and to retain the “extended period” language
from rising commodity prices showed through to pric- in the statement was largely anticipated by market par-
es at early stages of processing, and the producer price ticipants. However, some market participants report-
index for core intermediate materials continued to rise edly interpreted the retention of the “extended period”
rapidly through March. However, measures of labor language as pointing to a longer period of low rates
costs decelerated sharply last year, as compensation per than previously expected, and Eurodollar futures rates
hour in the nonfarm business sector increased only temporarily declined a bit in response.
slightly over the four quarters of 2009.
On balance over the intermeeting period, the expected
The U.S. international trade deficit widened in Febru- path of policy edged down slightly. Yields on 2-year
ary, as a rise in nominal imports outpaced a small in- and 10-year nominal Treasury securities posted small
crease in exports. Increased exports of industrial sup- mixed changes amid some volatility that reportedly re-
plies, capital goods, and automotive products were flected evolving views about the U.S. fiscal outlook,
partly offset by declines in agricultural goods and con- prospects for U.S. economic growth, and the fiscal sit-
sumer goods. The February rise in imports reversed a uation in peripheral European countries. Inflation
similarly sized decrease in January. Imports of oil ac- compensation—the difference between nominal Trea-
counted for more than one-third of the January decline, sury yields and yields on TIPS—rose some over the
reflecting lower volumes, but they accounted for only period, but survey measures of longer-term inflation
about one-tenth of the February increase, as volumes expectations were about unchanged.
rebounded but prices fell. Imports of capital goods
Overall, conditions in short-term funding markets re-
rose as strong computer imports more than offset fall-
mained generally stable during the intermeeting period.
ing aircraft purchases, and imports of industrial sup-
Spreads between London interbank offered rates (Li-
plies and consumer goods also moved up.
bor) and overnight index swap (OIS) rates were about
Recent indicators in the advanced foreign economies unchanged at levels near those that prevailed in late
suggested a continued divergence in the pace of recov- 2007, although they began to edge up in the final days
ery, with a strong performance in Canada, a moderate of the intermeeting period. Spreads in the commercial
expansion in Japan, and a more subdued rebound in paper market were little changed. Equity indexes rose,
Europe. Fiscal strains in Greece intensified during the on balance, over the intermeeting period, with bank
intermeeting period, and in mid-April, euro-area mem- shares outperforming the broader market. Stock prices
ber states announced a plan to provide financing aid to were supported by somewhat better-than-expected ma-
Greece in coordination with the International Monetary croeconomic data and a favorable response by inves-
Fund. However, at the time of the April FOMC meet- tors to the initial batch of first-quarter earnings reports,
ing, no official agreement had been reached concerning especially those of banking institutions. Option-
the scale, composition, and implementation of such an implied volatility on the S&P 500 index generally de-
aid package. Economic activity in emerging markets clined over the period but jumped at end of April on
continued to expand robustly in the first quarter. De- renewed concerns regarding the fiscal situation in
spite the strength of exports, merchandise trade bal- Greece. The gap between the staff’s estimate of the
ances declined for some countries where strong domes- expected real equity return over the next 10 years for
tic demand caused imports to outpace exports. In Chi- S&P 500 firms and the real 10-year Treasury yield—a
na, real gross domestic product (GDP) increased at a rough measure of the equity risk premium—remained
higher-than-expected annual rate in the first quarter as well above its average over the past decade. Yields on
the economic recovery remained broad based, with investment-grade corporate bonds edged down, leaving
industrial production, investment, and domestic de- their spreads to comparable-maturity Treasury securi-
mand continuing to grow briskly. In Latin America, ties a bit lower, at levels around those that prevailed in
indicators suggested that economic activity in Mexico late 2007. Consistent with more-favorable investor
and Brazil expanded further in the first quarter. For- sentiment toward risky assets, yields and spreads on
eign inflation was boosted by increases in the prices of speculative-grade corporate bonds declined, and sec-
oil and other commodities, but core inflation generally ondary market prices of syndicated leveraged loans rose
remained subdued. further.

--- Page 6 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Overall, net debt financing by nonfinancial firms was and securities holdings declined.2 The contraction in
positive in March. Issuance of nonfinancial bonds commercial and industrial loans remained pronounced.
surged, and net issuance of commercial paper re- The drop in commercial real estate loans persisted, re-
bounded appreciably. Net equity issuance by nonfi- flecting weak fundamentals that limited originations as
nancial firms was negative again in the first quarter as well as charge-offs of existing loans. Residential real
the solid pace of gross public issuance was more than estate loans also decreased further in March, as did cre-
offset by equity retirements from both cash-financed dit card loans and other consumer loans.
mergers and share repurchases. Financial firms issued
M2 fell in March, reflecting a slowing in the expansion
a significant volume of debt securities in the first quar-
of liquid deposits along with a further contraction in
ter and also raised a moderate amount of gross funds in
small time deposits and a steep runoff in retail money
the equity market, a pattern that appeared to continue
market mutual funds. Currency grew at a moderate
in the first half of April. Credit quality in the commer-
pace, likely as a result of continued demand for U.S.
cial real estate sector continued to deteriorate as the
banknotes from abroad coupled with solid domestic
delinquency rate for securitized commercial mortgages
demand. The monetary base contracted as the effect
increased again in March. The decline in outstanding
on reserves of purchases under the Federal Reserve’s
commercial mortgage debt in the fourth quarter of last
large-scale asset purchase programs was more than off-
year was the largest on record. Nonetheless, indexes of
set by a further contraction in credit outstanding under
prices for credit default swaps on commercial mort-
liquidity and credit facilities and an increase in the
gage-backed securities ticked up noticeably over the
Treasury’s balances at the Federal Reserve.
period, in line with the overall reduction in financial
market risk premiums. Until the intensification of the Greek crisis near the
end of the intermeeting period, equity indexes were
The conclusion of purchases under the Federal Re-
higher in nearly all countries, and emerging-market risk
serve’s agency MBS program had only a modest market
spreads had generally declined. These moves appeared
effect. Over the intermeeting period, spreads on agen-
to reflect growing confidence that the global recovery
cy MBS retraced much of the increase seen around the
was gaining momentum, particularly in emerging mar-
time of the program’s conclusion, ending the period
ket economies. However, sovereign debt spreads in
roughly unchanged. The factors contributing to the
Greece, Portugal, and other peripheral European coun-
recent narrowing of MBS and mortgage spreads in-
tries widened in the days leading up to the April FOMC
cluded the low level of mortgage originations, which
meeting, as investor anxiety about the fiscal situation in
damped the supply of new MBS, and Fannie Mae’s and
those countries increased. Downgrades to the credit
Freddie Mac’s increased purchases of mortgages
ratings of Greece and Portugal weighed on investor
through their buyouts of delinquent loans. Consumer
sentiment, and global markets retraced some of their
credit continued to trend lower in recent months,
earlier gains.
pushed down by a steep decline in revolving credit.
Spreads on high-quality credit card and auto loan asset- Over the intermeeting period, the Bank of Japan
backed securities (ABS) edged down over the period, doubled the size of its three-month fixed-rate funds
with little upward pressure evident from the end of the facility, the Bank of Canada dropped its conditional
portion of the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Fa- commitment to keeping rates steady through the first
cility supporting ABS. Nonetheless, fewer ABS were
issued in the first quarter than in the fourth quarter, 2 The new accounting standards make it more difficult for
reflecting continued weakness in loan originations. U.S. banks to hold assets off balance sheet. Banks adopted
Delinquency rates on consumer loans edged down fur- the standards in the fourth quarter of 2009 and the first quar-
ther in February but remained very elevated. Spreads ter of 2010. The cumulative effects of the resulting asset
of interest rates on credit cards over yields on two-year consolidation were incorporated in the bank credit data pub-
lished on the Federal Reserve’s H.8 Statistical Release “As-
Treasury securities continued to drift upward, while
sets and Liabilities of Commercial Banks in the United
interest rates on new auto loans at dealerships and their
States” as of March 31, 2010. While all major loan categories
spreads over yields on five-year Treasury securities ex-
were affected to some degree by banks’ adoption of Finan-
tended their previous decline.
cial Accounting Standards 166 and 167, the largest effect was
on credit card loans on commercial bank balance sheets;
After adjusting to remove the effects of banks’ adop-
banks also consolidated significant amounts of other con-
tion of Financial Accounting Standards 166 and 167,
sumer loans, commercial and industrial loans, and residential
bank credit contracted again in March, as both loans
real estate loans.

--- Page 7 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 7 - 2 8 , 2 0 1 0 Page 7
half of the year, and the Reserve Bank of Australia the incoming information as broadly in line with their
raised its policy rate. The trade-weighted value of the earlier projections for moderate growth; accordingly,
dollar changed little, on net; gains against the euro and their views on the economic outlook had not changed
yen were offset by declines against many emerging appreciably. Participants expected the economic re-
market currencies. covery to continue, but, consistent with experience fol-
lowing previous financial crises, most anticipated that
Staff Economic Outlook
the pickup in output would be rather slow relative to
The economic forecast prepared by the staff for the
past recoveries from deep recessions. A moderate pace
April FOMC meeting was similar to that developed for
of expansion, in turn, would imply only a modest im-
the March meeting. The staff continued to project that
provement in the labor market this year, with the un-
the accommodative stance of monetary policy, together
employment rate declining gradually. Most participants
with a further attenuation of financial stress, the waning
again projected that the economy would grow some-
of adverse effects of earlier declines in wealth, and im-
what faster in 2011 and 2012, generating a more pro-
proving household and business confidence, would
nounced decline in the unemployment rate. In light of
support a moderate recovery in economic activity and a
stable longer-term inflation expectations and the likely
gradual decline in the unemployment rate over the next
continuation of substantial resource slack, policymakers
two years. The staff forecast for both real GDP
anticipated that both overall and core inflation would
growth and the unemployment rate through the end of
remain subdued through 2012, with measured inflation
2011 was roughly in line with previous projections.
somewhat below rates that policymakers considered to
Recent data on core consumer prices led the staff to be consistent over the longer run with the Federal Re-
mark down slightly its forecast for core PCE inflation. serve’s dual mandate.
The staff continued to anticipate that downward pres-
Participants expected that economic growth would
sure on inflation from the substantial amount of pro-
continue: Recent data pointed to significant gains in
jected resource slack would be tempered by stable infla-
retail sales, business spending on equipment and soft-
tion expectations. With energy price increases expected
ware had picked up substantially, and reports from
to slow next year, total PCE inflation was seen as likely
business contacts and regional surveys indicated that
to fall back in line with core inflation by the end of
production was increasing briskly in many sectors. Par-
2011, as in previous projections.
ticipants agreed that the growth in real GDP appeared
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the to reflect a strengthening of private final demand and
Economic Outlook not just fiscal stimulus and a slower pace of inventory
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, all meeting decumulation; this welcome development lessened pol-
participants—the five members of the Board of Gov- icymakers’ concerns about the economy’s ability to
ernors and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve maintain a self-sustaining recovery without government
Banks—provided projections of economic growth, the support. Businesses appeared to be gaining confidence
unemployment rate, and consumer price inflation for in the economic recovery, and narrowing credit spreads
each year from 2010 through 2012 and over a longer in private debt markets were allowing low policy rates
horizon. Longer-run projections represent each partic- to be reflected more fully in the cost of capital. At the
ipant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable same time, rising stock prices and the apparent stabili-
would be expected to converge over time under appro- zation of house prices were helping to repair household
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further balance sheets. As a result, consumers and firms were
shocks. Participants’ forecasts through 2012 and over beginning to satisfy demands for durable goods and
the longer run are described in the Summary of Eco- capital equipment that had been postponed during the
nomic Projections, which is attached as an addendum economic downturn. Many participants noted that
to these minutes. employment had increased in recent months, and that
they expected a further firming of labor market condi-
In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
tions going forward. A stronger labor market could
look, meeting participants agreed that the incoming
continue to boost consumer and business confidence
data and information received from business contacts
and so contribute to further gains in spending.
indicated that economic activity continued to streng-
then and the labor market was beginning to improve. Although these developments were positive, partici-
Although some of the recent data on economic activity pants noted several factors that likely would continue
had been better than anticipated, most participants saw to restrain expansion in economic activity and posed

--- Page 8 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
some downside risks. The recent increase in consumer Economic conditions abroad, especially in several
spending appeared to be supported importantly by emerging Asian economies, continued to strengthen in
pent-up demands and possibly by other temporary fac- recent months, contributing to gains in U.S. exports.
tors, such as unusually large income tax refunds. With However, participants saw the escalation of fiscal
the personal saving rate having dropped back to a rela- strains in Greece and spreading concerns about other
tively low level, it seemed unlikely that consumer peripheral European countries as weighing on financial
spending would be the major factor driving growth as conditions and confidence in the euro area. If other
the recovery progressed. Moreover, the recovery in the European countries responded by intensifying their
housing market appeared to have stalled in recent fiscal consolidation efforts, the result would likely be
months despite various forms of government support. slower growth in Europe and potentially a weaker
Although residential real estate values seemed to be global economic recovery. Some participants ex-
stabilizing and in some areas had reportedly moved pressed concern that a crisis in Greece or in some other
higher, housing sales and starts had leveled off in re- peripheral European countries could have an adverse
cent months at depressed levels. Some participants saw effect on U.S. financial markets, which could also slow
the possibility of elevated foreclosures adding to the the recovery in this country.
already very large inventory of vacant homes as posing
Developments in labor markets were positive over the
a downside risk to home prices, thereby limiting the
intermeeting period. Nonfarm payrolls posted a mod-
extent of the pickup in residential investment for a
est gain in March, and the upturn in private employ-
while.
ment was widespread across industries. Nevertheless,
In the business sector, prospects for nonresidential participants remained concerned about elevated unem-
construction outside the energy sector remained weak. ployment, including high levels of long-term unem-
Commercial real estate activity continued to fall in most ployment and permanent separations, which were seen
parts of the country as a result of deteriorating funda- as potentially leading to the loss of worker skills and
mentals, including declining occupancy and rental rates greater needs for labor reallocation that could slow
and tight credit conditions. However, a number of employment growth going forward. Moreover, infor-
participants noted that investment in equipment and mation from business contacts generally underscored
software had been strengthening, and they relayed the degree to which firms’ reluctance to add to payrolls
anecdotal information from their business contacts that or start large capital projects reflected uncertainty about
suggested continued growth in orders for capital the economic outlook and future government policies.
equipment. A number of participants pointed out that the econom-
ic recovery could eventually lose traction without a
Business investment was expected to be supported by
substantial pickup in job creation.
improved conditions in financial markets. Large firms
with access to capital markets appeared to be having Participants cited a wide array of evidence as indica-
little difficulty in obtaining credit, and in many cases tions that underlying inflation remained subdued. The
they also had ample retained earnings with which to latest readings on core inflation—which exclude the
fund their operations and investment. However, many relatively volatile prices of food and energy—were gen-
participants noted that while financial markets had im- erally lower than they had anticipated. One participant
proved, bank lending was still contracting and credit noted that core inflation had been held down in recent
remained tight for many borrowers. Smaller firms in quarters by unusually slow increases in the price index
particular reportedly continued to face substantial diffi- for shelter, and that the recent behavior of core infla-
culty in obtaining bank loans. Because such firms tend tion might be a misleading signal of the underlying in-
to be more dependent on commercial banks for financ- flation trend. However, a number of participants
ing, participants saw limited credit availability as a po- pointed out that the recent moderation in price changes
tential constraint on future investment and hiring by was widespread across many categories of spending
small businesses, which normally are a significant and was evident in measures that exclude the most ex-
source of employment growth in recoveries. Some treme price movements in each period. In addition,
participants noted that many small and regional banks survey measures of longer-term inflation expectations
were vulnerable to deteriorating performance of com- remained fairly stable, wage growth continued to be
mercial real estate loans. restrained, and unit labor costs were still falling; reports
from business contacts also suggested that pricing
power remained limited. Against this backdrop, most

--- Page 9 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 7 - 2 8 , 2 0 1 0 Page 9
participants anticipated that substantial resource slack ciated with a later start, because the scope for more
and stable longer-term inflation expectations would accommodative policy was limited by the effective low-
likely keep inflation subdued for some time. er bound on the federal funds rate, while the Commit-
tee could be flexible in adjusting the magnitude and
Participants’ assessments of the risks to the inflation
pace of tightening in response to evolving economic
outlook were mixed. Some participants saw the risks to
circumstances. In light of the improved functioning of
inflation as tilted to the downside in the near term, re-
financial markets, Committee members agreed that it
flecting the quite elevated level of economic slack and
would be appropriate for the statement to be released
the possibility that inflation expectations could begin to
following the meeting to indicate that the previously
decline in response to the low level of actual inflation.
announced schedule for closing the Term Asset-Backed
Others, however, saw the balance of risks as pointing
Securities Loan Facility was being maintained.
to potentially higher inflation and cited pressures on
commodity and energy prices associated with expand- At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
ing global economic activity as an upside inflation risk; voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
some also noted the possibility that inflation expecta- of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
tions could rise as a result of the public’s concerns ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance
about the extraordinary size of the Federal Reserve’s with the following domestic policy directive:
balance sheet in a period of very large federal budget
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
deficits. While survey measures of longer-term infla-
monetary and financial conditions that will
tion expectations had been fairly stable, some market-
foster price stability and promote sustainable
based measures of inflation expectations and inflation
growth in output. To further its long-run
risk suggested increased concern among market partici-
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions
pants about higher inflation. To keep inflation expecta-
in reserve markets consistent with federal
tions well anchored, all participants agreed that it was
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.
important for policy to be responsive to changes in the
The Committee directs the Desk to engage
economic outlook and for the Federal Reserve to con-
in dollar roll transactions as necessary to faci-
tinue to communicate clearly its ability and intent to
litate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s
begin withdrawing monetary policy accommodation at
agency MBS transactions. The System Open
the appropriate time and pace.
Market Account Manager and the Secretary
Committee Policy Action will keep the Committee informed of ongo-
In the members’ discussion of monetary policy for the ing developments regarding the System’s bal-
period ahead, they agreed that no changes to the ance sheet that could affect the attainment
Committee’s federal funds rate target range were war- over time of the Committee’s objectives of
ranted at this meeting. On balance, the economic out- maximum employment and price stability.”
look had changed little since the March meeting. Even
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
though the recovery appeared to be continuing and was
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.:
expected to strengthen gradually over time, most mem-
bers projected that economic slack would continue to “Information received since the Federal
be quite elevated for some time, with inflation remain- Open Market Committee met in March sug-
ing below rates that would be consistent in the longer gests that economic activity has continued to
run with the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives. Based strengthen and that the labor market is be-
on this outlook, members agreed that it would be ap- ginning to improve. Growth in household
propriate to maintain the target range of 0 to ¼ percent spending has picked up recently but remains
for the federal funds rate. In addition, nearly all mem- constrained by high unemployment, modest
bers judged that it was appropriate to reiterate the ex- income growth, lower housing wealth, and
pectation that economic conditions—including low tight credit. Business spending on equip-
levels of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, ment and software has risen significantly;
and stable inflation expectations—were likely to war- however, investment in nonresidential struc-
rant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate tures is declining and employers remain re-
for an extended period. As at previous meetings, a few luctant to add to payrolls. Housing starts
members noted that at the current juncture, the risks of have edged up but remain at a depressed lev-
an early start to policy tightening exceeded those asso- el. While bank lending continues to contract,

--- Page 10 ---

Page 10 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
financial market conditions remain suppor- Mr. Hoenig dissented because he believed it was no
tive of economic growth. Although the pace longer advisable to indicate that economic and financial
of economic recovery is likely to be mod- conditions were likely to warrant “exceptionally low
erate for a time, the Committee anticipates a levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period.”
gradual return to higher levels of resource Mr. Hoenig was concerned that communicating such
utilization in a context of price stability. an expectation could lead to the buildup of future fi-
nancial imbalances and increase the risks to longer-run
With substantial resource slack continuing to
macroeconomic and financial stability, while limiting
restrain cost pressures and longer-term infla-
the Committee’s flexibility to begin raising rates mod-
tion expectations stable, inflation is likely to
estly in the near term. Mr. Hoenig believed that the
be subdued for some time.
target for the federal funds rate should be increased
The Committee will maintain the target range toward 1 percent this summer, and that the Committee
for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent could then pause to further assess the economic out-
and continues to anticipate that economic look. He believed this approach would leave consider-
conditions, including low rates of resource able policy accommodation in place to foster an ex-
utilization, subdued inflation trends, and sta- pected gradual decline in unemployment in the quarters
ble inflation expectations, are likely to war- ahead and would reduce the risk of an increase in fi-
rant exceptionally low levels of the federal nancial imbalances and inflation pressures in coming
funds rate for an extended period. The years. It would also mitigate the need to push the poli-
Committee will continue to monitor the eco- cy rate to higher levels later in the expansionary phase
nomic outlook and financial developments of the economic cycle.
and will employ its policy tools as necessary
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
to promote economic recovery and price
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, June 22–23,
stability.
2010. The meeting adjourned at 12:50 p.m. on April
In light of improved functioning of financial 28, 2010.
markets, the Federal Reserve has closed all
Notation Vote
but one of the special liquidity facilities that
By notation vote completed on April 5, 2010, the
it created to support markets during the cri-
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
sis. The only remaining such program, the
FOMC meeting held on March 16, 2010.
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility,
is scheduled to close on June 30 for loans
backed by new-issue commercial mortgage-
backed securities; it closed on March 31 for
loans backed by all other types of collateral.”
Voting for this action: Ben Bernanke, William C.
Dudley, James Bullard, Elizabeth Duke, Donald L.
Kohn, Sandra Pianalto, Eric Rosengren, Daniel K. Ta-
rullo, and Kevin Warsh. _____________________________
Brian F. Madigan
Voting against this action: Thomas M. Hoenig. Secretary

--- Page 11 ---

Page 1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the April 27–28, 2010, FOMC meet- real GDP growth in 2010. Beyond 2010, however, the
ing, the members of the Board of Governors and the contours of participants’ projections for economic activity
presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom and inflation were little changed. Participants continued
participate in deliberations of the FOMC, submitted pro- to expect the pace of the economic recovery to be re-
jections for output growth, unemployment, and inflation strained by household and business uncertainty, only gra-
for the years 2010 to 2012 and over the longer run. The dual improvement in labor market conditions, and slow
projections were based on information available through easing of credit conditions in the banking sector. Partici-
the end of the meeting and on each participant’s assump- pants generally expected that it would take some time for
tions about factors likely to affect economic outcomes, the economy to converge fully to its longer-run path—
including his or her assessment of appropriate monetary characterized by a sustainable rate of output growth and
policy. “Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the by rates of employment and inflation consistent with par-
future path of policy that the participant deems most like- ticipants’ interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s dual ob-
ly to foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation jectives—but only a minority anticipated that the conver-
that best satisfy his or her interpretation of the Federal gence process would take more than five to six years. As
Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum employment and in January, most participants judged the risks to their
stable prices. Longer-run projections represent each par- growth outlook as balanced, and most also saw balanced
ticipant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable risks surrounding their inflation projections. Participants
would be expected to converge over time under appro- in general continued to judge the uncertainty surrounding
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further their projections for economic activity and inflation as
shocks. unusually high relative to historical norms.
FOMC participants’ forecasts for economic activity and The Outlook
inflation were broadly similar to their previous projec- Participants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2010
tions, which were made in conjunction with the January had a central tendency of 3.2 to 3.7 percent, a little higher
2010 FOMC meeting. As depicted in figure 1, the eco- than in January. Readings on consumer spending and
nomic recovery was expected to be gradual, with real business outlays for equipment and software were seen as
gross domestic product (GDP) expanding at a rate only broadly consistent with a moderate pace of economic
moderately above the participants’ assessment of its long- recovery. The labor market appeared to be starting to
er-run sustainable growth rate and unemployment declin- improve, but job growth was expected to be modest.
ing slowly over the next few years. Most participants also Participants pointed to a number of factors that would
anticipated that inflation would remain subdued over this support the continued expansion of economic activity,
period. As indicated in table 1, participants generally including accommodative monetary policy and the im-
made modest upward revisions to their projections for proved condition of financial markets and institutions.
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Governors and Reserve Bank presidents, April 2010
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2010 2011 2012 Longer run 2010 2011 2012 Longer run
Change in real GDP. . . . . . 3.2 to 3.7 3.4 to 4.5 3.5 to 4.5 2.5 to 2.8 2.7 to 4.0 3.0 to 4.6 2.8 to 5.0 2.4 to 3.0
January projection. . . . 2.8 to 3.5 3.4 to 4.5 3.5 to 4.5 2.5 to 2.8 2.3 to 4.0 2.7 to 4.7 3.0 to 5.0 2.4 to 3.0
Unemployment rate. . . . . . 9.1 to 9.5 8.1 to 8.5 6.6 to 7.5 5.0 to 5.3 8.6 to 9.7 7.2 to 8.7 6.4 to 7.7 5.0 to 6.3
January projection. . . . 9.5 to 9.7 8.2 to 8.5 6.6 to 7.5 5.0 to 5.2 8.6 to 10.0 7.2 to 8.8 6.1 to 7.6 4.9 to 6.3
PCE inflation. . . . . . . . . . . 1.2 to 1.5 1.1 to 1.9 1.2 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 1.1 to 2.0 0.9 to 2.4 0.7 to 2.2 1.5 to 2.0
January projection. . . . 1.4 to 1.7 1.1 to 2.0 1.3 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 1.2 to 2.0 1.0 to 2.4 0.8 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0
Core PCE inflation3. . . . . . 0.9 to 1.2 1.0 to 1.5 1.2 to 1.6 0.7 to 1.6 0.6 to 2.4 0.6 to 2.2
January projection. . . . 1.1 to 1.7 1.0 to 1.9 1.2 to 1.9 1.0 to 2.0 0.9 to 2.4 0.8 to 2.0
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and in inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of the year
indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and
the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the
year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections represent each participant’s
assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy.
The January projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on January 26-27, 2010.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year consists of all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

--- Page 12 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2010–12 and over the longer run
Percent
Change in real GDP 5
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections 4
3
Actual 2
1
+
_0
1
2
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual.

--- Page 13 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t io n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 7 - 2 8 , 2 0 1 0 Page 3
Several participants also noted that fiscal policy was cur- would reduce the sustainable level of employment, partic-
rently providing substantial support to real activity. ipants’ longer-term unemployment projections had a cen-
However, they expected less impetus to GDP growth tral tendency of 5.0 to 5.3 percent, essentially the same as
from this factor later in the year and anticipated that bud- in January.
getary pressures would probably continue to weigh on
Most participants revised down slightly their near-term
spending at the state and local levels. Many participants
projections for inflation, and participants generally antic-
thought that the expansion was likely to be restrained by
ipated that inflation would remain subdued over the next
firms’ caution in hiring and spending in light of the con-
several years. The central tendency of their projections
siderable uncertainty regarding the economic outlook, and
for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation
by limited access to credit by small businesses and con-
was 1.2 to 1.5 percent for 2010, 1.1 to 1.9 percent for
sumers.
2011, and 1.2 to 2.0 percent for 2012. Many participants
Looking further ahead, participants’ projections were for anticipated that increases in food and energy prices would
real GDP growth to pick up somewhat in 2011 and 2012; lead headline PCE inflation to run slightly above core
the projections for growth in both years had a central PCE inflation over the next few years. Most expected
tendency of about 3½ to 4½ percent. As in January, par- that inflation would rise gradually toward their individual
ticipants generally expected the ongoing recovery in assessments of the measured rate of inflation judged to be
household wealth and gradual improvements in credit most consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate.
availability to bolster consumer spending. As the recov- As in January, the central tendency of projections of the
ery became more firmly established, businesses were seen longer-run inflation rate was 1.7 to 2.0 percent. A majori-
as likely to boost their outlays on equipment and software ty of participants anticipated that inflation in 2012 would
and to increase production in order to rebuild their inven- still be below their assessments of the mandate-consistent
tories. Nevertheless, participants indicated several factors inflation rate, while the remainder expected that inflation
that would likely restrain the pace of expansion, including would be at or slightly above its longer-run value by that
a higher household saving rate as households repair bal- time.
ance sheets, significant uncertainty on the part of house-
Uncertainty and Risks
holds and businesses about the outlook for the economy,
Most participants continued to see their projections of
and a slow recovery in nonresidential construction.
future economic activity and unemployment as subject to
Moreover, although financial conditions had improved
greater-than-average uncertainty.1 Participants generally
noticeably in recent months, ongoing strains in the com-
perceived the risks to their projections as roughly bal-
mercial real estate sector were expected to pose risks to
anced, although a few indicated that they now viewed the
the balance sheets of banking institutions for some time.
risks to economic growth as tilted to the upside. Many
Terms and standards on bank loans remained restrictive,
participants pointed to stronger incoming data as suggest-
and participants anticipated only a gradual easing of credit
ing that the economic recovery was more firmly estab-
conditions for many households and smaller firms. In the
lished than had been the case in January, but they empha-
absence of further shocks, participants generally expected
sized that predicting macroeconomic outcomes in the
that real GDP growth would converge over time to an
wake of a financial crisis and a severe recession was par-
annual rate of 2.5 to 2.8 percent, the longer-run pace that
ticularly difficult. In addition, participants cited uncer-
appeared to be sustainable in view of expected trends in
tainties regarding the likely persistence of both the recent
the labor force and improvements in labor productivity.
pickup in the growth of consumer spending and rapid
Participants anticipated that labor market conditions labor productivity growth and noted the risk that severe
would improve slowly over the next several years. The strains in the commercial real estate sector could continue
central tendency of their projections for the average un- to impair bank balance sheets, thus limiting credit availa-
employment rate in the fourth quarter of 2010 was 9.1 to bility and restraining growth of output and employment.
9.5 percent, only modestly below the levels of late last
year. In line with their outlook for moderate output
growth, participants generally expected that the unem- 1 Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for the
ployment rate would decline only to about 6.6 to 7.5 per- change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total consum-
cent by the end of 2012, remaining well above their as- er price inflation over the period from 1990 to 2009. At the
sessments of its longer-run sustainable rate. Although end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” discusses
the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in economic fore-
some participants noted concerns that substantial ongo-
casts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty
ing structural adjustments in product and labor markets
and risk attending participants’ projections.

--- Page 14 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Most participants continued to see the uncertainty sur- Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
rounding their inflation projections as elevated. Howev- Percentage points
Variable 2010 2011 2012
er, a few judged that uncertainty in the outlook for infla-
tion was about in line with typical levels, and one viewed
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . . . ±1.1 ±1.7 ±1.8
the uncertainty surrounding the inflation outlook as lower Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . . . ±0.5 ±1.2 ±1.5
than average. Nearly all participants judged the risks to
Total consumer prices2 . . . . . . . ±0.9 ±1.0 ±1.1
the inflation outlook as roughly balanced; however, two
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root
saw these risks as tilted to the upside, while two regarded mean squared error of projections for 1990 through 2009 that were released
the risks as weighted to the downside. Several partici- in the spring by various private and government forecasters. As described
in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is
pants noted that inflation expectations were well anc-
about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unem-
hored, likely mitigating the tendency for inflation to de- ployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size
cline in response to continued slack in resource utiliza- of projection errors made in the past. Further information is in David Reif-
schneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Eco-
tion. Others cited the risk that expected and actual infla-
nomic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Econom-
tion could increase, especially if extraordinarily accom- ics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, November).
modative monetary policy measures were not unwound in
1. For definitions, refer to general note in table 1.
a timely fashion. 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that
has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts.
Diversity of Views Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the
Figures 2.A and 2.B provide further details on the diversi- fourth quarter of the year indicated.
ty of participants’ views regarding the likely outcomes for Corresponding information about the diversity of partici-
real GDP growth and the unemployment rate. The dis- pants’ views regarding the inflation outlook is provided in
tributions of participants’ projections for real GDP figures 2.C and 2.D. For overall and core PCE inflation,
growth this year and next year were slightly narrower than the distributions of participants’ projections for 2010
the distributions of their projections in January, but the shifted a bit lower relative to the distributions in January.
distribution of projections for real GDP growth in 2012 The distributions of overall and core inflation for 2011
was little changed. As in earlier projections, the disper- and 2012, however, were little changed and remained fair-
sion in participants’ forecasts for output growth appeared ly wide. The dispersion in participants’ projections over
to reflect the diversity of their assessments regarding the the next few years was mainly due to differences in their
current degree of underlying momentum in economic judgments regarding the determinants of inflation, includ-
activity, the evolution of consumer and business senti- ing their estimates of prevailing resource slack and their
ment, the likely pace of easing of bank lending standards assessments of the extent to which such slack affects ac-
and terms, and other factors. Regarding participants’ un- tual and expected inflation. In contrast, the relatively
employment rate projections, the distribution for 2010 tight distribution of participants’ projections for longer-
shifted down somewhat, but the distributions of their run inflation illustrates their substantial agreement about
unemployment rate projections for 2011 and 2012 did not the measured rate of inflation that is most consistent with
change appreciably. The distributions of participants’ the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum em-
estimates of the longer-run sustainable rates of output ployment and stable prices.
growth and unemployment were essentially the same as in
January.

--- Page 15 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t io n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 7 - 2 8 , 2 0 1 0 Page 5
Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2010–12 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2010
14
April projections
January projections 12
10
8
6
4
2
2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2011
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2012
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
2.2- 2.4- 2.6- 2.8- 3.0- 3.2- 3.4- 3.6- 3.8- 4.0- 4.2- 4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0-
2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 16 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2010–12 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2010
14
April projections
January projections 12
10
8
6
4
2
4.8- 5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8- 10.0-
4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2011
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.8- 5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8- 10.0-
4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2012
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.8- 5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8- 10.0-
4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.8- 5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8- 10.0-
4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 17 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t io n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 7 - 2 8 , 2 0 1 0 Page 7
Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2010–12 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2010
14
April projections
January projections 12
10
8
6
4
2
0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2011
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2012
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 18 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 2.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inflation, 2010–12
Number of participants
2010
14
April projections
January projections 12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2011
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2012
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3-
0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 19 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t io n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 7 - 2 8 , 2 0 1 0 Page 9
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the to that experienced in the past and the risks
members of the Board of Governors and the around the projections are broadly balanced, the
presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks inform numbers reported in table 2 would imply a prob-
discussions of monetary policy among policy- ability of about 70 percent that actual GDP
makers and can aid public understanding of the would expand within a range of 1.9 to 4.1 per-
basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertain- cent in the current year, 1.3 to 4.7 percent in the
ty attends these projections, however. The eco- second year, and 1.2 to 4.8 percent in the third
nomic and statistical models and relationships year. The corresponding 70 percent confidence
used to help produce economic forecasts are intervals for overall inflation would be 1.1 to 2.9
necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real percent in the current year, 1.0 to 3.0 percent in
world. And the future path of the economy can the second year, and 0.9 to 3.1 percent in the
be affected by myriad unforeseen developments third year.
and events. Thus, in setting the stance of mone- Because current conditions may differ from
tary policy, participants consider not only what those that prevailed, on average, over history,
appears to be the most likely economic outcome participants provide judgments as to whether the
as embodied in their projections, but also the uncertainty attached to their projections of each
range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly
of their occurring, and the potential costs to the similar to typical levels of forecast uncertainty in
economy should they occur. the past as shown in table 2. Participants also
Table 2 summarizes the average historical provide judgments as to whether the risks to
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including those their projections are weighted to the upside, are
reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those weighted to the downside, or are broadly ba-
prepared by Federal Reserve Board staff in ad- lanced. That is, participants judge whether each
vance of meetings of the Federal Open Market variable is more likely to be above or below their
Committee. The projection error ranges shown projections of the most likely outcome. These
in the table illustrate the considerable uncertain- judgments about the uncertainty and the risks
ty associated with economic forecasts. For ex- attending each participant’s projections are dis-
ample, suppose a participant projects that real tinct from the diversity of participants’ views
gross domestic product (GDP) and total con- about the most likely outcomes. Forecast uncer-
sumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, tainty is concerned with the risks associated with
respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the a particular projection rather than with diver-
uncertainty attending those projections is similar gences across a number of different projections.

# Tables

## Page_11_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |      |      |            |      |      |      |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|------------|------|------|------|
| 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 2011 | 2012 | Longer run | 2010 | 2011 | 2012 |
| 3.2 to 3.7 3.4 to 4.5 3.5 to 4.5 2.5 to 2.8
2.8 to 3.5 3.4 to 4.5 3.5 to 4.5 2.5 to 2.8
9.1 to 9.5 8.1 to 8.5 6.6 to 7.5 5.0 to 5.3
9.5 to 9.7 8.2 to 8.5 6.6 to 7.5 5.0 to 5.2
1.2 to 1.5 1.1 to 1.9 1.2 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0
1.4 to 1.7 1.1 to 2.0 1.3 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0
0.9 to 1.2 1.0 to 1.5 1.2 to 1.6
1.1 to 1.7 1.0 to 1.9 1.2 to 1.9 |      |      |            |      |      |      |