# 20091104_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:36:21*
*Pages: 20, Tables: 2*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Page 1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
November 3-4, 2009
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit- Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of
tee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve the Staff Director for Management, Board of
System was held in the offices of the Board of Gover- Governors
nors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, November 3,
2009, at 2:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, No- Mr. English, Deputy Director, Division of Mone-
vember 4, 2009, at 9:00 a.m. tary Affairs, Board of Governors
PRESENT: Ms. Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Mr. Bernanke, Chairman Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman
Ms. Duke Ms. Edwards, Messrs. Levin and Nelson, Senior
Mr. Evans Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Af-
Mr. Kohn fairs, Board of Governors; Messrs. Reif-
Mr. Lacker schneider, and Wascher, Senior Associate Di-
Mr. Lockhart rectors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Mr. Tarullo Board of Governors
Mr. Warsh
Ms. Yellen Mr. Leahy,¹ Associate Director, Division of Inter-
national Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Bullard, Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Pianalto, and Mr.
Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Mr. Palumbo, Deputy Associate Director, Division
Open Market Committee of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Messrs. Fisher, Kocherlakota, and Plosser, Presi- Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Affairs, Board of Governors
Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, respectively
Ms. Ihrig, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Af-
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist fairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Luecke, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Mr. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Divi-
Mr. Sheets, Economist sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Economist
Ms. Holcomb, First Vice President, Federal Re-
Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman, serve Bank of Dallas
Sullivan, Wilcox, and Williams, Associate
Economists Messrs. Fuhrer and Sniderman, Executive Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston
Mr. Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account and Cleveland, respectively
Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors
¹ Attended the portion of the meeting relating to financial
Mr. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Sec- developments, open market operations, and System facili-
retary, Board of Governors ties.

--- Page 2 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Mr. Barkema, Mses. Mester and Mosser, and Mr. The staff briefed the Committee on recent develop-
Waller, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve ments regarding various Federal Reserve liquidity and
Banks of Kansas City, Philadelphia, New York, credit facilities, including the Term Auction Facility
and St. Louis, respectively (TAF), the primary credit program, the Term Asset-
Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF), and the swap
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Re- lines with foreign central banks. Usage of these facili-
serve Bank of Minneapolis ties had been declining in recent months as financial
market conditions continued to improve. On Septem-
Mr. Burke and Ms. Yucel, Vice Presidents, Federal ber 24, the Board of Governors announced a gradual
Reserve Banks of New York and Dallas, re- reduction in amounts to be auctioned under the TAF
spectively through January and indicated that auctions of credit
with maturities longer than 28 days would be phased
Ms. Sbordone and Mr. Sill, Assistant Vice Presi- out. The staff reviewed the changes that had been
dents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York made since the onset of the crisis to the terms of the
and Philadelphia, respectively primary credit program, including loan maturities and
interest rates. The staff noted that reducing the maxi-
Mr. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve mum maturity of loans available under the primary
Bank of Richmond credit program from 90 days to 28 days would
represent another step toward normalization of the
Federal Reserve’s policy-implementation framework
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed- and would align the maximum maturities of the prima-
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet ry credit program with those under the TAF, but no
The Manager of the System Open Market Account action on this matter was taken by the Board at this
reported on recent developments in domestic and for- meeting. Regarding the TALF, the staff indicated that
eign financial markets. The Manager also reported on auto and credit card asset-backed security issuance was
System open market operations in Treasury securities, increasingly being funded by non-TALF sources; how-
agency debt, and agency mortgage-backed securities ever, commercial MBS remained more dependent on
(MBS) since the Committee’s September 22-23 meet- TALF financing.
ing. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified those
The staff presented another update on the continuing
transactions. There were no open market operations in
development of several tools that could help support a
foreign currencies for the System’s account during the
smooth withdrawal of policy accommodation at the
intermeeting period. Since the Committee met in Sep-
appropriate time. These measures include executing
tember, the Federal Reserve’s total assets were about
reverse repurchase agreements (RPs) on a large scale,
unchanged, on balance, at approximately $2.2 trillion,
potentially with counterparties other than the primary
as the increase in the System’s holdings of securities
dealers; implementing a term deposit facility, available
roughly matched a further decline in usage of the Sys-
to depository institutions, to reduce the supply of re-
tem’s credit and liquidity facilities. The Manager noted
serve balances; and taking steps to tighten the link be-
that, as of October 30, $300 billion in Treasury securi-
tween the interest rate paid on reserve balances held at
ties had been purchased, as directed by the Committee.
the Federal Reserve Banks and the federal funds rate.
Overall, the Treasury market had recovered substantial-
The staff had made considerable further progress on
ly from the strains during the financial crisis, and the
these tools. Participants expressed confidence that the
Manager reported that the completion of the Federal
Committee would be in a position to remove policy
Reserve’s purchase program did not appear to have led
accommodation when appropriate by raising the rate of
to any significant upward pressure on Treasury yields
interest paid on excess reserves and by employing re-
or to any notable deterioration in Treasury market
serve-management tools such as reverse RPs, term de-
functioning. There was little evidence, to date, of a
posits, and, if desirable, asset sales. Completing the
buildup in year-end funding pressures, although de-
operational work necessary to establish reverse RPs and
mand for Treasury bills with maturities extending just
term deposits as tools that can drain large volumes of
beyond the year-end seemed to be elevated. The Man-
reserves was viewed as an important near-term objec-
ager noted that the recent path of purchases of agency
tive. Participants anticipated that the Federal Reserve
debt was consistent with buying a cumulative amount
would conduct tests of these tools, but they stressed
of $175 billion by the end of the first quarter of 2010.

--- Page 3 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f N o v e m b e r 3 - 4 , 2 0 0 9 Page 3
that such testing would not imply that these tools The labor market continued to weaken in September,
would be employed for policy purposes any time soon. but the pace of deterioration lessened from that seen
earlier in the year. Job losses remained widespread
Participants expressed a range of views about how the
across industries. The length of the average workweek
Committee might use its various tools in combination
for production and nonsupervisory workers decreased,
to foster most effectively its dual objectives of maxi-
and the index of aggregate hours worked for this group
mum employment and price stability. As part of the
fell, albeit more slowly than earlier in the year. In the
Committee’s strategy for eventual exit from the period
household survey, the unemployment rate rose in Sep-
of extraordinary policy accommodation, several partici-
tember to 9.8 percent, and the labor force participation
pants thought that asset sales could be a useful tool to
rate fell to its lowest level of the year. Continuing
reduce the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet
claims for unemployment insurance through regular
and lower the level of reserve balances, either prior to
state programs declined through early October, but
or concurrently with increasing the policy rate. In their
total claims, including those for extended and emergen-
view, such sales would help reinforce the effectiveness
cy benefits, remained high.
of paying interest on excess reserves as an instrument
for firming policy at the appropriate time and would Industrial production rose in September for the third
help quicken the restoration of a balance sheet compo- consecutive month. A substantial portion of the third-
sition in which Treasury securities were the predomi- quarter gain was directly attributable to a rebound in
nant asset. Other participants had reservations about motor vehicle assemblies and related parts production,
asset sales—especially in advance of a decision to raise but increases in production were widespread across the
policy interest rates—and noted that such sales might industrial sector. Indicators from business surveys sug-
elicit sharp increases in longer-term interest rates that gested that there would be further gains in factory out-
could undermine attainment of the Committee’s goals. put over the near term. Nevertheless, considerable
Furthermore, they believed that other reserve manage- slack remained in the manufacturing sector, as the fac-
ment tools such as reverse RPs and term deposits tory utilization rate for September was up only a bit
would likely be sufficient to implement an appropriate from its historical low earlier this year.
exit strategy and that assets could be allowed to run off
For the third quarter as a whole, real personal con-
over time, reflecting prepayments and the maturation
sumption expenditures (PCE) rose at a solid rate, with
of issues. Participants agreed to continue to evaluate
noticeable increases in motor vehicles, furniture, elec-
various potential policy-implementation tools and the
tronics, and other durable goods. However, real out-
possible combinations and sequences in which they
lays declined in September after a sharp increase in Au-
might be used. They also agreed that it would be im-
gust. The monthly pattern in expenditures was signifi-
portant to develop communication approaches for
cantly affected by swings in motor vehicle sales during
clearly explaining to the public the use of these tools
and after the government’s “cash-for-clunkers” pro-
and the Committee’s exit strategy more broadly.
gram. Real disposable personal income fell for the
Staff Review of the Economic Situation fourth consecutive month in September, reflecting the
The information reviewed at the November 3-4 meet- weakness in the labor market. Poor labor market con-
ing suggested that overall economic activity continued ditions and prior declines in household net worth ap-
to rise in recent months. Manufacturers increased pro- peared to have weighed on consumer sentiment, and
duction in September for the third consecutive month. the October Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on
The gradual recovery in construction of single-family Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) suggested that many
homes from its extremely low level earlier in the year banking institutions continued to tighten standards for
continued, and home sales increased in the third quar- consumer lending in the third quarter.
ter. Although consumer spending on motor vehicles
The housing sector continued to recover, on balance.
declined in September after the expiration of govern-
Although single-family starts were about flat in Sep-
ment rebates, other household spending rose. Outlays
tember, the number of starts was well above the record
for equipment and software (E&S) appeared to be sta-
low reached in the first quarter of the year. In the
bilizing. However, the labor market weakened further,
much smaller multifamily sector, where tight credit
and business spending on nonresidential structures
conditions persisted and vacancies remained elevated,
continued to decline. Meanwhile, consumer price infla-
starts were about unchanged. Sales of new homes, al-
tion remained subdued in recent months.
though down a bit in September, rose over the third

--- Page 4 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
quarter as a whole. The inventory of unsold new tion rebounded sharply. In contrast, real gross domes-
homes declined further, as sales outpaced construction. tic product (GDP) contracted in the United Kingdom
Sales of existing single-family homes increased in Sep- in the third quarter, and real GDP in Canada edged
tember and for the quarter as a whole, and recent resale down in July and August. In most emerging market
activity appeared to be driven primarily by transactions economies, recent data showed that economic recovery
of nondistressed properties. The average interest rate continued in the third quarter. Real GDP increased
on 30-year conforming fixed-rate mortgages remained strongly in China, Korea, and Singapore, and the re-
very low over the intermeeting period. Although some covery in Brazil continued. In Mexico, available data
house price indexes had risen in recent months, such suggested that activity had begun to expand after sever-
indexes remained below year-earlier levels. al quarters of contraction. Across most of the major
foreign economies, price pressures remained subdued.
Real spending on E&S appeared to have stabilized in
Twelve-month inflation remained elevated but declined
the third quarter. Real business outlays on high-tech
further in Mexico and Brazil.
E&S increased modestly further, outlays for aircraft
posted another gain, and business investment in motor In the United States, recent monthly data indicated that
vehicles and other areas was down only slightly. The consumer price inflation remained subdued. The PCE
improvements in a number of the fundamental deter- price index moved up only a bit in September as in-
minants of investment in E&S, including a decline in creases in energy prices were largely offset by declines
the cost of capital and a rise in business output, sug- in food prices. Core PCE prices also edged up during
gested further, albeit sluggish, gains in spending over the month. Gasoline prices rose again in October.
the next few quarters. The responses to the October Median year-ahead inflation expectations in the final
SLOOS indicated that banks continued to tighten stan- October Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of
dards on commercial and industrial (C&I) loans to Consumers increased, remaining higher than at the turn
firms. Meanwhile, conditions in the nonresidential of the year, but longer-term inflation expectations from
construction sector generally remained quite poor. The this survey were about unchanged. Measures of labor
recent trend in architectural billings was consistent with compensation rose moderately in the third quarter after
further declines in nonresidential construction, and decelerating significantly in the first half of the year.
employment in the sector continued to decline. The The employment cost index for wages and salaries was
October SLOOS suggested that financing for new con- boosted by increases in several industry categories that
struction projects was very difficult for businesses to might have been affected by the rise in the minimum
obtain. The Bureau of Economic Analysis estimated wage in July. Output per hour rose sharply in the
that businesses continued to liquidate inventories in the second and third quarters, contributing to a sizable de-
third quarter, but at a slower rate than in the preceding cline in unit labor costs so far this year.
quarter.
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
In August, the U.S. international trade deficit narrowed, Market participants largely anticipated the decisions by
as exports edged up and imports declined, but it re- the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) at the
mained wider than it had been at its recent low point in September meeting to leave the target range for the
May. The increase in exports of goods and services federal funds rate unchanged and to extend the Federal
was held down by a sharp drop in the volatile aircraft Reserve’s purchases of agency MBS and agency debt
category. The decline in imports of goods and services through the end of the first quarter of 2010 to allow for
was led by a lower volume of imported oil. In contrast, a gradual reduction in the pace of these purchases. The
imports of machinery, automotive products, and indus- announcement of the Committee’s intent to purchase
trial supplies increased. the full $1.25 trillion of agency MBS securities reduced
some uncertainty about the cumulative amount of these
Indicators of economic activity in the advanced foreign
purchases. After the release of the statement, investors
economies during the third quarter were mixed, but
marked down their expected path for the federal funds
consistent with economic recovery in the aggregate. In
rate slightly; over subsequent weeks, that initial reaction
most countries, purchasing managers surveys were at
was largely reversed so that, on balance, the expected
levels consistent with expansion, and many indicators
path appeared to change little over the intermeeting
of consumer and business confidence continued to
period. Yields on nominal Treasury securities were
show improvement. Economic indicators were strong-
about unchanged on net. Inflation compensation
est in Japan and the euro area, where industrial produc-
based on five-year Treasury inflation-protected securi-

--- Page 5 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f N o v e m b e r 3 - 4 , 2 0 0 9 Page 5
ties (TIPS) rose over the intermeeting period, apparent- Debt of the private domestic nonfinancial sector ap-
ly owing in part to an increase in oil and other com- peared to have declined again in the third quarter, as
modity prices, while five-year inflation compensation estimates suggested that household debt edged down
five years ahead was little changed. and nonfinancial business debt decreased. Consumer
credit contracted for the seventh consecutive month in
Overall conditions in short-term funding markets eased
August, reflecting declines in both revolving and non-
a bit further during the intermeeting period. Spreads
revolving credit; issuance of consumer credit asset-
between London interbank offered rates (Libor) and
backed securities also fell. Gross issuance of bonds by
overnight index swap (OIS) rates at the one- and three-
investment-grade nonfinancial corporations slowed
month maturities were about unchanged and were near
somewhat in October, even as speculative-grade firms
their pre-crisis levels. Spreads at the six-month maturi-
continued to issue bonds at a robust pace. CP out-
ty narrowed but remained elevated. Spreads on
standing increased, though gains were concentrated at a
A2/P2-rated commercial paper (CP) and AA-rated as-
few large issuers. Bank loans continued to contract
set-backed CP remained at the lower ends of their re-
rapidly. In contrast, the federal government continued
spective ranges over the past two years. Indicators of
to issue debt at a brisk pace, and gross issuance of state
Treasury market functioning, including on-the-run li-
and local government debt remained strong in Octo-
quidity premiums for the 10-year Treasury note and
ber.
trading volumes in both the nominal and TIPS mar-
kets, showed some signs of improvement over the in- Bank credit declined in September and in the first half
termeeting period, but trading conditions remained of October, as the contraction in C&I loans contri-
somewhat impaired. Year-end pressures in funding buted importantly to a further decline in total loans
markets generally appeared modest. However, some over the period. According to the SLOOS, bank lend-
evidence pointed to increased demand for Treasury ing standards and terms tightened further and demand
securities that mature soon after the turn of the year. continued to decline, on net, for most types of loans in
the third quarter. Commercial real estate (CRE) loans
Broad stock price indexes were about unchanged, on
also continued to decrease, reportedly because of wide-
net, over the intermeeting period despite initial third-
spread paydowns and charge-offs. In addition, residen-
quarter earnings reports that mostly beat analysts’ fore-
tial mortgage loans on banks’ books fell, and revolving
casts. Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index
home equity loans and consumer loans also contracted.
moved up slightly. The spread between an estimate of
The pace of decline in total loans at large banks contin-
the expected real return on equity over the next 10
ued to exceed that at smaller banks. The allowance for
years for S&P 500 firms and an estimate of the real 10-
loan and lease losses rose further at large banks in Sep-
year Treasury yield—a rough gauge of the equity risk
tember, but it was about unchanged at small banks.
premium—remained elevated. Corporate bond spreads
narrowed further as yields on investment- and specula- M2 appeared to have expanded at a moderate rate in
tive-grade corporate bonds decreased more than those September and October. While liquid deposits rose
on comparable-maturity Treasury securities. Bid-asked rapidly, small time deposits and retail money market
spreads for corporate bonds—a measure of liquidity in mutual funds continued to contract. Meanwhile, cur-
this market—remained at moderate levels. Conditions rency increased amid moderate demand for U.S. cur-
in the secondary market for leveraged syndicated loans rency from abroad.
continued to improve, as secondary-market prices rose
Stock indexes fell over the intermeeting period in most
and bid-asked spreads narrowed.
major industrial economies, while 10-year sovereign
Investor sentiment toward the banking sector appeared yields declined in Europe and were little changed in
to deteriorate over the intermeeting period. Bank share Japan and Canada. Equity prices were mixed in emerg-
prices fell, with equity prices for large banks declining ing markets, and credit spreads on emerging market
more than those for regional and smaller banks. Credit sovereign debt edged up. The trade-weighted index of
default swap spreads for large bank holding companies the foreign exchange value of the dollar was little
were about flat, but they widened for regional and changed over the intermeeting period. The Reserve
smaller banking organizations. Market participants Bank of Australia and Norges Bank raised their policy
reportedly remained concerned about the earnings rates, while most other central banks left their respec-
prospects for banks in an environment of weak eco- tive policy rates unchanged over the intermeeting pe-
nomic activity and rising loan losses. riod. The European Central Bank, the Bank of Eng-

--- Page 6 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
land, and the Bank of Japan continued implementing each year from 2009 through 2012 and over a longer
their special liquidity and asset purchase programs, al- horizon. Longer-run projections represent each partic-
though Bank of Japan officials indicated they would let ipant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable
some credit-easing programs expire at the end of the would be expected to converge over time under appro-
year. priate monetary policy and in the absence of further
shocks. Participants’ forecasts through 2012 and over
Staff Economic Outlook
the longer run are described in the Summary of Eco-
In the forecast prepared for the November FOMC
nomic Projections, which is attached as an addendum
meeting, the staff raised its projection for real GDP
to these minutes.
growth over the second half of 2009 but left the fore-
cast for output growth in 2010 and 2011 roughly un- In the meeting participants’ discussion of the economic
changed. The spending and production data received situation and outlook, they agreed that the incoming
during the intermeeting period suggested that econom- data and information received from business contacts
ic activity, especially household spending, was a little suggested that economic activity was picking up as an-
stronger in the summer than previously estimated. Al- ticipated, with output continuing to expand in the
so, industrial production increased more than had been fourth quarter. A number of factors were expected to
anticipated at the September meeting. But with labor support near-term growth: Business inventories were
market conditions somewhat weaker than anticipated, being brought into better alignment with sales, and the
earlier declines in wealth still weighing on household pace of inventory runoff was slowing; activity in the
balance sheets, and measures of consumer sentiment housing sector appeared to be turning up, and house
relatively low, the staff did not take much signal from prices seemed to be leveling out or beginning to rise by
the recent unexpected strength in spending and output. some measures; consumer spending appeared to be
Indeed, the staff boosted its projection for the unem- rising even apart from the effects of fiscal incentives to
ployment rate over the next several years. Still, the purchase autos; the outlook for growth abroad had
staff continued to believe that several factors that were improved since earlier in the year, auguring well for
restraining spending would gradually fade. The staff U.S. exports; and U.S. and global financial market con-
anticipated that the strengthening of the recovery in ditions, while roughly unchanged over the intermeeting
real output during 2010 and 2011 would be supported period, were substantially better than earlier in the year.
by an ongoing improvement in financial conditions and Above-trend output growth in the third quarter was a
household balance sheets, continued recovery in the welcome development. Moreover, the upturn in real
housing sector, improved household and business con- GDP appeared to reflect stronger final demand and not
fidence, and accommodative monetary policy even as just a slower pace of inventory decumulation. While
the impetus to real activity from fiscal policy dimi- these developments were positive, participants noted
nished. that it was not clear how much of the recent firming in
final demand reflected the effects of temporary fiscal
The staff forecast for inflation was little changed from
programs to support the auto and housing sectors, and
the September meeting. Although oil prices moved
some participants expressed concerns about the ability
higher, likely boosting near-term inflation, the staff also
of the economy to generate a self-sustaining recovery
revised up its estimate of the degree of slack in the
without government support. Nonetheless, partici-
economy, leaving the forecast for total and core PCE
pants expected the recovery to continue in subsequent
inflation over the next two years little changed. With
quarters, although at a pace that would be rather slow
significant underutilization of resources expected to
relative to historical experience, particularly the robust
persist for several years, the staff continued to project
recoveries that followed previous steep downturns.
that core inflation would slow somewhat further over
Such a modest pace of expansion would imply only
the next two years.
slow improvement in the labor market next year, with
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the unemployment remaining high. Indeed, participants
Economic Outlook noted that business contacts continued to report plans
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, all meeting to be cautious in hiring and capital spending even as
participants—the five members of the Board of Gov- demand for their products increased. Nonetheless,
ernors and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve economic growth was expected to strengthen during
Banks—provided projections for economic growth, the the next two years as housing construction continued
unemployment rate, and consumer price inflation for to rise and financial conditions improved further, lead-

--- Page 7 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f N o v e m b e r 3 - 4 , 2 0 0 9 Page 7
ing to more-substantial increases in resource utilization ing at small businesses, which are normally a source of
in product and labor markets. employment growth in recoveries.
Most participants now viewed the risks to their growth The weakness in labor market conditions remained an
forecasts as being roughly balanced rather than tilted to important concern to meeting participants, with unem-
the downside, but uncertainty surrounding these fore- ployment expected to remain elevated for some time.
casts was still viewed as quite elevated. Downside risks Although the pace of job losses was moderating, the
to growth included the continued weakness in the labor unusually large fraction of those who were working
market and its implications for income growth and part time for economic reasons and the unusually low
consumer confidence, as well as the potential for credit level of the average workweek pointed to only a gradual
availability to remain relatively tight for consumers and decline in the unemployment rate as the economic re-
some businesses. In this regard, some participants covery proceeded. In addition, business contacts re-
noted the difficulty that smaller, bank-dependent firms ported that they would be cautious in their hiring and
were having in securing financing. The CRE sector would continue to aggressively seek cost savings in the
was also considered a downside risk to the forecast and absence of revenue growth. Indeed, participants ex-
a possible source of increased pressure on banks. On pected that businesses would be able to meet any in-
the other hand, consumer spending on items other creases in demand in the near term by raising their em-
than autos had been stronger than expected, which ployees’ hours and boosting productivity, thus delaying
might be signaling more underlying momentum in the the need to add to their payrolls; this view was sup-
recovery and some chance that the step-up in spending ported by aggregate data indicating rapid productivity
would be sustained going forward. In addition, growth growth in recent quarters. Moreover, the need to real-
abroad had exceeded expectations for some time, po- locate labor across sectors as the recovery proceeds, as
tentially providing more support to U.S. exports and well as losses of skills caused by high levels of long-
domestic growth than anticipated. term unemployment and permanent separations, could
limit the pace of gains in employment. Participants
Financial market developments over recent months
discussed the possibility that this recovery could re-
were generally regarded as supportive of continued
semble the past two, which were characterized by a
economic recovery, with equity prices considerably
slow pace of hiring for a time even after aggregate de-
higher, private credit spreads substantially lower, and
mand picked up.
financial markets generally performing significantly bet-
ter than earlier in the year. Participants noted, howev- The prospect for continued weakness in labor markets
er, that bank credit remained tight. With rising levels remained an important factor in the outlook for con-
of nonperforming loans expected to continue to be a sumer spending. Although consumer spending had
source of stress, and with many regional and small picked up more than expected in recent months, partic-
banks vulnerable to the deteriorating performance of ipants saw that increase as partly reflecting special fac-
CRE loans, banks continued to tighten lending stan- tors such as the cash-for-clunkers program. Uncertain
dards for C&I loans and consumer loans, although the job prospects, slow income growth, and tight credit, as
net percentage of banks reporting further tightening in well as wealth levels that remained relatively low de-
each category had fallen in recent surveys. Bank loans spite the recent rise in equity prices and stabilization in
continued to contract sharply in all categories. Partici- house prices, were seen as weighing on consumer con-
pants noted that the dichotomy between significant fidence and the growth of consumer spending for some
easing of conditions in capital markets and continuing time to come. In such an environment, households’
tight conditions in the banking sector implied that fi- saving behavior was an important source of uncertainty
nancing conditions differed for large and small firms. in the outlook. Participants continued to believe that
Large firms with access to debt and equity markets for the most likely outcome was for the saving rate to re-
financing had relatively little difficulty in obtaining main near its average level over the past few quarters or
credit and in many cases also had high levels of re- to edge up gradually. However, they could not com-
tained earnings with which to fund their operations and pletely discount the possibility of a further substantial
investment. In contrast, smaller firms, which tend to rise in the saving rate as households took further steps
be more dependent on commercial banks for financing, to repair their balance sheets.
reportedly faced substantial constraints in their access
Participants noted that firms seemed to be reducing
to credit. Limited credit availability, along with weak
inventories at a slower pace than earlier in the year and
aggregate demand, was viewed as likely to restrain hir-

--- Page 8 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
apparently had made substantial progress in reducing that substantial slack in both labor and product markets
stocks toward desired levels. With inventories lower, would likely keep inflation subdued. Indeed, the consi-
firms were beginning to raise production to meet at derable decelerations in wages and unit labor costs this
least a portion of increased demand, and this adjust- year were cited as factors putting downward pressure
ment was expected to make an important contribution on inflation. However, some participants noted that
to economic recovery in the fourth quarter of the year the recent rise in the prices of oil and other commodi-
and, to a lesser extent, in 2010 as well. Investment in ties, as well as increases in import prices stemming
E&S appeared to have stabilized in the third quarter, from the decline in the foreign exchange value of the
and recent data on new orders continued to point to a dollar, could boost inflation pressures. Overall, many
pickup next year. However, many participants ex- participants viewed the risks to their inflation outlooks
pressed the view that cautious business sentiment, to- over the next few quarters as being roughly balanced.
gether with low industrial utilization rates, was likely to Some saw the risks as tilted to the downside in the near
keep new capital spending subdued until firms became term, reflecting the quite elevated level of economic
more confident about the durability of increases in de- slack and the possibility that inflation expectations
mand. could begin to decline in response to the low level of
actual inflation. But others felt that risks were tilted to
In the residential real estate sector, home sales and con-
the upside over a longer horizon, because of the possi-
struction increased over recent months from very low
bility that inflation expectations could rise as a result of
levels; moreover, house prices appeared to be stabiliz-
the public’s concerns about extraordinary monetary
ing and in some areas had reportedly moved higher.
policy stimulus and large federal budget deficits.
Generally, the outlook was for these trends to continue.
Moreover, these participants noted that banks might
However, some participants still viewed the improve-
seek to reduce appreciably their excess reserves as the
ments as quite tentative, pointing to potential sources
economy improves by purchasing securities or by eas-
of softness from the pending termination of the tem-
ing credit standards and expanding their lending sub-
porary tax credit for first-time homebuyers, the
stantially. Such a development, if not offset by Federal
winding down of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS
Reserve actions, could give additional impetus to
purchase program, and the downward pressure that
spending and, potentially, to actual and expected infla-
anticipated further increases in foreclosures would put
tion. To keep inflation expectations anchored, all par-
on house prices. In contrast to developments in the
ticipants agreed that it was important for policy to be
residential sector, CRE activity continued to fall mar-
responsive to changes in the economic outlook and for
kedly in most Districts as a result of deteriorating fun-
the Federal Reserve to continue to clearly communicate
damentals, including declining occupancy and rental
its ability and intent to begin withdrawing monetary
rates and very tight credit conditions.
policy accommodation at the appropriate time and
Stronger foreign economic activity, especially in Asia, pace.
as well as the partial reversal this year of the dollar’s
Committee Policy Action
appreciation during the latter part of 2008, was provid-
In the members’ discussion of monetary policy for the
ing support to U.S. exports. Participants noted that the
period ahead, they agreed that no substantive changes
recent fall in the foreign exchange value of the dollar
to the Committee’s federal funds target range or large-
had been orderly and appeared to reflect an unwinding
scale asset purchase programs were warranted at this
of safe-haven demand in light of the recovery in finan-
meeting. On balance, the economic outlook had
cial market conditions this year, but that any tendency
changed little since the September meeting. The recov-
for dollar depreciation to intensify or to put significant
ery appeared to be continuing and was expected to
upward pressure on inflation would bear close watch-
gradually strengthen over time. Still, most members
ing. Further improvements in foreign economies
projected that over the next couple of years, the unem-
would likely buoy U.S. exports going forward, but as
ployment rate would remain quite elevated and the lev-
the recovery took hold in the United States, import
el of inflation would remain below rates consistent over
growth would also strengthen.
the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s objectives.
Participants continued to discuss the appropriate Based on this outlook, members decided to maintain
weights to place on resource slack, inflation expecta- the federal funds target range at 0 to ¼ percent and to
tions, and other factors in assessing the inflation out- continue to state their expectation that economic con-
look. In the near term, most participants anticipated ditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low rates

--- Page 9 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f N o v e m b e r 3 - 4 , 2 0 0 9 Page 9
for an extended period. Low levels of resource utiliza- foster price stability and promote sustainable
tion, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation ex- growth in output. To further its long-run
pectations were among the important factors underly- objectives, the Committee seeks conditions
ing their expectation for monetary policy, and members in reserve markets consistent with federal
agreed that policy communications would be enhanced funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent.
by citing these conditions in the policy statement. The Committee directs the Desk to purchase
Members noted the possibility that some negative side agency debt and agency MBS during the in-
effects might result from the maintenance of very low termeeting period with the aim of providing
short-term interest rates for an extended period, includ- support to private credit markets and eco-
ing the possibility that such a policy stance could lead nomic activity. The timing and pace of these
to excessive risk-taking in financial markets or an un- purchases should depend on conditions in
anchoring of inflation expectations. While members the markets for such securities and on a
currently saw the likelihood of such effects as relatively broader assessment of private credit market
low, they would remain alert to these risks. All agreed conditions. The Desk is expected to execute
that the path of short-term rates going forward would purchases of about $175 billion in housing-
be dependent on the evolution of the economic out- related agency debt and about $1.25 trillion
look. of agency MBS by the end of the first quarter
of 2010. The Desk is expected to gradually
With respect to the large-scale asset purchase pro-
slow the pace of these purchases as they near
grams, all members supported reiterating the Commit-
completion. The Committee anticipates that
tee’s intention to purchase $1.25 trillion of agency MBS
outright purchases of securities will cause the
by the end of the first quarter of 2010. The Committee
size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to
also agreed to specify that its agency debt purchases
expand significantly in coming months. The
would cumulate to about $175 billion by the end of the
System Open Market Account Manager and
first quarter, $25 billion less than the previously an-
the Secretary will keep the Committee in-
nounced maximum for these purchases. Owing to the
formed of ongoing developments regarding
limited availability of agency debt and concerns that
the System’s balance sheet that could affect
larger purchases could impair market functioning, the
the attainment over time of the Committee’s
Committee’s transactions in these instruments for some
objectives of maximum employment and
time had been on a trajectory that would leave total
price stability.”
purchases somewhat below the previously established
maximum. Announcing that purchases would total The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
about $175 billion was viewed as providing greater clar- low to be released at 2:15 p.m.:
ity to the public regarding the expected amount of pur-
“Information received since the Federal
chases and would not reflect a decision to scale back
Open Market Committee met in September
the degree of policy accommodation. Members also
suggests that economic activity has contin-
decided to reiterate their intention to gradually slow the
ued to pick up. Conditions in financial mar-
pace of the Committee’s agency MBS and agency debt
kets were roughly unchanged, on balance,
purchases to promote a smooth transition in markets as
over the intermeeting period. Activity in the
the announced purchases are completed. The Commit-
housing sector has increased over recent
tee agreed that it would continue to evaluate the timing
months. Household spending appears to be
and overall amounts of its purchases of securities in
expanding but remains constrained by ongo-
light of the evolving economic outlook and conditions
ing job losses, sluggish income growth, lower
in financial markets.
housing wealth, and tight credit. Businesses
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee are still cutting back on fixed investment and
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank staffing, though at a slower pace; they con-
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex- tinue to make progress in bringing inventory
ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance stocks into better alignment with sales. Al-
with the following domestic policy directive: though economic activity is likely to remain
weak for a time, the Committee anticipates
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
that policy actions to stabilize financial mar-
monetary and financial conditions that will
kets and institutions, fiscal and monetary

--- Page 10 ---

Page 10 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
stimulus, and market forces will support a both agency debt and agency mortgage-
strengthening of economic growth and a backed securities and anticipates that these
gradual return to higher levels of resource transactions will be executed by the end of
utilization in a context of price stability. the first quarter of 2010. The Committee
will continue to evaluate the timing and
With substantial resource slack likely to con-
overall amounts of its purchases of securities
tinue to dampen cost pressures and with
in light of the evolving economic outlook
longer-term inflation expectations stable, the
and conditions in financial markets. The
Committee expects that inflation will remain
Federal Reserve is monitoring the size and
subdued for some time.
composition of its balance sheet and will
In these circumstances, the Federal Reserve make adjustments to its credit and liquidity
will continue to employ a wide range of tools programs as warranted.”
to promote economic recovery and to pre-
Voting for this action: Messrs. Bernanke and Dudley,
serve price stability. The Committee will
Ms. Duke, Messrs. Evans, Kohn, Lacker, Lockhart,
maintain the target range for the federal
Tarullo, and Warsh, and Ms. Yellen.
funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and continues to
anticipate that economic conditions, includ- Voting against this action: None.
ing low rates of resource utilization, subdued
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
inflation trends, and stable inflation expecta-
would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, December 15-
tions, are likely to warrant exceptionally low
16, 2009. The meeting adjourned at 12:40 p.m. on No-
levels of the federal funds rate for an ex-
vember 4, 2009.
tended period. To provide support to mort-
gage lending and housing markets and to im- Notation Vote
prove overall conditions in private credit By notation vote completed on October 13, 2009, the
markets, the Federal Reserve will purchase a Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
total of $1.25 trillion of agency mortgage- FOMC meeting held on September 22-23, 2009.
backed securities and about $175 billion of
agency debt. The amount of agency debt
purchases, while somewhat less than the pre-
viously announced maximum of $200 billion,
is consistent with the recent path of purchas-
es and reflects the limited availability of _____________________________
agency debt. In order to promote a smooth Brian F. Madigan
transition in markets, the Committee will Secretary
gradually slow the pace of its purchases of

--- Page 11 ---

Page 1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the November 3-4, 2009, FOMC the June FOMC meeting. Looking beyond 2009, the
meeting, the members of the Board of Governors and contours of the participants’ outlook for economic ac-
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of tivity and inflation were broadly similar to those in their
whom participate in deliberations of the FOMC, sub- June projections, with the pace of the economic recov-
mitted projections for output growth, unemployment, ery expected to be restrained by household and busi-
and inflation for the years 2009 to 2012 and over the ness uncertainty, weak labor market conditions, and
longer run. The projections were based on information slow waning of tight credit conditions in the banking
available through the end of the meeting and on each system. Most participants anticipated that about five or
participant’s assumptions about factors likely to affect six years would be needed for the economy to converge
economic outcomes, including his or her assessment of fully to a longer-run path characterized by a sustainable
appropriate monetary policy. “Appropriate monetary rate of output growth and by rates of unemployment
policy” is defined as the future path of policy that the and inflation consistent with their interpretation of the
participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for Federal Reserve’s objectives. However, some partici-
economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or pants indicated that the convergence process might
her interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objec- well require even longer, while a few expected that al-
tives of maximum employment and stable prices. though inflation would settle at its longer-run rate in
Longer-run projections represent each participant’s the next several years, the convergence process for the
assessment of the rate to which each variable would be real economy was likely to occur over a somewhat
expected to converge over time under appropriate longer period. With a further waning of downside risks
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks. to growth since June, nearly all participants now judged
the risks to their growth outlook as roughly balanced,
As depicted in Figure 1, FOMC participants anticipated
and most also saw roughly balanced risks surrounding
that economic recovery would be gradual, with real
their inflation projections. As in June, however, partic-
gross domestic product (GDP) growing at a moderate
ipants generally judged that their projections for eco-
pace and the unemployment rate declining slowly over
nomic activity and inflation were subject to an unusual-
the next few years. Most participants also expected
ly high degree of uncertainty relative to historical
that inflation would remain subdued over this period.
norms.
As indicated in Table 1, participants marked up their
projections for real GDP growth in 2009, reflecting a The Outlook
faster pickup in output during the second half of the Participants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2009
year than they had anticipated at the time of their pre- had a central tendency of negative 0.4 percent to nega-
vious forecasts, which were made in conjunction with tive 0.1 percent, around a percentage point above the
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Governors and Reserve Bank presidents, November 2009
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer run 2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer run
Change in real GDP . . -0.4 to -0.1 2.5 to 3.5 3.4 to 4.5 3.5 to 4.8 2.5 to 2.8 -0.5 to 0.0 2.0 to 4.0 2.5 to 4.6 2.8 to 5.0 2.4 to 3.0
June projection. . . -1.5 to -1.0 2.1 to 3.3 3.8 to 4.6 n.a. 2.5 to 2.7 -1.6 to -0.6 0.8 to 4.0 2.3 to 5.0 n.a. 2.4 to 2.8
Unemployment rate. . . 9.9 to 10.1 9.3 to 9.7 8.2 to 8.6 6.8 to 7.5 5.0 to 5.2 9.8 to 10.3 8.6 to 10.2 7.2 to 8.7 6.1 to 7.6 4.8 to 6.3
June projection. . . 9.8 to 10.1 9.5 to 9.8 8.4 to 8.8 n.a. 4.8 to 5.0 9.7 to 10.5 8.5 to 10.6 6.8 to 9.2 n.a. 4.5 to 6.0
PCE inflation. . . . . . . . 1.1 to 1.2 1.3 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.9 1.2 to 1.9 1.7 to 2.0 1.0 to 1.7 1.1 to 2.0 0.6 to 2.4 0.2 to 2.3 1.5 to 2.0
June projection. . . 1.0 to 1.4 1.2 to 1.8 1.1 to 2.0 n.a. 1.7 to 2.0 1.0 to 1.8 0.9 to 2.0 0.5 to 2.5 n.a. 1.5 to 2.1
Core PCE inflation3. . 1.4 to 1.5 1.0 to 1.5 1.0 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.7 1.3 to 1.6 0.9 to 2.0 0.5 to 2.4 0.2 to 2.3
June projection. . . 1.3 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.5 0.9 to 1.7 n.a. 1.2 to 2.0 0.5 to 2.0 0.2 to 2.5 n.a.
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and in inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of
the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expendi-
tures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the
fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projections
represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of
further shocks to the economy. The June projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on June 23-24, 2009.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year consists of all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

--- Page 12 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2009–12 and over the longer run
Percent
Change in real GDP 5
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections 4
3
Actual 2
1
+
_0
1
2
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual.

--- Page 13 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t i o n s f o r t h e M e e t i n g o f N o v e m b e r 3 - 4 , 2 0 0 9 Page 3
central tendency of their June projections. The projec- recovery would gather steam in 2011 and 2012 as a
tions for the year as a whole were broadly consistent consequence of further improvements in consumer and
with participants’ previous expectations that economic business confidence and in the condition of financial
activity would bottom out around midyear. However, markets and institutions. In the absence of any further
the contraction over the first half was a bit sharper than shocks, participants generally expected that the econo-
many participants had anticipated at the time of the my would converge over time to a sustainable path
June FOMC meeting, which took place about a month with real GDP growing at a rate of 2.5 to 2.8 percent,
before the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) pub- reflecting longer-term demographic trends and im-
lished its advance estimate of second-quarter GDP and provements in labor productivity.
its comprehensive revision of previous estimates, in-
Participants generally anticipated that the unemploy-
cluding a substantial downward revision to the estimate
ment rate would rise somewhat further during the final
of first-quarter GDP growth. Subsequent data on con-
months of 2009 and then decline steadily over the next
sumer spending, housing starts, and industrial produc-
few years. Their projections for the average unem-
tion, as well as the advance estimate of third-quarter
ployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2009 had a cen-
GDP, suggested that the economy was growing at a
tral tendency of 9.9 to 10.1 percent, somewhat higher
moderate pace over the second half of the year. Parti-
than the actual unemployment rate of 9.8 percent in
cipants took note of the continuing improvement in
September—the latest reading available at the time of
financial market conditions, the progress that business-
the November FOMC meeting. Participants noted
es appeared to be making in bringing inventories into
that, as in the early stages of previous recoveries the
line with sales, and the signs of stronger growth abroad,
unemployment rate was continuing to rise after output
especially in Asia. Participants also indicated that GDP
turned up, reflecting firms’ uncertainty about the pace
growth in the second half of 2009 had likely been
of recovery and their efforts to raise productivity and
boosted by transitory factors such as the “cash-for-
hold down costs. Looking further ahead, participants’
clunkers” program and the first-time homebuyers’
unemployment rate projections had a central tendency
credit, which had brought forward spending that would
of 9.3 to 9.7 percent for the fourth quarter of 2010, 8.2
have otherwise occurred in subsequent quarters.
to 8.6 percent for the end of 2011, and 6.8 to 7.5 per-
Looking beyond this year, participants’ outlook for real cent for the final quarter of 2012. A number of partic-
GDP growth was generally similar to that reflected in ipants made modest upward revisions to their estimates
their June forecasts. The central tendency of their out- of the longer-run sustainable rate of unemployment in
put growth projections was 2.5 to 3.5 percent for 2010, light of their assessments of the extent to which ongo-
3.4 to 4.5 percent for 2011, and 3.5 to 4.8 percent for ing structural adjustments would be associated with
2012. Participants indicated that consumer spending somewhat higher labor market frictions. Thus, partici-
would likely be bolstered by the turnaround in housing pants’ longer-run unemployment rate projections had a
prices, further increases in equity values, and gradual central tendency of 5.0 to 5.2 percent, about a quarter
improvements in credit availability. With an improved percentage point higher than in June.
sales outlook, businesses would rebuild their inventory
The central tendency of participants’ projections for
stocks and spending on equipment and software would
personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation in
pick up; in addition, exports would likely receive a sig-
2009 was 1.1 to 1.2 percent, and the central tendency of
nificant boost from stronger global growth. Monetary
their projections for core PCE inflation was 1.4 to 1.5
and fiscal stimulus would provide further support to
percent.1 While actual PCE inflation over the first half
aggregate demand next year. Nevertheless, the pace of
of the year turned out to be somewhat lower than par-
expansion would probably be damped for some time
ticipants had anticipated at the time of the June FOMC
by elevated uncertainty on the part of households and
meeting, recent increases in energy prices led most of
businesses and by the slow and lagging recovery of la-
them to make upward revisions to their second-half
bor markets, which would hold down income growth
and limit any rebound in household confidence. In
addition, distress in commercial real estate markets
1 In July 2009, the BEA adjusted the definition of core PCE
would likely weigh further on the balance sheets of
inflation to include prices for food consumed at restaurants
banking institutions, thereby contributing to continued and other establishments away from home. FOMC partici-
tight credit conditions for many households and small- pants indicated that this definitional adjustment did not
er firms. However, participants anticipated that the cause any material changes in their core inflation projections
for 2009 or beyond.

--- Page 14 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
inflation forecasts; thus, participants’ PCE inflation Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
projections for the year as a whole were broadly similar Percentage points
to their previous forecasts. Core PCE inflation was 1.6 Variable 2009 2010 2011 2012
percent at an annual rate over the first half of 2009, Change in real GDP1 . . . . . ±0.6 ±1.4 ±1.6 ±1.5
about a quarter point lower than most participants had
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . ±0.2 ±0.7 ±0.9 ±1.1
anticipated last June, and nearly all participants pro-
Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.5 ±1.0 ±1.0 ±1.0
jected that core PCE inflation would decline further to
an annual rate of about 1¼ percent in the second half.
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root
mean squared error of projections for 1989 through 2008 that were re-
leased in the fall by various private and government forecasters. As de-
Looking beyond this year, participants generally anti-
scribed in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions,
cipated that inflation would remain subdued. The cen- there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP,
tral tendency of their projections for PCE inflation was unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by the aver-
age size of projection errors made in the past. Further information is in
1.3 to 1.6 percent for 2010, 1.0 to 1.9 percent for 2011,
David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of
and 1.2 to 1.9 percent for 2012, and the central tenden- the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and
Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors
cy of their projections for core PCE inflation was 1.0 to
of the Federal Reserve System, November).
1.5 percent for 2010, 1.0 to 1.6 percent for 2011, and 1. For definitions, refer to general note in table 1.
1.0 to 1.7 percent for 2012. Many participants stated 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure that
has been most widely used in government and private economic forecasts.
that well-anchored inflation expectations would play an
Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous year to the
important role in avoiding further declines in inflation fourth quarter of the year indicated.
over the next few years despite the persistence of siza-
culties in predicting the dynamics of the economy fol-
ble resource slack. Participants also pointed out that
lowing a financial crisis and a severe recession. Partici-
strong global growth was likely to place significant up-
pants noted that the recent pickup in economic growth
ward pressure on the prices of energy and other com-
might reflect stronger underlying momentum in eco-
modities; as a consequence, their projections for overall
nomic activity than anticipated and hence point to a
inflation over the next several years were generally a
faster pace of recovery going forward. On the other
notch higher than their projections for core inflation.
hand, participants referred to the possibility that deteri-
As in June, the central tendency of projections for PCE
orating performance of commercial real estate and con-
inflation over the longer run was 1.7 to 2.0 percent,
sumer loans could have adverse effects on the financial
reflecting participants’ assessments of the measured
system that would damp the growth of output and em-
rate of inflation that would best satisfy the Federal Re-
ployment over coming quarters.
serve’s dual mandate of maximum employment and
stable prices. Most participants expected that inflation Most participants continued to see the uncertainty sur-
in 2012 would remain below its longer-run value, but a rounding their inflation projections as unusually high,
few expected inflation to have converged to its longer- although a few viewed the extent of such uncertainty as
run value by that time. roughly in line with historical norms. Participants gen-
erally judged the risks to the inflation outlook to be
Uncertainty and Risks
roughly balanced, and many of them indicated that
As in June, nearly all participants judged the degree of
these risks were linked, at least in part, to the risks as-
uncertainty surrounding their projections of output
sociated with the economic outlook. Participants cited
growth and unemployment as higher than historical
the risk that longer-term inflation expectations might
norms.2 Participants generally saw the risks to these
start drifting downward in response to persistent eco-
projections as roughly balanced, although a few indi-
nomic slack and low inflation outcomes; alternatively,
cated that the risks to the unemployment outlook re-
those expectations could shift upwards in response to a
mained weighted to the upside. In explaining these
sharper recovery, especially if extraordinary monetary
judgments, participants highlighted the intrinsic diffi-
policy stimulus were not unwound in a timely fashion.
Participants also noted the possibility that an accelera-
tion in global economic activity could induce a surge in
2 Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for the
the prices of energy and other commodities that would
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con-
place upward pressure on headline inflation.
sumer price inflation over the period from 1989 to 2008. At
the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” Diversity of Views
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in Figures 2.A and 2.B provide further details on the di-
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess
versity of participants’ views regarding likely outcomes
the uncertainty and risks attending participants’ projections.

--- Page 15 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t i o n s f o r t h e M e e t i n g o f N o v e m b e r 3 - 4 , 2 0 0 9 Page 5
for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate in was generally more tightly concentrated than in June,
2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, and over the longer run. The reflecting modest upward revisions to some partici-
dispersion in these projections reflects, among other pants’ estimates of the sustainable rate of unemploy-
factors, differences in the participants’ assessments re- ment to which the economy would converge under
garding the current degree of underlying momentum in appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of fur-
economic activity, the evolution of consumer and busi- ther shocks.
ness sentiment, and the trajectory for private saving,
Figures 2.C and 2.D provide corresponding informa-
and in their interpretations of the continued weakness
tion about the diversity of participants’ views regarding
in bank credit. The distribution of participants’ GDP
the inflation outlook. For total PCE inflation, the dis-
growth projections for 2009 shifted upward about a
tribution of participants’ projections for 2009 was nar-
percentage point and became narrower in response to
rower than in June, whereas the distributions of their
the economic and financial information received since
projections for 2010 and 2011 did not change signifi-
the June FOMC meeting. Most participants only
cantly, and there was virtually no change in the distri-
shaded up their growth projections for 2010, but a few
bution of longer-run projections. For core PCE infla-
participants made more substantial upward revisions;
tion, participants’ projections for 2009 became more
hence the lowest points in the distribution increased
tightly concentrated, while their projections for 2010
markedly while the median was just a notch higher than
and 2011 were only slightly less dispersed than in June.
in June. The distribution of growth projections for
The distributions of total and core PCE inflation pro-
2011 was little changed from June, while the distribu-
jections for 2012 exhibited somewhat greater disper-
tion for 2012 was centered at a slightly higher rate than
sion than those for 2011. The dispersion in partici-
for 2011 with about the same degree of dispersion. A
pants’ projections for 2010, 2011, and 2012 mainly re-
few participants made modest upward revisions to their
flected differences in their judgments regarding the
estimates of the longer-run sustainable rate of output
determinants of inflation, including their estimates of
growth, producing a slight widening of the range for
prevailing resource slack and their assessments of the
these longer-run projections. Regarding participants’
extent to which that slack affects inflation outcomes
unemployment rate projections, the distribution for
and expectations. In contrast, the relatively concen-
2009 narrowed but with roughly the same mode as in
trated distribution of longer-run inflation projections
June, while the distributions for 2010 and 2011 shifted
indicates substantial agreement among participants re-
down a bit and narrowed somewhat. The distribution
garding the measured rate of inflation that best satisfies
of unemployment rate projections for 2012 exhibited
the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum em-
noticeably greater dispersion than for 2011. The distri-
ployment and stable prices.
bution of longer-run unemployment rate projections

--- Page 16 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2009–12 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2009 14
November projections 12
June projections
10
8
6
4
2
-1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2-0.0-0.2-0.4-0.6-0.8-1.0-1.2-1.4-1.6-1.8-2.0-2.2-2.4-2.6-2.8-3.0-3.2-3.4-3.6-3.8-4.0-4.2-4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-
-1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2010 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2-0.0-0.2-0.4-0.6-0.8-1.0-1.2-1.4-1.6-1.8-2.0-2.2-2.4-2.6-2.8-3.0-3.2-3.4-3.6-3.8-4.0-4.2-4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-
-1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2011 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2-0.0-0.2-0.4-0.6-0.8-1.0-1.2-1.4-1.6-1.8-2.0-2.2-2.4-2.6-2.8-3.0-3.2-3.4-3.6-3.8-4.0-4.2-4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-
-1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2012 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2-0.0-0.2-0.4-0.6-0.8-1.0-1.2-1.4-1.6-1.8-2.0-2.2-2.4-2.6-2.8-3.0-3.2-3.4-3.6-3.8-4.0-4.2-4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-
-1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2-0.0-0.2-0.4-0.6-0.8-1.0-1.2-1.4-1.6-1.8-2.0-2.2-2.4-2.6-2.8-3.0-3.2-3.4-3.6-3.8-4.0-4.2-4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-
-1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 17 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t i o n s f o r t h e M e e t i n g o f N o v e m b e r 3 - 4 , 2 0 0 9 Page 7
Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2009–12 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2009 14
November projections 12
June projections
10
8
6
4
2
4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-5.4-5.6-5.8-6.0-6.2-6.4-6.6-6.8-7.0-7.2-7.4-7.6-7.8-8.0-8.2-8.4-8.6-8.8-9.0-9.2-9.4-9.6-9.8-10.0-10.2-10.4-10.6-
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1 10.3 10.5 10.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2010 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-5.4-5.6-5.8-6.0-6.2-6.4-6.6-6.8-7.0-7.2-7.4-7.6-7.8-8.0-8.2-8.4-8.6-8.8-9.0-9.2-9.4-9.6-9.8-10.0-10.2-10.4-10.6-
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1 10.3 10.5 10.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2011 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-5.4-5.6-5.8-6.0-6.2-6.4-6.6-6.8-7.0-7.2-7.4-7.6-7.8-8.0-8.2-8.4-8.6-8.8-9.0-9.2-9.4-9.6-9.8-10.0-10.2-10.4-10.6-
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1 10.3 10.5 10.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2012 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-5.4-5.6-5.8-6.0-6.2-6.4-6.6-6.8-7.0-7.2-7.4-7.6-7.8-8.0-8.2-8.4-8.6-8.8-9.0-9.2-9.4-9.6-9.8-10.0-10.2-10.4-10.6-
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1 10.3 10.5 10.7
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-5.4-5.6-5.8-6.0-6.2-6.4-6.6-6.8-7.0-7.2-7.4-7.6-7.8-8.0-8.2-8.4-8.6-8.8-9.0-9.2-9.4-9.6-9.8-10.0-10.2-10.4-10.6-
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1 10.3 10.5 10.7
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 18 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2009–12 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2009 14
November projections 12
June projections
10
8
6
4
2
0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2010 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2011 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2012 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 19 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t i o n s f o r t h e M e e t i n g o f N o v e m b e r 3 - 4 , 2 0 0 9 Page 9
Figure 2.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inflation, 2009–12
Number of participants
2009 14
November projections 12
June projections
10
8
6
4
2
0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2010 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2011 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2012 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 20 ---

Page 10 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by experienced in the past and the risks around
the members of the Board of Governors and the projections are broadly balanced, the num-
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks bers reported in table 2 would imply a proba-
inform discussions of monetary policy among bility of about 70 percent that actual GDP
policymakers and can aid public understand- would expand within a range of 2.4 to 3.6 per-
ing of the basis for policy actions. Considera- cent in the current year, 1.6 to 4.4 percent in
ble uncertainty attends these projections, the second year, 1.4 to 4.6 in the third year and
however. The economic and statistical models 1.5 to 4.5 percent in the fourth year. The cor-
and relationships used to help produce eco- responding 70 percent confidence intervals for
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de- overall inflation would be 1.5 to 2.5 percent in
scriptions of the real world. And the future the current year and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the
path of the economy can be affected by my- second, third and fourth years.
riad unforeseen developments and events. Because current conditions may differ
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, from those that prevailed, on average, over his-
participants consider not only what appears to tory, participants provide judgments as to
be the most likely economic outcome as em- whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
bodied in their projections, but also the range jections of each variable is greater than, smaller
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
their occurring, and the potential costs to the forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in
economy should they occur. table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
Table 2 summarizes the average historical to whether the risks to their projections are
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including weighted to the upside, are weighted to the
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
and those prepared by Federal Reserve Board participants judge whether each variable is
staff in advance of meetings of the Federal more likely to be above or below their projec-
Open Market Committee. The projection tions of the most likely outcome. These judg-
error ranges shown in the table illustrate the ments about the uncertainty and the risks at-
considerable uncertainty associated with eco- tending each participant’s projections are dis-
nomic forecasts. For example, suppose a par- tinct from the diversity of participants’ views
ticipant projects that real gross domestic about the most likely outcomes. Forecast un-
product (GDP) and total consumer prices will certainty is concerned with the risks associated
rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 with a particular projection rather than with
percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty divergences across a number of different pro-
attending those projections is similar to that jections.

# Tables

## Page_10_Table_1


| Voting for this action: Messrs. Bernanke and Dudley,   |
|--------------------------------------------------------|
| Ms. Duke, Messrs. Evans, Kohn, Lacker, Lockhart,       |
| Tarullo, and Warsh, and Ms. Yellen.                    |
| Voting against this action: None.                      |


## Page_11_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |      |      |      |            |      |      |      |      |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|------|------------|------|------|------|------|
| 2009                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            | 2010 | 2011 | 2012 | Longer run | 2009 | 2010 | 2011 | 2012 |
| -0.4 to -0.1 2.5 to 3.5 3.4 to 4.5 3.5 to 4.8 2.5 to 2.8
-1.5 to -1.0 2.1 to 3.3 3.8 to 4.6 n.a. 2.5 to 2.7
9.9 to 10.1 9.3 to 9.7 8.2 to 8.6 6.8 to 7.5 5.0 to 5.2
9.8 to 10.1 9.5 to 9.8 8.4 to 8.8 n.a. 4.8 to 5.0
1.1 to 1.2 1.3 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.9 1.2 to 1.9 1.7 to 2.0
1.0 to 1.4 1.2 to 1.8 1.1 to 2.0 n.a. 1.7 to 2.0
1.4 to 1.5 1.0 to 1.5 1.0 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.7
1.3 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.5 0.9 to 1.7 n.a. |      |      |      |            |      |      |      |      |