# 20091216_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:36:12*
*Pages: 11, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Page 1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
December 15-16, 2009
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit- Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of
tee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve the Staff Director for Management, Board of
System was held in the offices of the Board of Gover- Governors
nors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 15,
2009, at 2:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, De- Mr. English, Deputy Director, Division of Mone-
cember 16, 2009, at 9:00 a.m. tary Affairs, Board of Governors
PRESENT: Ms. Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Mr. Bernanke, Chairman Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman
Ms. Duke Ms. Edwards, Messrs. Levin² and Nelson,¹ Senior
Mr. Evans Associate Directors, Division of Monetary Af-
Mr. Kohn fairs, Board of Governors; Messrs. Reif-
Mr. Lacker schneider and Wascher, Senior Associate Di-
Mr. Lockhart rectors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Mr. Tarullo Board of Governors
Mr. Warsh
Ms. Yellen Mr. Meyer, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors; Mr. Oliner, Sen-
Mr. Bullard, Ms. Cumming, Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Pia- ior Adviser, Division of Research and Statis-
nalto, and Mr. Rosengren, Alternate Members tics, Board of Governors
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Ms. Zickler, Deputy Associate Director, Division
Messrs. Fisher, Kocherlakota, and Plosser, Presi- of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas,
Minneapolis, and Philadelphia, respectively Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Luecke, Assistant Secretary Mr. Bassett, Section Chief, Division of Monetary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Affairs, Board of Governors; Mr. Roberts,²
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary Section Chief, Division of Research and Statis-
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel tics, Board of Governors
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Sheets, Economist Ms. Beattie,³ Assistant to the Secretary, Office of
the Secretary, Board of Governors
Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman,
Tracy, and Wilcox, Associate Economists Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-
sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Divi-
Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Parkinson, Director, Division of Bank Supervi-
sion and Regulation, Board of Governors ¹ Attended Tuesday’s session only.
² Attended the portion of the meeting related to infla-
Mr. Frierson,¹ Deputy Secretary, Office of the Sec- tion dynamics.
³ Attended Wednesday’s session only.
retary, Board of Governors

--- Page 2 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Messrs. Fuhrer and Rosenblum, Executive Vice the System’s credit and liquidity facilities. The Manager
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston noted that the System’s holdings of securities will tend
and Dallas, respectively to decline gradually after the completion of the asset
purchase programs, reflecting maturing issues and pre-
Mr. Krane, Ms. Mester, Messrs. Schweitzer and payments on holdings of MBS. The Manager noted
Waller, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve that the Committee would likely wish to discuss in de-
Banks of Chicago, Philadelphia, Cleveland, and tail its policy for reinvesting the proceeds of maturing
St. Louis, respectively issues and prepayments; he proposed, as an interim
approach, continuing the practice of not reinvesting the
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Re- proceeds of maturing agency securities or MBS pre-
serve Bank of Minneapolis payments. Meeting participants supported that interim
approach pending further discussion at future meet-
Messrs. Clark, Dotsey,² Fernald, Hornstein, Olivei,² ings.
and Wynne,² Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
The staff presented another update on the continuing
Banks of Kansas City, Philadelphia, San Fran-
development of several tools that could be used to
cisco, Richmond, Boston, Dallas, respectively
support a smooth withdrawal of policy accommodation
at the appropriate time; these tools include executing
Messrs. Friedman and van der Klaauw,² Assistant
reverse repurchase agreements (RRPs) on a large scale
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of New
and implementing a term deposit facility (TDF). To
York
further test its RRP capabilities, in early December, the
Desk executed a few small RRPs with primary dealers,
Mr. Martinez-Garcia,² Research Economist, Feder-
using both Treasury and agency debt as collateral.
al Reserve Bank of Dallas
These transactions confirmed the operational capability
to execute triparty RRPs on a larger scale if so directed
² Attended the portion of the meeting related to infla-
by the Committee. The Desk was continuing to devel-
tion dynamics.
op the capacity to conduct RRPs using agency MBS
collateral and anticipated that this work would be com-
pleted by the spring. In addition, the Desk reported
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
that it was exploring the operational issues associated
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
with expanding potential counterparties for RRPs
The Manager of the System Open Market Account
beyond the primary dealers. Staff also reported signifi-
reported on developments in domestic and foreign fi-
cant progress in developing and implementing a TDF.
nancial markets since the Committee’s November 3-4
The staff noted that it planned to ask the Board to ap-
meeting. Financial conditions generally had become
prove a Federal Register notice requesting public com-
somewhat more supportive of economic growth.
ments on a TDF and summarized the contents of the
There was little evidence of year-end funding pressures,
draft notice.
although demand for Treasury bills with maturities ex-
tending just beyond year-end remained elevated. The The staff also briefed the Committee on recent devel-
Manager also reported on System open market opera- opments regarding various Federal Reserve liquidity
tions in agency debt and agency mortgage-backed se- and credit facilities, including the Term Auction Facility
curities (MBS) during the intermeeting period. The (TAF), the primary credit program, and the Term As-
Desk continued to gradually slow the pace of purchases set-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF). TAF auc-
of these securities in accordance with the program for tions continued to be undersubscribed even as the Fed-
asset purchases that the Committee announced at the eral Reserve progressively reduced the total amount of
end of its November meeting. By unanimous vote, the funding available from the TAF. With the exception of
Committee ratified those transactions. There were no the TALF, usage of the other facilities declined further
open market operations in foreign currencies for the as financial market conditions continued to improve.
System’s account during the intermeeting period. Since The TALF expanded modestly, supporting issuance of
the Committee met in November, the Federal Re- asset-backed securities collateralized by consumer,
serve’s total assets were about unchanged, at nearly small business, and student loans as well as commercial
$2.2 trillion, as the increase in the System’s holdings of mortgage-backed securities (CMBS). Indeed, over the
securities roughly matched a further decline in usage of intermeeting period, TALF lending supported the first

--- Page 3 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f D e c e m b e r 1 5 - 1 6 , 2 0 0 9 Page 3
new CMBS issue since June 2008. On November 17, December. Continuing claims for unemployment in-
the Board of Governors announced a reduction in the surance through regular state programs also moved
maximum maturity of loans available under the dis- down, but the average length of spells of unemploy-
count window’s primary credit program from 90 days ment continued to increase.
to 28 days, effective January 14, 2010. Participants
After expanding briskly in the third quarter, industrial
agreed it would be useful to consider further steps the
production increased further in October and Novem-
Federal Reserve might take to move toward normaliza-
ber. The gains continued to be fairly broad based, and
tion of its lending facilities at upcoming meetings, when
were particularly strong for consumer durables and
the Committee plans to discuss alternative approaches
materials. Business surveys suggested that factory out-
to implementing monetary policy in the longer-run.
put would advance further in the coming months. Ca-
Staff Review of the Economic Situation pacity utilization rose again in November, but remained
The information reviewed at the December 15-16 at a very low level by historical standards.
meeting suggested that the recovery in economic activi-
Real personal consumption expenditures increased at a
ty was gaining momentum. The pace of job losses
solid pace in October, with broad-based advances in
slowed noticeably in recent months, and total hours
both goods and services. The data for nominal retail
worked increased in November; however, the unem-
sales in November showed continued widespread im-
ployment rate remained quite elevated. Industrial pro-
provement, particularly at general merchandise stores,
duction sustained the broad-based expansion that be-
electronics and appliance stores, and nonstore retailers.
gan in the third quarter, but capacity utilization re-
Outlays for motor vehicles bounced back in October
mained very low. Consumer spending expanded solidly
after a slump in September that followed the end of the
in October, reflecting in part a faster pace of motor
“cash-for-clunkers” program in August. Sales of new
vehicle sales. Both light vehicle sales and total retail
light vehicles increased again in November. Real dis-
sales rose again in November. Sales of new homes in-
posable personal income rose in October, reflecting
creased significantly in recent months, a development
modest gains in nominal labor income; moreover, the
that, given the slow pace of construction, reduced the
increase in real after-tax income during the spring and
inventory of unsold new homes; sales of existing
summer was revised up. The latest readings from in-
homes rose strongly. Spending on equipment and
dexes of consumer sentiment remained within the rela-
software continued to stabilize, but investment in non-
tively low range that prevailed over the previous six
residential structures declined further as conditions in
months, apparently still weighed down by weak labor
nonresidential real estate markets remained poor. Both
market conditions and prior declines in household net
imports and exports continued to recover from their
worth.
depressed levels of earlier this year, and the U.S. trade
deficit in September and October was wider than in Housing construction held fairly steady in recent
earlier months. Although a jump in energy prices months, while demand for housing continued to firm.
pushed up headline inflation somewhat, core consumer Single-family housing starts remained roughly flat from
price inflation remained subdued. June to November at levels only modestly above those
reported earlier in the year. In the much smaller multi-
Data received over the intermeeting period suggested
family sector, where tight credit conditions persisted
that the pace of job loss slowed considerably in recent
and vacancies stayed elevated, the average pace of starts
months relative to the steep declines that occurred in
in October and November decreased somewhat from
the first half of the year. The average decline in private
the already very low rate in the third quarter. In con-
payrolls in October and November was much smaller
trast, sales of existing single-family homes increased
than in the third quarter; that recent improvement was
significantly again in October. Sales of new homes also
widespread across industries. The length of the average
rose in October after two months of little change.
workweek for production and nonsupervisory workers
With sales continuing to outpace construction, the in-
increased in November; moreover, aggregate hours
ventory of unsold new homes declined to its lowest
worked registered the first substantial increase since the
level in three years. The recent increases in sales likely
recession began. The unemployment rate dropped in
reflected improved fundamentals: The average interest
November but remained quite high, while the labor
rate on 30-year conforming fixed-rate mortgages de-
force participation rate continued to decrease. The
clined to less than 5 percent, and surveys suggested that
four-week moving average of initial claims for unem-
households now expected home prices to be fairly sta-
ployment benefits declined somewhat through early
ble over the next year. Although some house price

--- Page 4 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
indexes declined a little in September and October, purchasing managers and indicators of business and
they remained above the troughs reached last spring. consumer confidence generally improved further. Data
for October indicated that trade volumes continued to
Real spending on equipment and software was esti-
rise in each of these economies, retail sales increased in
mated to have risen slightly in the third quarter after
the United Kingdom and stopped declining in the euro
falling sharply for more than a year. Increased outlays
area, housing starts climbed in Canada, and industrial
for transportation equipment and high-tech goods ac-
production increased in Japan for the eighth consecu-
counted for the stabilization. Outside of those sectors,
tive month. Third-quarter real GDP growth was sur-
spending declined a bit further in the third quarter, al-
prisingly strong in several emerging market economies,
though not as steeply as it had earlier in the year.
most notably Mexico and India. In emerging Asia and
Shipments of transportation and high-tech equipment
in Latin America, indicators suggested that economic
remained strong in October, but shipments of nonde-
activity was expanding somewhat less rapidly, but still
fense capital goods excluding those categories declined,
briskly, in the fourth quarter. Price pressures remained
and new orders fell sharply across a range of products.
subdued in most of the advanced foreign economies,
Business purchases of motor vehicles rose significantly
although headline inflation generally moved up. Head-
again in November. Moreover, monthly surveys of
line inflation also increased in emerging Asia, generally
business conditions, sentiment, and capital spending
from low levels, but declined further in Latin America,
plans pointed to a moderate rise in business spending
likely in part because of the recent appreciation of sev-
going forward. In contrast, conditions in the nonresi-
eral Latin American currencies.
dential construction sector generally remained quite
poor. For instance, real outlays on structures outside In the United States, the latest data indicated that total
of the drilling and mining sector plunged in the third consumer price inflation turned up in recent months,
quarter. Also in the third quarter, vacancy rates on while core consumer price inflation remained subdued.
nonresidential properties rose further, and property The higher readings on headline consumer price infla-
prices continued to fall amid difficult financing condi- tion were the result of a rebound in energy prices.
tions. The book value of manufacturing and trade in- Core consumer prices increased modestly in October
ventories excluding motor vehicles and parts increased and were unchanged in November. Median year-ahead
in October for the first time in more than a year, even inflation expectations in the Reuters/University of
as the ratio of such inventories to sales declined fur- Michigan Survey of Consumers declined in early De-
ther. Capital markets continued to become somewhat cember, and the same survey’s measure of longer-term
more supportive of business investment over the in- inflation expectations moved down to the lower end of
termeeting period. In contrast, available data indicated the narrow range that prevailed over the previous few
that banks continued to raise spreads on business loans. years. Revised data showed solid increases in hourly
compensation in the second and third quarters, along
The U.S. international trade deficit was somewhat wid-
with quite rapid productivity growth and a further de-
er in September and October than in previous months.
cline in unit labor costs. Average hourly earnings of
Exports of goods and services increased sharply, and
production and nonsupervisory workers increased
the gains were broadly distributed across most major
modestly, on average, in October and November.
categories of exports. After surging in September, im-
ports flattened out in October, although the slowing Staff Review of the Financial Situation
almost entirely reflected reduced oil purchases. Most Market participants largely anticipated the decisions by
other categories of imports, including automotive the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) at the
goods, industrial supplies other than oil and gold, con- November meeting to keep the target range for the
sumer goods, and capital goods, posted solid increases federal funds rate unchanged and to retain the “ex-
in the past two months. tended period” language in the accompanying state-
ment. However, market participants took note of the
The most recent data from the advanced foreign econ-
Committee’s explicit enumeration of the factors that
omies suggested that they continue to emerge from
were expected to continue to warrant this policy stance,
their deep recessions. Real gross domestic product
and Eurodollar futures rates fell a bit on the release. In
(GDP) rose in the third quarter in Japan, the euro area,
contrast, the announcement that the Federal Reserve
and Canada, and the pace of contraction in the United
would purchase only about $175 billion of agency debt
Kingdom moderated substantially. The limited data
securities had not been generally anticipated. Spreads
relating to the fourth quarter suggested that economic
on those securities widened a few basis points follow-
activity advanced in all of those economies. Surveys of

--- Page 5 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f D e c e m b e r 1 5 - 1 6 , 2 0 0 9 Page 5
ing the release, but declined, on net, over the intermeet- speculative-grade corporate bonds fell a little more than
ing period. Incoming economic data, while somewhat those on comparable-maturity nominal Treasury securi-
better than expected, seemed to have little net effect on ties, leaving their spreads somewhat narrower. Bid-
interest rate expectations. Indeed, the expected path of asked spreads for corporate bonds—a measure of the
the federal funds rate shifted down somewhat over the liquidity of such instruments—were about unchanged.
intermeeting period. Consistent with the decrease in Prices and bid-asked spreads in the secondary market
short-term interest rates, yields on 2-year nominal off- for leveraged loans also were stable over the intermeet-
the-run Treasury securities declined slightly, on net, ing period. Spreads on credit default swaps (CDS) for
over the intermeeting period. In contrast, yields on large bank holding companies narrowed a bit.
nominal 10-year Treasury securities edged higher on
Debt of the private domestic nonfinancial sector ap-
balance. Inflation compensation based on 5-year Trea-
peared to be declining again in the fourth quarter, as
sury inflation-protected securities (TIPS) increased,
estimates suggested a further drop in household debt
apparently owing in part to an announcement by the
and a tick down in nonfinancial business debt. Con-
Treasury of a smaller-than-expected amount of is-
sumer credit contracted for the ninth consecutive
suance of TIPS next year. Five-year inflation compen-
month in October, reflecting a steep decline in revolv-
sation five years ahead also rose, and was near the up-
ing credit that offset a small increase in nonrevolving
per end of its range in recent years.
credit. Issuance of consumer credit asset-backed secur-
Conditions in short-term funding markets were little ities rebounded in November from its subdued pace in
changed over the intermeeting period. Spreads be- October. Moreover, with support from the TALF, the
tween London interbank offered rates (Libor) and first CMBS issue in nearly 18 months came to market.
overnight index swap (OIS) rates at one- and three- A few other CMBS deals were subsequently completed
month maturities were about flat; spreads at the six- without support from the TALF. Business debt was
month maturity narrowed somewhat further but re- held down in November by another drop in bank
mained above pre-crisis levels. Spreads on A2/P2- loans, as well as a decrease in CP outstanding, though
rated commercial paper (CP) and AA-rated asset- the latter was concentrated among a few large firms. In
backed CP remained near their lows of the past two contrast, gross issuance of investment- and speculative-
years. Indicators of functioning in the market for nom- grade bonds was robust in November. The federal
inal Treasury securities—including trading volumes and government continued to issue debt at a brisk pace, and
liquidity premiums for the on-the-run 10-year note— gross issuance of state and local government debt re-
were roughly stable. Liquidity conditions in the TIPS mained strong in November.
market showed further improvement. Year-end pres-
Commercial bank credit decreased further in Novem-
sures in short-term funding markets, including the CP
ber, although the pace of decline slowed relative to re-
and bank funding markets, remained modest. Howev-
cent months. Commercial and industrial (C&I) loans
er, high demand for Treasury bills maturing just past
continued to drop, likely reflecting weak demand and a
December 31 drove yields on such issues to zero in
continued tightening of credit terms by banks. The
some recent auctions.
Survey of Terms of Business Lending conducted in
Over the intermeeting period, broad stock price index- November indicated that the average C&I loan rate
es increased further. The rise in share prices likely re- spread over comparable-maturity market instruments
flected the improvement in the economic outlook and rose for the fifth consecutive survey. The runoff in
strong third-quarter earnings, which led analysts to commercial real estate loans continued, consistent with
mark up their estimates of future earnings. The gains the further weakening of fundamentals in that sector.
were widespread across industry sectors. However, Bank loans to households rose, reflecting a slowdown
financial stocks significantly underperformed the mar- in loan sales to the housing-related government-
ket, as investors continued to express concerns about sponsored enterprises that resulted in a modest increase
the future profitability of the banking industry. Op- in banks’ on-balance-sheet holdings of closed-end resi-
tion-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index declined. dential mortgages in November. However, home equi-
The spread between an estimate of the expected real ty loans and consumer loans fell again. According to
return on equity over the next 10 years and an estimate third-quarter Call Report data, unused loan commit-
of the real 10-year Treasury yield—a rough gauge of ments shrank for the seventh consecutive quarter,
the equity risk premium—remained about unchanged though the rate of decline slowed, especially for com-
at a relatively high level. Yields on investment- and mitments to lend to businesses. The aggregate profita-

--- Page 6 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
bility of the banking sector turned positive in the third December would be its last and that the cost of the
quarter, but most of the increase was due to strong funds provided would float with interest rates set in
earnings at a few large institutions. Credit quality ap- future refinancing operations rather than being fixed as
peared to worsen as delinquency and charge-off rates in previous such operations.
increased further for most major loan categories.
Staff Economic Outlook
Banks’ regulatory capital ratios increased again as banks
In the forecast prepared for the December FOMC
continued to raise equity and shrink their balance
meeting, the staff raised its projection for average real
sheets.
GDP growth in the second half of 2009 somewhat, and
M2 expanded at a moderate rate in November. As was it also modestly increased its forecast for economic
the case in recent months, liquid deposits grew rapidly, growth in 2010 and 2011. Better-than-expected data
while small time deposits and retail money market mu- on employment, consumer spending, home sales, and
tual funds contracted, albeit at slightly slower paces. industrial production received during the intermeeting
Currency declined somewhat in November as foreign period pointed to a somewhat stronger increase in real
demand for U.S. banknotes appeared to ebb, consistent GDP in the current quarter than had previously been
with the continued stabilization in most global financial projected. In addition, the positive signal from the in-
markets. coming data, along with the sizable upward revisions to
household income in earlier quarters and more suppor-
Broad stock price indexes in major advanced foreign
tive financial market conditions, led to small upward
economies rose, although generally somewhat less than
adjustments to projected growth in real GDP over the
those in the United States. Stock price indexes in ma-
rest of the forecast period. The staff again anticipated
jor emerging markets increased as well, particularly in
that the recovery would strengthen in 2010 and 2011,
Brazil and Mexico, amid generally rising commodity
supported by further improvement in financial condi-
prices and a better-than-expected Mexican GDP re-
tions and household balance sheets, continued recovery
port; Chinese stock prices also increased strongly.
in the housing sector, growing household and business
Long-term government bond yields declined in most
confidence, and accommodative monetary policy, even
advanced foreign economies, but increased in the Unit-
as the impetus to real activity from fiscal policy dimi-
ed Kingdom. The dollar depreciated over much of the
nished. However, the projected pace of real output
intermeeting period, but then reversed course following
growth in 2010 and 2011 was expected to exceed that
the release of better-than-expected U.S. data on em-
of potential output by only enough to produce a very
ployment and retail sales for November. On balance,
gradual reduction in economic slack.
the dollar ended the period up slightly against the major
foreign currencies and down a little relative to the cur- The staff forecast for inflation was nearly unchanged.
rencies of other important trading partners. The staff interpreted the increases in prices of energy
and nonmarket services that recently boosted consumer
Concerns about the potential for default by some sov-
price inflation as largely transitory. Although the pro-
ereign borrowers rose over the intermeeting period.
jected degree of slack in resource utilization over the
News that the Dubai government had requested a
next two years was a little lower than shown in the pre-
standstill on debts owed by Dubai World, a govern-
vious staff forecast, it was still quite substantial. Thus,
ment-owned corporation, temporarily roiled some fi-
the staff continued to project that core inflation would
nancial markets. However, those pressures eased as
slow somewhat from its current pace over the next two
investors concluded that Dubai World’s difficulties
years. Moreover, the staff expected that headline con-
were likely to be isolated. Subsequently, the sovereign
sumer price inflation would decline to about the same
debt rating for Greece was lowered amid long-standing
rate as core inflation in 2010 and 2011.
concerns over its public finances and a widening of its
sovereign CDS spreads. Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
Economic Outlook
Although the central banks of the major foreign indus-
In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
trial economies kept policy rates on hold, the Bank of
look, meeting participants agreed that the incoming
England expanded its asset purchase program and the
data and information received from business contacts
Bank of Japan announced a new secured lending facili-
suggested that economic growth was strengthening in
ty. In contrast, the European Central Bank took some
the fourth quarter, that firms were reducing payrolls at
initial steps toward scaling back emergency lending. It
a less rapid pace, and that downside risks to the out-
announced that the one-year refinancing operation in
look for economic growth had diminished a bit further.

--- Page 7 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f D e c e m b e r 1 5 - 1 6 , 2 0 0 9 Page 7
Although some of the recent data had been better than they noted the risk that improvements in the housing
anticipated, most participants saw the incoming infor- sector might be undercut next year as the Federal Re-
mation as broadly in line with the projections for mod- serve’s purchases of MBS wind down, the homebuyer
erate growth and subdued inflation in 2010 that they tax credits expire, and foreclosures and distress sales
had submitted just before the Committee’s November continue. Though the near-term outlook remains un-
3-4 meeting; accordingly, their views on the economic certain, participants generally thought the most likely
outlook had not changed appreciably. Participants ex- outcome was that economic growth would gradually
pected the economic recovery to continue, but, consis- strengthen over the next two years as financial condi-
tent with experience following previous financial crises, tions improved further, leading to more-substantial
most anticipated that the pickup in output and em- increases in resource utilization.
ployment growth would be rather slow relative to past
Financial market conditions were generally regarded as
recoveries from deep recessions. A moderate pace of
having become more supportive of continued econom-
expansion would imply slow improvement in the labor
ic recovery during the intermeeting period: Equity
market next year, with unemployment declining only
prices rose further, private credit spreads narrowed
gradually. Participants agreed that underlying inflation
somewhat, and financial markets generally continued to
currently was subdued and was likely to remain so for
function significantly better than early in the year. Par-
some time. Some noted the risk that, over the next
ticipants noted, however, that securitization markets
couple of years, inflation could edge further below the
were still substantially impaired. In general, U.S. asset
rates they judged most consistent with the Federal Re-
values did not seem out of line with improving funda-
serve’s dual mandate for maximum employment and
mentals. While investors evidently had become less
price stability; others saw inflation risks as tilted toward
cautious and more willing to bear risk, they appeared to
the upside in the medium term.
be discriminating among risky assets. Banks were rais-
A number of factors were expected to support near- ing new capital and in some cases paying back funds
term expansion in economic activity. Consumer received from the Troubled Asset Relief Program.
spending appeared to be on a moderately rising trend, Bank loans, however, continued to contract sharply in
reflecting gains in after-tax income and wealth this year. all categories, reflecting lack of demand, deterioration
Recent upward revisions to official estimates of the in potential borrowers’ credit quality, uncertainty about
level of household income in recent quarters gave par- the economic outlook, and banks’ concerns about their
ticipants somewhat greater confidence that consumer own capital positions. With rising levels of nonper-
spending would continue to expand. The housing sec- forming loans expected to be a continuing source of
tor showed continuing signs of improvement, though stress, and with many regional and small banks vulner-
housing starts had leveled out after increasing earlier in able to the deteriorating performance of CRE loans,
the year and activity remained quite low. Businesses bank lending terms and standards were seen as likely to
seemed to be reducing the pace of inventory reduc- remain tight. Participants again noted the contrast be-
tions. The outlook for growth abroad had improved tween large and small firms’ access to financing. Large
since earlier in the year, auguring well for U.S. exports. firms that can issue debt in the markets appeared to
In addition, financial market conditions generally had have relatively little difficulty obtaining credit. In con-
become more supportive of economic growth. While trast, smaller firms, which tend to be more dependent
these developments were positive, participants noted on commercial banks for financing, reportedly faced
several factors that likely would continue to restrain the substantial constraints in gaining access to credit.
expansion in economic activity. Business contacts While survey evidence suggested that small businesses
again emphasized they would be cautious in adding to considered weak demand to be a larger problem than
payrolls and capital spending, even as demand for their access to credit, participants saw limited credit availabil-
products increases. Conditions in the commercial real ity as a potential constraint on future investment and
estate (CRE) sector were still deteriorating. Bank credit hiring by small businesses, which normally are a signifi-
had contracted further, and with many banks facing cant source of employment growth in recoveries.
continuing loan losses, tight bank credit could continue
The weakness in labor markets continued to be an im-
to weigh on the spending of some households and
portant concern to meeting participants, who generally
businesses. Some participants remained concerned
expected unemployment to remain elevated for quite
about the economy’s ability to generate a self-sustaining
some time. The unemployment rate was not the only
recovery without government support. In particular,
indicator pointing to substantial slack in labor markets:

--- Page 8 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
The employment-to-population ratio had fallen to a 25- quarter, and participants expected that it would do so
year low, and aggregate hours of production workers into 2010 as well. The combination of rising consumer
had dropped more than during the 1981-82 recession. spending, slower destocking, and rising goods produc-
Although the November employment report was con- tion was reflected in reports from major transportation
siderably better than anticipated, several participants companies that shipping volumes were up.
observed that more than one good report would be
Investment in equipment and software appeared to
needed to provide convincing evidence of recovery in
have stabilized, and recent data on new orders contin-
the labor market. Participants also noted that the slow-
ued to point to some pickup next year. Even so, many
ing pace of employment declines mainly reflected a
participants expressed the view that cautious business
diminished pace of layoffs; few firms were hiring.
sentiment, together with low industrial utilization rates,
Moreover, the unusually large fraction of those individ-
was likely to keep new capital spending subdued until
uals with jobs who were working part time for eco-
firms became more confident about the durability of
nomic reasons, as well as the uncommonly low level of
increases in demand. Many also noted widespread re-
the average workweek, pointed to only a gradual de-
ports from business contacts that uncertainties about
cline in unemployment as the economic recovery pro-
health-care, tax, and environmental policies were add-
ceeded. Indeed, many business contacts again reported
ing to businesses’ reluctance to commit to higher capi-
that they would be cautious in their hiring, saying they
tal spending. CRE activity continued to fall markedly
expected to meet any near-term increase in demand by
in most parts of the country as a result of deteriorating
raising their existing employees’ hours and boosting
fundamentals, including declining occupancy and rental
productivity, thus delaying the need to add employees.
rates, and very tight credit conditions. Prospects for
The necessity of reallocating labor across sectors as the
nonresidential construction remained weak.
recovery proceeds, as well as the loss of skills caused by
high levels of long-term unemployment and permanent In the residential real estate sector, home sales and con-
separations, also could limit the pace of employment struction had risen relative to the very low levels re-
gains. Nonetheless, the reported rise in employment of ported in the spring; moreover, house prices appeared
temporary workers in recent months could presage a to be stabilizing and in some areas had reportedly
broader increase in job growth and thus was a welcome moved higher. Generally, the outlook was for gains in
development. housing activity to continue. However, some partici-
pants still viewed the improved outlook as quite tenta-
The prognosis for labor markets remained an impor-
tive and again pointed to potential sources of softness,
tant factor in the outlook for consumer spending. Re-
including the termination next year of the temporary
cent data on household expenditures were encouraging.
tax credits for homebuyers and the downward pressure
Retail sales increased, spurred by price discounting.
that further increases in foreclosures could put on
The Bureau of Economic Analysis revised up its esti-
house prices. Moreover, mortgage markets could come
mates of the level of real disposable income—and thus
under pressure as the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS
of the personal saving rate—in the second and third
purchases wind down.
quarters of this year. Those revisions, along with re-
cent gains in equity prices, suggested a smaller proba- Stronger foreign economic activity, especially in the
bility that households would reduce spending to rebuild emerging market economies in Asia, as well as the par-
their savings more rapidly. However, uncertain job tial reversal this year of the dollar’s appreciation during
prospects, modest growth in real incomes, tight credit, the latter part of 2008, was providing further support to
and wealth levels that remained relatively low despite U.S. exports, including agricultural exports. Further
this year’s rise in equity prices and stabilization in house improvements in foreign economies would likely buoy
prices were seen as likely to weigh on consumer confi- U.S. exports going forward, but import growth would
dence and the growth of consumer spending for some also strengthen as the recovery took hold in the United
time to come. Anecdotal evidence on consumer States. Participants noted that any tendency for dollar
spending in this year’s holiday season was mixed. depreciation to put significant upward pressure on in-
flation would bear close watching.
Participants noted that firms had made substantial
progress in reducing inventories toward desired levels Most participants anticipated that substantial slack in
and were cutting stocks at a slower pace than earlier in labor and product markets, along with well-anchored
the year. This adjustment likely was making an impor- inflation expectations, would keep inflation subdued in
tant contribution to economic growth in the fourth the near term, although they had differing views as to

--- Page 9 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f D e c e m b e r 1 5 - 1 6 , 2 0 0 9 Page 9
the relative importance of those two factors. The de- bers noted that resource slack was expected to diminish
celerations in wages and unit labor costs this year, and only slowly and observed that it might become desira-
the accompanying deceleration in marginal costs, were ble at some point in the future to provide more policy
cited as factors putting downward pressure on inflation. stimulus by expanding the planned scale of the Com-
Moreover, anecdotal evidence suggested that most mittee’s large-scale asset purchases and continuing
firms had little ability to raise their prices in the current them beyond the first quarter, especially if the outlook
economic environment. Some participants noted, for economic growth were to weaken or if mortgage
however, that rising prices of oil and other commodi- market functioning were to deteriorate. One member
ties, along with increases in import prices, could boost thought that the improvement in financial market con-
inflation pressures going forward. Overall, many par- ditions and the economic outlook suggested that the
ticipants viewed the risks to their inflation outlooks as quantity of planned asset purchases could be scaled
being roughly balanced. Some saw inflation risks as back, and that it might become appropriate to begin
tilted to the downside, reflecting the quite elevated level reducing the Federal Reserve’s holdings of longer-term
of economic slack and the possibility that inflation ex- assets if the recovery gains strength over time. The
pectations could begin to decline in response to the low Committee maintained the federal funds target range at
level of actual inflation. But others felt that inflation 0 to ¼ percent and, based on the outlook for a slow
risks were tilted to the upside, particularly in the me- economic recovery, decided to reiterate its anticipation
dium term, because of the possibility that inflation ex- that economic conditions, including low levels of re-
pectations could rise as a result of the public’s concerns source utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable
about extraordinary monetary policy stimulus and large inflation expectations, were likely to warrant exception-
federal budget deficits. Moreover, a few participants ally low rates for an extended period. Although mem-
noted that banks might seek, as the economy improves, bers generally saw little risk that maintaining very low
to reduce their excess reserves quickly and substantially short-term interest rates could raise inflation expecta-
by purchasing securities or by easing credit standards tions or create instability in asset markets, they noted
and expanding their lending. A rapid shift, if not offset that it was important to remain alert to these risks. All
by Federal Reserve actions, could give excessive impe- agreed that the path of short-term rates going forward
tus to spending and potentially result in expected and would depend on the evolution of the economic out-
actual inflation higher than would be consistent with look.
price stability. To keep inflation expectations an-
Committee members and Board members agreed that
chored, all participants agreed that monetary policy
there had been substantial improvements in the func-
would need to be responsive to any significant im-
tioning of financial markets; accordingly they agreed
provement or worsening in the economic outlook and
that the statement to be released following the meeting
that the Federal Reserve would need to continue to
should indicate an anticipation that most of the Federal
clearly communicate its ability and intent to begin
Reserve’s special liquidity facilities will expire on Feb-
withdrawing monetary policy accommodation at the
ruary 1, 2010; these facilities include the Asset-Backed
appropriate time and pace.
Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquid-
In the Committee’s discussion of monetary policy for ity Facility, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, the
the period ahead, all members agreed that no changes Primary Dealer Credit Facility, and the Term Securities
to the Committee’s large-scale asset purchase pro- Lending Facility. Committee members also agreed to
grams, or to its target range for the federal funds rate, announce that the Federal Reserve will be working with
were warranted at this meeting, inasmuch as the eco- its central bank counterparties to close its temporary
nomic outlook had changed little since the November liquidity swap arrangements by February 1. In addi-
meeting. Accordingly, the Committee affirmed its in- tion, the statement would announce an expectation that
tention to purchase $1.25 trillion of agency MBS and amounts provided under the Term Auction Facility will
about $175 billion of agency debt by the end of the first continue to be scaled back in early 2010, and that the
quarter of 2010 and to gradually slow the pace of these anticipated expiration dates for the Term Asset-Backed
purchases to promote a smooth transition in markets. Securities Loan Facility remained June 30, 2010, for
The Committee emphasized that it would continue to loans backed by new-issue CMBS, and March 31, 2010,
evaluate the timing and overall amounts of its purchas- for loans backed by all other types of collateral. Mem-
es of securities in light of the evolving economic out- bers emphasized that they were prepared to modify
look and conditions in financial markets. A few mem- these plans if necessary to support financial stability

--- Page 10 ---

Page 10 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
and economic growth. In that context, several mem- sector has shown some signs of improve-
bers noted that the TALF was still providing important ment over recent months. Household
support for securitization markets, particularly the spending appears to be expanding at a mod-
CMBS market, and that improvements in the function- erate rate, though it remains constrained by a
ing of securitization markets were lagging behind those weak labor market, modest income growth,
in other financial markets. lower housing wealth, and tight credit. Busi-
nesses are still cutting back on fixed invest-
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
ment, though at a slower pace, and remain
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
reluctant to add to payrolls; they continue to
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
make progress in bringing inventory stocks
ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance
into better alignment with sales. Financial
with the following domestic policy directive:
market conditions have become more sup-
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks portive of economic growth. Although eco-
monetary and financial conditions that will nomic activity is likely to remain weak for a
foster price stability and promote sustainable time, the Committee anticipates that policy
growth in output. To further its long-run actions to stabilize financial markets and in-
objectives, the Committee seeks conditions stitutions, fiscal and monetary stimulus, and
in reserve markets consistent with federal market forces will contribute to a strengthen-
funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. ing of economic growth and a gradual return
The Committee directs the Desk to purchase to higher levels of resource utilization in a
agency debt and agency MBS during the in- context of price stability.
termeeting period with the aim of providing
With substantial resource slack likely to con-
support to private credit markets and eco-
tinue to dampen cost pressures and with
nomic activity. The timing and pace of these
longer-term inflation expectations stable, the
purchases should depend on conditions in
Committee expects that inflation will remain
the markets for such securities and on a
subdued for some time.
broader assessment of private credit market
conditions. The Desk is expected to execute The Committee will maintain the target
purchases of about $175 billion in housing- range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
related agency debt and about $1.25 trillion percent and continues to anticipate that eco-
of agency MBS by the end of the first quarter nomic conditions, including low rates of re-
of 2010. The Desk is expected to gradually source utilization, subdued inflation trends,
slow the pace of these purchases as they near and stable inflation expectations, are likely to
completion. The Committee anticipates that warrant exceptionally low levels of the feder-
outright purchases of securities will cause the al funds rate for an extended period. To
size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to provide support to mortgage lending and
expand significantly in coming months. The housing markets and to improve overall
System Open Market Account Manager and conditions in private credit markets, the Fed-
the Secretary will keep the Committee in- eral Reserve is in the process of purchasing
formed of ongoing developments regarding $1.25 trillion of agency mortgage-backed se-
the System’s balance sheet that could affect curities and about $175 billion of agency
the attainment over time of the Committee’s debt. In order to promote a smooth transi-
objectives of maximum employment and tion in markets, the Committee is gradually
price stability.” slowing the pace of these purchases, and it
anticipates that these transactions will be ex-
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
ecuted by the end of the first quarter of
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.:
2010. The Committee will continue to eva-
“Information received since the Federal luate the timing and overall amounts of its
Open Market Committee met in November purchases of securities in light of the evolv-
suggests that economic activity has contin- ing economic outlook and conditions in fi-
ued to pick up and that the deterioration in nancial markets.
the labor market is abating. The housing

--- Page 11 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f D e c e m b e r 1 5 - 1 6 , 2 0 0 9 Page 11
In light of ongoing improvements in the expectations in recent years likely had damped some-
functioning of financial markets, the Com- what the response of actual inflation to the recent eco-
mittee and the Board of Governors antic- nomic downturn and to fluctuations in the prices of
ipate that most of the Federal Reserve’s spe- energy and other commodities. In discussing these
cial liquidity facilities will expire on February issues, participants noted that they bear in mind the
1, 2010, consistent with the Federal Re- shocks hitting the economy and regularly monitor more
serve’s announcement of June 25, 2009. than one measure of resource slack as they assess the
These facilities include the Asset-Backed outlook for economic activity and inflation. They also
Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual noted the importance of formulating monetary policy
Fund Liquidity Facility, the Commercial Pa- in ways that would work well across a range of possible
per Funding Facility, the Primary Dealer economic structures rather than relying on any one ana-
Credit Facility, and the Term Securities lytical framework. Finally, they underscored the impor-
Lending Facility. The Federal Reserve will tance of keeping longer-run inflation expectations firm-
also be working with its central bank coun- ly anchored to help achieve the Federal Reserve’s dual
terparties to close its temporary liquidity mandate for maximum employment and price stability.
swap arrangements by February 1. The Fed-
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
eral Reserve expects that amounts provided
would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, January 26-27,
under the Term Auction Facility will contin-
2010. The meeting adjourned at 1:00 p.m. on Decem-
ue to be scaled back in early 2010. The an-
ber 16, 2009.
ticipated expiration dates for the Term As-
set-Backed Securities Loan Facility remain Notation Votes
set at June 30, 2010, for loans backed by By notation vote completed on November 23, 2009,
new-issue commercial mortgage-backed se- the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of
curities and March 31, 2010, for loans the FOMC meeting held on November 3-4, 2009.
backed by all other types of collateral. The
By notation vote completed on November 24, 2009,
Federal Reserve is prepared to modify these
the Committee unanimously approved the following
plans if necessary to support financial stabili-
resolution:
ty and economic growth.”
“The Federal Open Market Committee au-
Voting for this action: Messrs. Bernanke and Dudley,
thorizes the Federal Reserve Bank of New
Ms. Duke, Messrs. Evans, Kohn, Lacker, Lockhart,
York to conduct reverse repo transactions
Tarullo, and Warsh, and Ms. Yellen.
involving U.S. Government securities, and
Voting against this action: None. securities that are direct obligations of, or
fully guaranteed as to principal and interest
Following the Committee’s policy decision, staff gave
by, any agency of the United States, for the
several presentations on the key determinants of infla-
purpose of helping to ensure the readiness of
tion dynamics. Theoretical and empirical research indi-
the Federal Reserve’s tools for absorbing
cates that inflation can respond to deviations of eco-
bank reserves. The reverse repo transactions
nomic activity from its longer-run sustainable path.
authorized in this resolution shall have terms
However, in some theoretical frameworks, the connec-
to maturity of 20 business days or less and
tion between resource slack and inflation depends on
the total amount of all transactions outstand-
the nature of the shock and its impact on marginal
ing at a given time shall be $5 billion or less.”
costs and markups. Moreover, estimates of the magni-
tude of slack and its effect on inflation are sensitive to
the details of the analytical framework and the statistic-
al methodology used in each study. While theory sug-
gests that the degree of slack prevailing in foreign _____________________________
economies could affect domestic inflation, empirical Brian F. Madigan
evidence on the importance of such an effect was Secretary
mixed. Evidence suggested that sizable shifts in the
longer-run inflation expectations of households and
firms had influenced the evolution of inflation over
previous decades; in contrast, the anchoring of inflation

# Tables

## Page_11_Table_1


| Voting for this action: Messrs. Bernanke and Dudley,   |
|--------------------------------------------------------|
| Ms. Duke, Messrs. Evans, Kohn, Lacker, Lockhart,       |
| Tarullo, and Warsh, and Ms. Yellen.                    |
| Voting against this action: None.                      |