# 20090318_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:35:54*
*Pages: 10, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Page 1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
March 17-18, 2009
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the the Staff Director for Management, Board of
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues- Governors
day, March 17, 2009, at 2:00 p.m. and continued on
Wednesday, March 18, 2009, at 9:00 a.m. Ms. Bailey and Mr. English, Deputy Directors, Di-
visions of Banking Supervision and Regulation
PRESENT: and Monetary Affairs, respectively, Board of
Mr. Bernanke, Chairman Governors
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman
Ms. Duke Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Mr. Evans Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Kohn
Mr. Lacker Messrs. Leahy, Nelson, Reifschneider, and Wasch-
Mr. Lockhart er,1 Associate Directors, Divisions of Interna-
Mr. Tarullo tional Finance, Monetary Affairs, Research and
Mr. Warsh Statistics, and Research and Statistics, respec-
Ms. Yellen tively, Board of Governors
Mr. Bullard, Ms. Cumming, Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Pia- Mr. Gagnon, Visiting Associate Director, Division
nalto, and Mr. Rosengren, Alternate Members of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
of the Federal Open Market Committee
Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research
Messrs. Fisher, Plosser, and Stern, Presidents of and Statistics, Board of Governors
the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Philadel-
phia, and Minneapolis, respectively Mr. Lewis, Economist, Division of Monetary Af-
fairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary Ms. Beattie,¹ Assistant to the Secretary, Office of
Mr. Luecke, Assistant Secretary the Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Sheets, Economist Mr. Williams, Records Management Analyst, Divi-
Mr. Stockton, Economist sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman, Mr. Sapenaro, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Sullivan, Weinberg, Wilcox, and Williams, As- Bank of St. Louis
sociate Economists
Messrs. Fuhrer and Rosenblum, Executive Vice
Ms. Mosser, Temporary Manager, System Open Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston
Market Account and Dallas, respectively
Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the Messrs. Hilton and Schweitzer, Senior Vice Presi-
Secretary, Board of Governors dents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York
and Cleveland, respectively
Mr. Frierson, Deputy Secretary, Office of the Sec-
retary, Board of Governors
1 Attended Tuesday’s session only.

--- Page 2 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
and households. Participants discussed the prospective
Messrs. Clark, Gavin, Klitgaard, and Yi, Vice Pres- further increase in the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet,
idents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City, with a focus on the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan
St. Louis, New York, and Philadelphia, respec- Facility (TALF) and open market purchases of longer-
tively term assets.
The launch of the TALF was announced on March 3.
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Re-
In the initial phase of the program, the Federal Reserve
serve Bank of Minneapolis
offered to provide up to $200 billion of three-year
loans, on a nonrecourse basis, against AAA-rated asset-
backed securities (ABS) backed by newly and recently
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
originated auto loans, credit card loans, student loans,
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
loans guaranteed by the Small Business Administration,
The Manager of the System Open Market Account
and, potentially, certain other closely related types of
reported on recent developments in domestic and for-
ABS. The Federal Reserve and the Treasury had pre-
eign financial markets. The Manager also reported on
viously announced their expectation that the program
System open market operations in Treasury securities
would be expanded to accept other types of ABS. The
and in agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securi-
demand for TALF funding appeared likely to be mod-
ties (MBS) during the period since the Committee’s
est initially, and some participants saw a risk that pri-
January 27-28 meeting. By unanimous vote, the Com-
vate firms might be reluctant to borrow from the
mittee ratified those transactions. There were no open
TALF out of concern about potential future changes in
market operations in foreign currencies for the Sys-
government policies that could affect TALF borrowers.
tem’s account during the period since the Committee’s
However, other participants anticipated that TALF
January 27-28 meeting.
loans would increase over time as financial market in-
Staff reported on recent developments in System li- stitutions became more familiar with the program.
quidity programs and on changes in the System’s bal- Most participants supported the expansion of the lend-
ance sheet. As of March 12, the System’s total assets ing capacity of the TALF, subject to receiving addition-
and liabilities were about $2 trillion, close to the level of al capital from the Treasury, and the inclusion of addi-
that just before the January 27-28 meeting. Holdings tional categories of recently issued, highly rated ABS as
of agency debt and agency MBS had increased, while acceptable collateral. However, some participants ex-
foreign central bank drawings on reciprocal currency pressed concern about the risks that might arise from
arrangements had declined. Credit extended by the the possible extension of the TALF to include older
Commercial Paper Funding Facility also had declined, and lower-quality assets, noting, in particular, the great-
as 90-day paper purchased in the early weeks of the er uncertainty over the value of such assets.
program matured and a large portion was not renewed
The Federal Reserve’s programs to buy direct debt ob-
through the facility. Primary credit extended by the
ligations of the federal housing agencies and agency-
Federal Reserve was about unchanged, and credit out-
guaranteed MBS were on track to reach their initial tar-
standing under the Term Auction Facility increased
gets of $100 billion and $500 billion, respectively, by
somewhat over the period as the February auctions
the end of June. Participants agreed that the asset pur-
experienced higher demand than previous auctions. In
chase programs were helping to reduce mortgage inter-
contrast, credit extended under the Primary Dealer
est rates and improve market functioning, thereby pro-
Credit Facility declined somewhat over the intermeet-
viding support to economic activity. Some participants
ing period, and credit extended under the Asset-Backed
stated a preference for communicating the Committee’s
Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquid-
intention regarding such purchases in terms of the
ity Facility edged down.
growth rate of Federal Reserve holdings rather than a
Most meeting participants interpreted the evidence as dollar target for total purchases. However, others
indicating that credit markets still were not working noted that the pace of MBS issuance was likely to be
well, and that the Federal Reserve’s lending programs, especially brisk over the next few months, in part be-
asset purchases, and currency swaps were providing cause of the Administration’s new Making Home Af-
much-needed support to economic activity by reducing fordable program, and observed that it could be advan-
dislocations in financial markets, lowering the cost of tageous to be able to front-load purchases to accom-
credit, and facilitating the flow of credit to businesses modate the pattern of mortgage refinancing. Partici-

--- Page 3 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f M a r c h 1 7 - 1 8 , 2 0 0 9 Page 3
pants also discussed the relative merits of increasing the (ECB), the Bank of Japan, and the Swiss Na-
Federal Reserve’s purchases of agency MBS versus in- tional Bank to support the provision of liquidi-
itiating purchases of longer-term Treasury securities. ty in British pounds, euros, Japanese yen, and
Some participants remarked that experience suggested Swiss francs. The swap arrangements with
that purchases of Treasury securities would have effects each foreign central bank shall be subject to
across a variety of long-term debt markets and should the following limits: an aggregate amount of
ease financial conditions generally while minimizing the up to £30 billion with the Bank of England; an
Federal Reserve’s influence on the allocation of credit. aggregate amount of up to €80 billion with the
However, purchases of agency securities could have a ECB; an aggregate amount of up to ¥10 tril-
more direct effect on mortgage rates, thus providing lion with the Bank of Japan; and an aggregate
greater benefits to the housing sector, and on private amount of up to SwF 40 billion with the Swiss
borrowing rates more generally. Also, some partici- National Bank. These arrangements shall ter-
pants were concerned that Federal Reserve purchases minate no later than October 30, 2009, unless
of longer-term Treasury securities might be seen as an extended by mutual agreement of the Commit-
indication that the Federal Reserve was responding to a tee and the respective foreign central banks.
fiscal objective rather than its statutory mandate, thus The Committee also authorizes the Federal Re-
reducing the Federal Reserve’s credibility regarding serve Bank of New York to provide the for-
long-run price stability. Most participants, however, eign currencies obtained under the arrange-
saw this risk as low so long as the Federal Reserve was ments to U.S. financial institutions by means of
clear about the importance of its long-term price stabil- swap transactions to assist such institutions in
ity objective and demonstrated a commitment to take meeting short-term liquidity needs in their for-
the necessary steps in the future to achieve its objec- eign operations. Requests for drawings on the
tives. central bank swap lines and distribution of the
foreign currency proceeds to U.S. financial in-
In light of the economic and financial conditions, meet-
stitutions shall be initiated by the appropriate
ing participants viewed the expansion of the Federal
Reserve Bank and approved by the Foreign
Reserve’s balance sheet that might be associated with
Currency Subcommittee.”
these and other programs as appropriate in order to
foster the dual objectives of maximum employment Staff Review of the Economic and Financial Situa-
and price stability. It was noted that the Treasury and tion
the Federal Reserve will seek legislation to give the The information reviewed at the March 17-18 meeting
Federal Reserve tools in addition to interest on reserves indicated that economic activity had fallen sharply in
to manage the federal funds rate while providing the recent months. The contraction was reflected in wide-
funding necessary for the TALF and other key credit- spread declines in payroll employment and industrial
easing programs. production. Consumer spending appeared to remain at
a low level after changing little, on balance, in recent
The Committee also took up a proposal to augment the
months. The housing market weakened further, and
existing network of central bank liquidity swap lines by
nonresidential construction fell. Business spending on
adding several temporary swap lines that could provide
equipment and software continued to fall across a
foreign currency liquidity to U.S. institutions, analogous
broad range of categories. Despite the cutbacks in
to the arrangements that currently provide U.S. dollar
production, inventory overhangs appeared to worsen in
liquidity abroad. There was no evidence that these in-
a number of areas. Both headline and core consumer
stitutions were encountering difficulty in meeting for-
prices edged up in January and February.
eign currency obligations at this time, but these facili-
ties would be available should pressures develop in the Labor market conditions continued to deteriorate. Pri-
future. The Committee unanimously approved the vate payroll employment dropped considerably over
following resolution: the three months ending in February. Employment
losses remained widespread across industries, with the
“The Federal Open Market Committee autho-
notable exception of health care. Meanwhile, the aver-
rizes the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to
age workweek of production and nonsupervisory
enter into additional temporary reciprocal cur-
workers on private payrolls continued to be low in Feb-
rency arrangements (swap lines) with the Bank
ruary, and the number of aggregate hours worked for
of England, the European Central Bank
this group was markedly below the fourth-quarter aver-

--- Page 4 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
age. The civilian unemployment rate climbed ½ per- mained very weak, however. Although the stock of
centage point in February, to 8.1 percent. The labor unsold new single-family homes fell in January to its
force participation rate declined in January and Febru- lowest level since 2003, inventories continued to move
ary, on balance, likely in response to weakened labor up relative to the slow pace of sales. Sales of existing
demand. The four-week moving average of initial single-family homes fell in January, reversing the uptick
claims for unemployment insurance continued to move seen in December. Over the previous 12 months, the
up through early March, and the level of insured un- pace of existing home sales declined much less than
employed rose further. that of new home sales, reflecting in part increases in
foreclosure-related and other distressed sales. The
Industrial production fell in January and February, with
weakness in home sales persisted despite historically
cutbacks again widespread, and capacity utilization in
low mortgage rates for borrowers eligible for conform-
manufacturing declined to a very low level. Although
ing loans. After having fallen significantly late last year,
production of light motor vehicles turned up in Febru-
rates for conforming 30-year fixed-rate mortgages fluc-
ary, it remained well below the pace of the fourth quar-
tuated in a relatively narrow range during the intermeet-
ter as manufacturers responded to the significant dete-
ing period. In contrast, the market for nonconforming
rioration in demand over the past few months. The
loans remained severely impaired. House prices con-
output of high-tech products declined as production of
tinued to decline.
computers and semiconductors extended the sharp
declines that began in the fourth quarter of 2008. The Business spending on transportation equipment con-
production of other consumer durables and business tinued to fall from already low levels, and demand both
equipment weakened further, and broad indicators of for high-tech equipment and software and for equip-
near-term manufacturing activity suggested that factory ment other than high-tech and transportation dropped
output would continue to contract over the next few sharply in the fourth quarter. In January, nominal
months. shipments of nondefense capital goods excluding air-
craft declined, and new orders fell significantly further.
The available data suggested that real consumer spend-
The fundamental determinants of equipment and soft-
ing held steady, on balance, in the first two months of
ware spending worsened appreciably: Business output
this year after having fallen sharply over the second half
dropped, and rising corporate bond yields boosted the
of last year. Real spending on goods excluding motor
user cost of capital in the fourth quarter. After holding
vehicles was estimated to have edged up, on balance, in
up surprisingly well through most of last year, outlays
January and February. In contrast, real outlays on mo-
on nonresidential structures began to show declines
tor vehicles contracted further in February after a de-
consistent with the weak fundamentals for this sector.
cline in January. The financial strain on households
In real terms, investment declined for most types of
intensified over the previous several months; by the
buildings over the previous few months. Census data
end of the fourth quarter, household net worth for the
on book-value inventory investment for January sug-
first time since 1995 had fallen to less than five times
gested that firms had further pared their stocks; how-
disposable income, and substantial declines in equity
ever, sales continued to fall more quickly than invento-
and house prices continued early this year. Consumer
ries, apparently exacerbating the overhangs that devel-
sentiment declined further in February as households
oped in the second half of 2008.
voiced greater concerns about income and job pros-
pects. The Reuters/University of Michigan index in The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in De-
early March stood only slightly above its 29-year low cember and January, as a steep fall in imports more
reached in November, and the Conference Board in- than offset a decline in exports. All major categories of
dex, which includes questions about employment con- exports decreased, especially sales of industrial supplies,
ditions, fell in February to a new low. machinery, and automotive products. All major cate-
gories of imports decreased as well, with large declines
Housing activity continued to be subdued. Single-
in imports of oil, automotive products, and industrial
family starts ticked up in February, and adjusted permit
supplies. The drop in the value of oil imports reflected
issuance in this sector moved up to a level slightly
a lower price. Imports of automotive products de-
above starts. Multifamily starts jumped in February
clined as automakers made significant production cut-
from the very low level in January, and the level of mul-
backs throughout North America.
tifamily starts was close to where it had been at the end
of the third quarter of 2008. Housing demand re-

--- Page 5 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f M a r c h 1 7 - 1 8 , 2 0 0 9 Page 5
Output in the advanced foreign economies contracted riod, and inflation compensation at shorter horizons
in the fourth quarter, with large reductions in real gross was little changed. Poor liquidity in the market for
domestic product (GDP) in all the major economies Treasury inflation-protected securities continued to
and a double-digit rate of decline in Japan. Trade and make these readings difficult to interpret.
investment in those countries were particularly weak.
Conditions in short-term funding markets were mixed
Indicators of economic activity, especially industrial
over the intermeeting period. In unsecured interbank
production, suggested that the pace of contraction ac-
funding markets, spreads of dollar London interbank
celerated late in the fourth quarter and into the first
offered rates (Libor) over comparable-maturity over-
quarter. Economic activity in emerging market econ-
night index swap rates trended higher, on net, especially
omies also weakened significantly in the fourth quarter.
at longer maturities, and forward spreads increased,
Exports, industrial production, and confidence indica-
evidently on renewed concerns about the financial
tors dropped notably in both Latin America and emerg-
condition of some large banks. Conditions in the
ing Asia. Incoming data for January and February sug-
commercial paper (CP) market continued to improve,
gested a further significant decline in the first quarter.
on balance, over the intermeeting period. Spreads on
In the United States, overall consumer prices increased 30-day A2/P2-rated CP trended down further, and
in January and February, led by an increase in energy those on AA-rated asset-backed commercial paper re-
prices, after posting sizable declines late last year. Ex- mained at the lower end of the range recorded over the
cluding the categories of food and energy, consumer past year. Conditions in repurchase agreement markets
prices edged higher in January and February after three for most collateral types improved over the period, but
months of no change. The producer price index for volumes remained low.
core intermediate materials dropped for a fifth month
Trading conditions in the secondary market for nomin-
in February, reflecting, in part, weaker global demand
al Treasury coupon securities showed some limited
and steep declines in the prices of a wide variety of
signs of improvement. Average bid-asked spreads for
energy-intensive goods, such as chemicals and plastics.
on-the-run nominal Treasury notes were relatively sta-
Low readings on overall and core consumer price infla-
ble near their pre-crisis levels. Daily trading volumes
tion in recent months, as well as the weakened eco-
for on-the-run securities, however, inched lower, and
nomic outlook, kept near-term inflation expectations
spreads between the yields of on- and off-the-run 10-
reported in surveys well below their high levels in mid-
year Treasury notes remained very high.
2008. In contrast, measures of longer-term expecta-
tions remained close to their averages over the past Broad equity price indexes dropped significantly, on
couple of years. Hourly earnings continued to increase balance, over the intermeeting period amid continued
at a moderate rate in February. concerns about the health of the financial sector, un-
certainty regarding the efficacy of government support
The Federal Open Market Committee’s decision at the
to the sector, and a further weakening of the economic
January meeting to leave the target range for the federal
outlook. Bank stock prices were particularly hard hit,
funds rate unchanged was widely anticipated by inves-
and the credit default swap (CDS) spreads of many
tors and had little impact on short-term money mar-
banks rose above the peaks recorded last fall on anxie-
kets. Over the intermeeting period, the path for the
ties about the financial conditions of the largest bank-
federal funds rate implied by futures rates shifted down
ing firms. Stock prices of insurance companies
somewhat, on net, mostly on incoming news about the
dropped sharply over the period, reflecting concerns
financial sector and the economic outlook. Yields on
about the adequacy of their capital positions. On
nominal Treasury coupon securities increased over the
March 2, American International Group, Inc. (AIG),
period, reportedly because market participants had as-
reported losses of more than $60 billion for the fourth
signed some probability to the possibility that the Fed-
quarter of last year, and the Treasury and the Federal
eral Reserve would establish a purchase program for
Reserve announced a restructuring of the government
longer-term Treasury securities that was not, in fact,
assistance to AIG to enhance the company’s capital
forthcoming; yields were also reported to have re-
and liquidity to facilitate the orderly completion of its
sponded to concerns over the federal deficit and the
global divestiture program.
growing supply of Treasury securities. Yields on long-
er-term inflation-indexed Treasury securities increased Measures of liquidity in the secondary market for spe-
more than those on their nominal counterparts, leaving culative-grade corporate bonds worsened somewhat
longer-term inflation compensation lower over the pe- over the period but remained significantly better than

--- Page 6 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
in the fall of 2008. Spreads of yields on both BBB- ments rose modestly overall from the November sur-
rated and speculative-grade bonds relative to those on vey. Commercial real estate loans outstanding also de-
comparable-maturity Treasury securities were little clined over the first part of 2009. In contrast, consum-
changed on net. The investment- and speculative- er loans on banks’ books jumped over the first two
grade CDS indexes widened significantly, on net, over months of the year because of sizable increases at a few
the intermeeting period. Gross bond issuance by non- banks that purchased loans from their affiliated finance
financial firms was very strong in January and February, companies. In addition, some banks brought consumer
as investment-grade issuance more than doubled from loans that had previously been securitized back onto
its already solid pace in the fourth quarter; speculative- their books. After 12 consecutive months of contrac-
grade issuance, however, remained sluggish. Trading tion, residential mortgage loans on banks’ books in-
conditions in the leveraged syndicated loan market im- creased in February, likely a result of the pickup in refi-
proved slightly, but issuance continued to be very weak. nancing activity. In contrast, the rise in home equity
The market for commercial mortgage-backed securities loans slowed noticeably in January and February.
(CMBS) also remained under heavy stress. Indexes of
Among the advanced foreign economies, headline equi-
CDS spreads on AAA-rated CMBS widened to record
ty price indexes generally fell significantly over the pe-
levels, as Moody’s downgraded a large portion of the
riod, with the sharpest drops in the banking sector. In
2006 and 2007 vintages after a reevaluation of its rating
particular, European bank shares fell steeply as earnings
criteria.
reports for the fourth quarter came in weaker than ex-
The debt of the domestic private nonfinancial sector, pected and fears about the exposure of many western
which was about unchanged in the fourth quarter of European banks to emerging Europe increased. The
last year, was estimated to have remained about flat in major currencies index of the dollar rose, on net, over
the first quarter. Household debt appeared to have the intermeeting period; foremost among the contribu-
contracted in the first quarter for the second quarter in tors to the rise was a significant appreciation of the
a row, primarily as a result of declines in both consum- dollar against the yen. Financial conditions in emerging
er and home mortgage debt. Declines in consumer and markets also worsened, with their exchange rates and
mortgage debt stemmed, in turn, from very weak equity prices generally falling and CDS premiums rising
household spending, the continued drop in house pric- a bit on balance.
es, and tighter terms and standards for loans. Business
Several foreign governments and central banks took
debt was projected to expand at a moderate pace in the
further steps to support their financial markets and
first quarter, largely because of a burst of corporate
economies. The Bank of England announced its inten-
bond issuance. Reflecting heavy borrowing by the
tion to purchase substantial quantities of government
Treasury, total debt of the domestic nonfinancial sector
and corporate bonds through its Asset Purchase Facili-
was projected to have continued to expand in the first
ty, after which yields on long-term British gilts fell sig-
quarter, but at a pace below that recorded in the fourth
nificantly. In addition, the British government
quarter of last year.
launched its Asset Protection Scheme, which insured
The rise in M2 slowed in February from the rapid pace assets placed in the scheme by the Royal Bank of Scot-
recorded over the previous few months. Liquid depo- land and Lloyds Bank. The Bank of Japan stated that it
sits, while decelerating, continued to expand briskly. would resume purchases of equities held on banks’ bal-
Savings deposits increased while demand deposits de- ance sheets, announced plans to purchase corporate
creased. Retail money funds fell in February, reflecting bonds, and began its previously announced purchases
sizable outflows from Treasury-only funds, which gen- of commercial paper. The Swiss National Bank an-
erally provided low yields. Small time deposits also nounced that it would purchase both domestic corpo-
contracted, as the institutions that had been bidding rate debt and foreign currency to increase liquidity.
aggressively for these retail funds stopped doing so.
Staff Economic Outlook
The expansion in currency remained robust.
In the forecast prepared for the meeting, the staff re-
Bank credit continued to decline in January and Febru- vised down its outlook for economic activity. The de-
ary, and commercial and industrial (C&I) loans de- terioration in labor market conditions was rapid in re-
creased over these months. The February Survey of cent months, with steep job losses across nearly all sec-
Terms of Business Lending indicated that C&I loan tors. Industrial production continued to contract ra-
rate spreads over comparable-maturity market instru- pidly as firms responded to the falloff in demand and

--- Page 7 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f M a r c h 1 7 - 1 8 , 2 0 0 9 Page 7
the buildup of some inventory overhangs. The incom- remained fragile and unsettled, with pressures on finan-
ing data on business spending suggested that business cial institutions generally intensifying this year. Overall,
investment in equipment and structures continued to participants expressed concern about downside risks to
decline. Single-family housing starts had fallen to a an outlook for activity that was already weak. With
post–World War II low in January, and demand for regard to the outlook for inflation, all participants
new homes remained weak. Both exports and imports agreed that inflation pressures were likely to remain
retreated significantly in the fourth quarter of last year subdued, and several expressed the view that inflation
and appeared headed for comparable declines this was likely to persist below desirable levels.
quarter. Consumer outlays showed some signs of sta-
District business contacts indicated that production
bilizing at a low level, with real outlays for goods out-
and sales were declining steeply. Some industries that
side of motor vehicles recording gains in January and
previously were less affected, such as agriculture and
February. Financial conditions overall were even less
energy, had begun to suffer the effects of the slow-
supportive of economic activity, with broad equity in-
down. Businesses reported that bank financing was
dexes down significantly amid continued concerns
becoming more expensive and more difficult to obtain.
about the health of the financial sector, the dollar
Expenditures were being cut substantially for a wide
stronger, and long-term interest rates higher. The
range of capital equipment, and spending on nonresi-
staff’s projections for real GDP in the second half of
dential structures had recently turned down. Inventory
2009 and in 2010 were revised down, with real GDP
liquidation was continuing, but inventory-sales ratios
expected to flatten out gradually over the second half
remained elevated as sales slowed. Against this back-
of this year and then to expand slowly next year as the
drop, participants anticipated further employment cut-
stresses in financial markets ease, the effects of fiscal
backs over coming months, though perhaps at a gradu-
stimulus take hold, inventory adjustments are worked
ally diminishing rate.
through, and the correction in housing activity comes
to an end. The weaker trajectory of real output re- Several participants said that the degree and pervasive-
sulted in the projected path of the unemployment rate ness of the decline in foreign economic activity was one
rising more steeply into early next year before flattening of the most notable developments since the January
out at a high level over the rest of the year. The staff meeting. In light of this development, it was widely
forecast for overall and core personal consumption agreed that exports were not likely to be a source of
expenditures (PCE) inflation over the next two years support for U.S. economic activity in the near term.
was revised down slightly. Both core and overall PCE
Participants did not interpret the uptick in housing
price inflation were expected to be damped by low
starts in February as the beginning of a new trend, but
rates of resource utilization, falling import prices, and
some noted that there was only limited scope for hous-
easing cost pressures as a result of the sharp net de-
ing activity to fall further. Nonetheless, large invento-
clines in oil and other raw materials prices since last
ries of unsold homes relative to sales and the prospect
summer.
of a continued high level of distressed sales would con-
Meeting Participants’ Views and Committee Poli- tinue to hold down residential investment in the near
cy Action term. Several participants noted the tentative signs of
In the discussion of the economic situation and out- stabilization in consumer spending in January and Feb-
look, nearly all meeting participants said that conditions ruary. However, others suggested that strains on
had deteriorated relative to their expectations at the household balance sheets from falling equity and house
time of the January meeting. The slowdown was wide- prices, reduced credit availability, and the fear of un-
spread across sectors. Large declines in equity prices, a employment could well lead to further increases in the
further drop in house prices, and mounting job losses saving rate that would damp consumption growth in
threatened to further depress consumer spending, de- the near term.
spite some firming in the recent retail sales data and
Overall, most participants viewed downside risks as
forthcoming tax reductions. Business capital spending
predominating in the near term, mainly owing to poten-
was weakening in an environment of uncertainty and
tial adverse feedback effects as reduced employment
low business confidence. Of particular note was the
and production weighed on consumer spending and
apparent sharp fall in foreign economic activity, which
investment, and as the weakening economy boosted the
was having a negative effect on U.S. exports. Credit
prospective losses of financial institutions, leading to a
conditions remained very tight, and financial markets
further tightening of credit conditions.

--- Page 8 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Looking beyond the very near term, a number of mar- government might take and future regulations it might
ket forces and policies now in place were seen as even- impose were making it more difficult to plan and were
tually leading to economic recovery. Notably, the low discouraging participation in government efforts to
level of mortgage interest rates, reduced house prices, stabilize the financial system. Participants agreed that a
and the Administration’s new programs to encourage credible and widely understood program to deal with
mortgage refinancing and mitigate foreclosures ulti- the troubles of the banking system could help restore
mately could bring about a lower cost of homeowner- business and consumer confidence. Many viewed the
ship, a sustained increase in home sales, and a stabiliza- strengthening of the banking system as essential for a
tion of house prices. The household saving rate, which sustained and robust recovery.
had already risen considerably, would eventually level
In the discussion of monetary policy for the intermeet-
out and cease to hold back consumption growth.
ing period, Committee members agreed that substantial
Business inventories would come into line with even a
additional purchases of longer-term assets eligible for
low level of sales, and the pressure on production from
open market operations would be appropriate. Such
inventory drawdowns would diminish. Fiscal and
purchases would provide further monetary stimulus to
monetary policies were likely to contribute significantly
help address the very weak economic outlook and re-
to aggregate demand in coming quarters. Participants
duce the risk that inflation could persist for a time be-
expressed a variety of views about the strength and
low rates that best foster longer-term economic growth
timing of the recovery, however. Some believed that
and price stability. One member preferred to focus
the natural resilience of market forces would become
additional purchases on longer-term Treasury securi-
evident later this year. Others, who saw recovery as
ties, whereas another member preferred to focus on
delayed and potentially weak, were concerned about a
agency MBS. However, both could support expanded
possible further rise in the saving rate and a very slow
purchases across a range of assets, and several mem-
improvement in financial conditions. Some partici-
bers noted that working across a range of assets and
pants also cautioned that, because of the poor func-
instruments was appropriate when the effects of any
tioning of the financial system, capital and labor were
one tactic were uncertain. Members agreed that the
not being allocated to their most productive uses, and
monetary base was likely to grow significantly as a con-
this failure threatened to damp the recovery and reduce
sequence of additional asset purchases; one, in particu-
the potential growth of the economy over the medium
lar, stressed that sustained increases in the monetary
term.
base were important to ensure that policy was consis-
Participants saw little chance of a pickup in inflation tently expansionary. Members expressed a range of
over the near term, as rising unemployment and falling views as to the preferred size of the increase in pur-
capacity utilization were holding down wages and pric- chases. Several members felt that the significant dete-
es and inflation expectations appeared subdued. Sever- rioration in the economic outlook merited a very sub-
al expressed concern that inflation was likely to persist stantial increase in purchases of longer-term assets. In
below desired levels, with a few pointing to the risk of contrast, the potential for a large increase over time in
deflation. Even without a continuation of outright the size of the balance sheet from the TALF program
price declines, falling expectations of inflation would was seen as supporting a more modest, though still
raise the real rate of interest and thus increase the bur- substantial, increase in asset purchases. Ultimately,
den of debt and further restrain the economy. members agreed to undertake additional purchases of
agency MBS of up to $750 billion and of agency debt
Some indicators, including share prices and CDS
of up to $100 billion, and they also agreed to purchase
spreads of financial institutions, suggested a worsening
up to $300 billion of longer-term Treasury securities.
of financial market strains since January. However, for
The Committee believed that purchases of these
the most part, participants viewed conditions in finan-
amounts would help to promote a return to economic
cial markets as little changed but remaining extraordi-
growth and price stability. The period for conducting
narily stressed. The large volume of issuance of in-
the agency debt and MBS purchases was extended from
vestment-grade corporate bonds in recent weeks was a
the next three months to the next nine months; mem-
notable bright spot. Participants shared comments
bers agreed to allow the Desk flexibility within this ho-
received from financial industry contacts on their expe-
rizon to respond to market conditions. Treasury pur-
riences with and concerns about recent government
chases were to be conducted over the next six months.
programs to stabilize the financial system. These con-
Members also noted the recent launch of the TALF,
tacts feared that uncertainties about future actions the

--- Page 9 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f M a r c h 1 7 - 1 8 , 2 0 0 9 Page 9
and they agreed to include in the Committee’s state- objectives of maximum employment and price
ment an indication that the range of assets accepted as stability.”
eligible collateral for the TALF was likely to be ex-
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
panded. Committee members decided to keep the tar-
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.:
get range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent
and to communicate to the public the Committee’s “Information received since the Federal Open
view that the federal funds rate was likely to remain Market Committee met in January indicates
exceptionally low for an extended period. that the economy continues to contract. Job
losses, declining equity and housing wealth,
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
and tight credit conditions have weighed on
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
consumer sentiment and spending. Weaker
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
sales prospects and difficulties in obtaining
ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance
credit have led businesses to cut back on in-
with the following domestic policy directive:
ventories and fixed investment. U.S. exports
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks have slumped as a number of major trading
monetary and financial conditions that will partners have also fallen into recession. Al-
foster price stability and promote sustainable though the near-term economic outlook is
growth in output. To further its long-run ob- weak, the Committee anticipates that policy
jectives, the Committee seeks conditions in actions to stabilize financial markets and insti-
reserve markets consistent with federal funds tutions, together with fiscal and monetary
trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The stimulus, will contribute to a gradual resump-
Committee directs the Desk to purchase GSE tion of sustainable economic growth.
debt, GSE-guaranteed MBS, and longer-term
In light of increasing economic slack here and
Treasury securities during the intermeeting
abroad, the Committee expects that inflation
period with the aim of providing support to
will remain subdued. Moreover, the Commit-
private credit markets and economic activity.
tee sees some risk that inflation could persist
The timing and pace of these purchases
for a time below rates that best foster eco-
should depend on conditions in the markets
nomic growth and price stability in the longer
for such securities and on a broader assess-
term.
ment of private credit market conditions. The
Committee anticipates that the combination In these circumstances, the Federal Reserve
of outright purchases and various liquidity fa- will employ all available tools to promote
cilities outstanding will cause the size of the economic recovery and to preserve price sta-
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to expand bility. The Committee will maintain the target
significantly in coming months. The Desk is range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ per-
expected to purchase up to $200 billion in cent and anticipates that economic conditions
housing-related GSE debt by the end of this are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels
year. The Desk is expected to purchase at of the federal funds rate for an extended pe-
least $500 billion in GSE-guaranteed MBS by riod. To provide greater support to mortgage
the end of the second quarter of this year and lending and housing markets, the Committee
is expected to purchase up to $1.25 trillion of decided today to increase the size of the Fed-
these securities by the end of this year. The eral Reserve’s balance sheet further by pur-
Committee also directs the Desk to purchase chasing up to an additional $750 billion of
longer-term Treasury securities during the in- agency mortgage-backed securities, bringing
termeeting period. Over the next six months, its total purchases of these securities to up to
the Desk is expected to purchase up to $300 $1.25 trillion this year, and to increase its pur-
billion of longer-term Treasury securities. chases of agency debt this year by up to
The System Open Market Account Manager $100 billion to a total of up to $200 billion.
and the Secretary will keep the Committee in- Moreover, to help improve conditions in pri-
formed of ongoing developments regarding vate credit markets, the Committee decided to
the System’s balance sheet that could affect purchase up to $300 billion of longer-term
the attainment over time of the Committee’s Treasury securities over the next six months.

--- Page 10 ---

Page 10 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
The Federal Reserve has launched the Term ronment, it was anticipated that such an expansion
Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility to facili- would provide additional assistance to financial markets
tate the extension of credit to households and and institutions in meeting the credit needs of house-
small businesses and anticipates that the range holds and businesses and thus would support overall
of eligible collateral for this facility is likely to economic activity. While several participants expressed
be expanded to include other financial assets. some concern that the expansion of the TALF pro-
The Committee will continue to carefully gram could increase the Federal Reserve’s exposure to
monitor the size and composition of the Fed- credit risk, the program’s requirements for highly rated
eral Reserve's balance sheet in light of evolv- collateral that would exceed the value of the related
ing financial and economic developments.” loans, in combination with the added TARP funds as a
backstop against losses, were generally seen as provid-
Voting for this action: Messrs. Bernanke and Dudley,
ing the Federal Reserve with adequate protection. Par-
Ms. Duke, Messrs. Evans, Kohn, Lacker, Lockhart,
ticipants also discussed the implications of the ex-
Tarullo, and Warsh, and Ms. Yellen.
panded TALF program for the Federal Reserve’s bal-
Voting against this action: None. ance sheet over time. Participants agreed it would be
important to work with the Treasury to obtain tools to
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
ensure that any reserves added to the banking system
would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, April 28-29,
through this program could be removed at the appro-
2009. The meeting adjourned at 1:35 p.m. on March
priate time.
18, 2009.
Notation Vote
Conference Call
By notation vote completed on February 17, 2009, the
On February 7, 2009, the Committee met by confe-
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
rence call in a joint session with the Board of Gover-
FOMC meeting held on January 27-28, 2009.
nors to discuss the potential role of the Federal Reserve
in the Treasury’s forthcoming financial stabilization
plan. After hearing an overview of the version of the
plan envisioned at the time of the meeting, meeting
participants discussed its principal elements and shared
a range of perspectives on its implications for financial
markets and institutions. The Federal Reserve’s prima-
_____________________________
ry direct role in the plan would be through an expan-
Brian F. Madigan
sion of the previously announced TALF, which would
Secretary
be supported by additional funds from the Troubled
Asset Relief Program (TARP). In the current envi-

# Tables

## Page_10_Table_1


| Voting for this action: Messrs. Bernanke and Dudley,   |
|--------------------------------------------------------|
| Ms. Duke, Messrs. Evans, Kohn, Lacker, Lockhart,       |
| Tarullo, and Warsh, and Ms. Yellen.                    |
| Voting against this action: None.                      |