# 20090128_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:36:20*
*Pages: 25, Tables: 4*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Page 1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
January 27-28, 2009
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Staff Director for Management, Board of
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues- Governors
day, January 27, 2009, at 1:30 p.m. and continued on
Wednesday, January 28, 2009, at 9:00 a.m. Ms. Bailey, Deputy Director, Division of Banking
Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gover-
PRESENT: nors
Mr. Bernanke, Chairman
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman Mr. English, Deputy Director, Division of Mone-
Ms. Duke tary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Evans
Mr. Kohn Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Mr. Lacker Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Lockhart
Mr. Warsh Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher, Associate Di-
Ms. Yellen rectors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Mr. Bullard, Ms. Cumming, Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Pi-
analto, and Mr. Rosengren, Alternate Members Mr. Levin, Associate Director, Division of Mone-
of the Federal Open Market Committee tary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Fisher, Plosser, and Stern, Presidents of Ms. Shanks,3 Associate Secretary, Office of the
the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Philadel- Secretary, Board of Governors
phia, and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Reeve, Deputy Associate Director, Division of
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist International Finance, Board of Governors
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Luecke, Assistant Secretary Mr. Sichel, Deputy Associate Director, Division of
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel Mr. Meyer, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary
Mr. Ashton,1 Assistant General Counsel Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Sheets, Economist
Mr. Stockton, Economist Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman,
Tracy, and Wilcox, Associate Economists Ms. Dynan, Assistant Director, Division of Re-
search and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Mosser, Temporary Manager, System Open
Market Account Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Johnson,2 Secretary of the Board, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors
1 Attended Wednesday’s session only.
Mr. Frierson,2 Deputy Secretary, Office of the Sec- 2 Attended portion of the meeting that was a joint
retary, Board of Governors session of the Board and the FOMC.
3 Attended portion of the meeting on Tuesday that
was a joint session of the Board and the FOMC.

--- Page 2 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Ms. Kusko, Senior Economist, Division of Re- Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
search and Statistics, Board of Governors York, as alternate.
Mr. Gust, Senior Economist, Division of Interna- Jeffrey M. Lacker, President of the Federal Reserve
tional Finance, Board of Governors Bank of Richmond, with Eric C. Rosengren, President
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, as alternate.
Messrs. Driscoll and King, Economists, Division
of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Charles L. Evans, President of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Chicago, with Sandra Pianalto, President of the
Ms. Beattie,2 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as alternate.
the Secretary, Board of Governors
Dennis P. Lockhart, President of the Federal Reserve
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi- Bank of Atlanta, with James B. Bullard, President of
sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, as alternate.
Ms. Green, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Janet L. Yellen, President of the Federal Reserve Bank
Bank of Richmond of San Francisco, with Thomas M. Hoenig, President
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, as alter-
Messrs. Fuhrer, Rosenblum, and Sniderman, Ex- nate.
ecutive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
of Boston, Dallas, and Cleveland, respectively Annual Organizational Matters
By unanimous vote, the following officers of the Fed-
Messrs. Hilton and Krane, Mses. Mester and eral Open Market Committee were selected to serve
Perelmuter, Messrs. Rasche, Rudebusch, and until the selection of their successors at the first regu-
Sellon, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve larly scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2010:
Banks of New York, Chicago, Philadelphia,
New York, St. Louis, San Francisco, and Kan- Ben S. Bernanke Chairman
sas City, respectively William C. Dudley Vice Chairman
Brian F. Madigan Secretary and Economist
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Re- Deborah J. Danker Deputy Secretary
serve Bank of Minneapolis Matthew M. Luecke Assistant Secretary
David W. Skidmore Assistant Secretary
Mr. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Michelle A. Smith Assistant Secretary
Bank of Richmond Scott G. Alvarez General Counsel
Thomas C. Baxter, Jr. Deputy General Counsel
2 Attended portion of the meeting that was a joint Richard M. Ashton Assistant General
session of the Board and the FOMC. Counsel
D. Nathan Sheets Economist
David J. Stockton Economist
In the agenda for this meeting, it was reported that ad-
vices of the election of the following members and al- David E. Altig
ternate members of the Federal Open Market Commit- James A. Clouse
tee for a term beginning January 27, 2009, had been Thomas A. Connors
received and that these individuals had executed their Steven B. Kamin
oaths of office. Lawrence Slifman
Daniel G. Sullivan
The elected members and alternate members were as Joseph S. Tracy
follows: John A. Weinberg
David W. Wilcox
William C. Dudley, President of the Federal Reserve John C. Williams Associate Economists
Bank of New York, with Christine M. Cumming, First

--- Page 3 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J a n u a r y 2 7 - 2 8 , 2 0 0 9 Page 3
By unanimous vote, the Committee adopted several Mexican pesos
minor amendments to its Program for Security of New Zealand dollars
FOMC Information. Norwegian kroner
Pounds sterling
By unanimous vote, the Federal Reserve Bank of New
Singapore dollars
York was selected to execute transactions for the Sys-
Swedish kronor
tem Open Market Account.
Swiss francs
Secretary’s note: The Chairman reported that
prior to the meeting he had used his authority B. To hold balances of, and to have outstanding
under the Committee’s Rules of Organization forward contracts to receive or to deliver, the foreign
to appoint Ms. Mosser as Manager of the Sys- currencies listed in paragraph A above.
tem Open Market Account until the Commit- C. To draw foreign currencies and to permit for-
tee selects a replacement manager. eign banks to draw dollars under the reciprocal cur-
rency arrangements listed in paragraph 2 below, pro-
vided that drawings by either party to any such ar-
By unanimous vote, the Committee approved the Au- rangement shall be fully liquidated within 12 months
thorization for Foreign Currency Operations (shown after any amount outstanding at that time was first
below) with a clerical amendment that combined the drawn, unless the Committee, because of exceptional
list of currencies in 1.A approved at the January 2008 circumstances, specifically authorizes a delay.
meeting with the five additional currencies that were D. To maintain an overall open position in all for-
approved by the Committee in September and October eign currencies not exceeding $25.0 billion. For this
2008 in connection with temporary reciprocal currency purpose, the overall open position in all foreign cur-
arrangements: rencies is defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of
net positions in individual currencies, excluding
AUTHORIZATION FOR FOREIGN CURRENCY
changes in dollar value due to foreign exchange rate
OPERATIONS
movements and interest accruals. The net position in
(Amended January 27, 2009)
a single foreign currency is defined as holdings of
1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes balances in that currency, plus outstanding contracts
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, for for future receipt, minus outstanding contracts for
System Open Market Account, to the extent necessary future delivery of that currency, i.e., as the sum of
to carry out the Committee's foreign currency directive these elements with due regard to sign.
and express authorizations by the Committee pursuant 2. The Federal Open Market Committee directs the
thereto, and in conformity with such procedural in- Federal Reserve Bank of New York to maintain recip-
structions as the Committee may issue from time to rocal currency arrangements (“swap” arrangements) for
time: the System Open Market Account for periods up to a
A. To purchase and sell the following foreign cur- maximum of 12 months with the following foreign
rencies in the form of cable transfers through spot or banks, which are among those designated by the Board
forward transactions on the open market at home of Governors of the Federal Reserve System under
and abroad, including transactions with the U.S. Section 214.5 of Regulation N, Relations with Foreign
Treasury, with the U.S. Exchange Stabilization Fund Banks and Bankers, and with the approval of the
established by Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act of Committee to renew such arrangements on maturity:
1934, with foreign monetary authorities, with the
Bank for International Settlements, and with other Foreign bank Amount of arrangement
international financial institutions: (millions of dollars equivalent)
Australian dollars Bank of Canada 2,000
Brazilian reais Bank of Mexico 3,000
Canadian dollars
Danish kroner Any changes in the terms of existing swap arrange-
euro ments, and the proposed terms of any new arrange-
Japanese yen ments that may be authorized, shall be referred for re-
Korean won view and approval to the Committee.

--- Page 4 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
3. All transactions in foreign currencies undertaken mittee shall be called at the request of any member, or
under paragraph 1.A. above shall, unless otherwise ex- at the request of the Manager, System Open Market
pressly authorized by the Committee, be at prevailing Account (“Manager”), for the purposes of reviewing
market rates. For the purpose of providing an invest- recent or contemplated operations and of consulting
ment return on System holdings of foreign currencies with the Manager on other matters relating to the Man-
or for the purpose of adjusting interest rates paid or ager’s responsibilities. At the request of any member of
received in connection with swap drawings, transac- the Subcommittee, questions arising from such reviews
tions with foreign central banks may be undertaken at and consultations shall be referred for determination to
non-market exchange rates. the Federal Open Market Committee.
4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange with for- 7. The Chairman is authorized:
eign central banks for the coordination of foreign cur- A. With the approval of the Committee, to enter
rency transactions. In making operating arrangements into any needed agreement or understanding with the
with foreign central banks on System holdings of for- Secretary of the Treasury about the division of re-
eign currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York sponsibility for foreign currency operations between
shall not commit itself to maintain any specific balance, the System and the Treasury;
unless authorized by the Federal Open Market Com- B. To keep the Secretary of the Treasury fully ad-
mittee. Any agreements or understandings concerning vised concerning System foreign currency operations,
the administration of the accounts maintained by the and to consult with the Secretary on policy matters
Federal Reserve Bank of New York with the foreign relating to foreign currency operations;
banks designated by the Board of Governors under C. From time to time, to transmit appropriate re-
Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall be referred for re- ports and information to the National Advisory
view and approval to the Committee. Council on International Monetary and Financial
5. Foreign currency holdings shall be invested to Policies.
ensure that adequate liquidity is maintained to meet 8. Staff officers of the Committee are authorized to
anticipated needs and so that each currency portfolio transmit pertinent information on System foreign cur-
shall generally have an average duration of no more rency operations to appropriate officials of the Treas-
than 18 months (calculated as Macaulay duration). Such ury Department.
investments may include buying or selling outright ob- 9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall participate in the
ligations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and in- foreign currency operations for System Account in ac-
terest by, a foreign government or agency thereof; buy- cordance with paragraph 3G(1) of the Board of Gov-
ing such securities under agreements for repurchase of ernors' Statement of Procedure with Respect to For-
such securities; selling such securities under agreements eign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks dated
for the resale of such securities; and holding various January 1, 1944.
time and other deposit accounts at foreign institutions.
In addition, when appropriate in connection with ar-
rangements to provide investment facilities for foreign By unanimous vote, the Foreign Currency Directive
currency holdings, U.S. Government securities may be was reaffirmed in the form shown below:
purchased from foreign central banks under agree-
FOREIGN CURRENCY DIRECTIVE
ments for repurchase of such securities within 30 cal-
(Reaffirmed January 27, 2009)
endar days.
6. All operations undertaken pursuant to the preced- 1. System operations in foreign currencies shall gen-
ing paragraphs shall be reported promptly to the For- erally be directed at countering disorderly market con-
eign Currency Subcommittee and the Committee. The ditions, provided that market exchange rates for the
Foreign Currency Subcommittee consists of the U.S. dollar reflect actions and behavior consistent with
Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Committee, the IMF Article IV, Section 1.
Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors, and such 2. To achieve this end the System shall:
other member of the Board as the Chairman may des- A. Undertake spot and forward purchases and sales
ignate (or in the absence of members of the Board of foreign exchange.
serving on the Subcommittee, other Board members B. Maintain reciprocal currency (“swap”) arrange-
designated by the Chairman as alternates, and in the ments with selected foreign central banks.
absence of the Vice Chairman of the Committee, the
Vice Chairman’s alternate). Meetings of the Subcom-

--- Page 5 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J a n u a r y 2 7 - 2 8 , 2 0 0 9 Page 5
C. Cooperate in other respects with central banks cies exceeding $300 million on any day or $600 mil-
of other countries and with international monetary lion since the most recent regular meeting of the
institutions. Committee.
3. Transactions may also be undertaken: B. Any operation that would result in a change on
A. To adjust System balances in light of probable any day in the System's net position in a single for-
future needs for currencies. eign currency exceeding $150 million, or $300 million
B. To provide means for meeting System and when the operation is associated with repayment of
Treasury commitments in particular currencies, and swap drawings.
to facilitate operations of the Exchange Stabilization C. Any operation that might generate a substantial
Fund. volume of trading in a particular currency by the Sys-
C. For such other purposes as may be expressly tem, even though the change in the System's net po-
authorized by the Committee. sition in that currency might be less than the limits
4. System foreign currency operations shall be con- specified in 1.B.
ducted: D. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank
A. In close and continuous consultation and coop- not exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15
eration with the United States Treasury; percent of the size of the swap arrangement.
B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with foreign 2. The Manager shall clear with the Committee (or
monetary authorities; and with the Subcommittee, if the Subcommittee believes
C. In a manner consistent with the obligations of that consultation with the full Committee is not feasible
the United States in the International Monetary Fund in the time available, or with the Chairman, if the
regarding exchange arrangements under IMF Article Chairman believes that consultation with the Subcom-
IV. mittee is not feasible in the time available):
A. Any operation that would result in a change in
the System's overall open position in foreign curren-
By unanimous vote, the Committee approved the Pro-
cies exceeding $1.5 billion since the most recent regu-
cedural Instructions with Respect to Foreign Currency
lar meeting of the Committee.
Operations, with the addition of the clarifying phrase
B. Any swap drawing proposed by a foreign bank
“unless otherwise directed by the Committee” in the
exceeding the larger of (i) $200 million or (ii) 15 per-
first sentence:
cent of the size of the swap arrangement.
PROCEDURAL INSTRUCTIONS WITH RESPECT 3. The Manager shall also consult with the Sub-
TO FOREIGN CURRENCY OPERATIONS committee or the Chairman about proposed swap
(Amended January 27, 2009) drawings by the System and about any operations that
are not of a routine character.
In conducting operations pursuant to the authorization
and direction of the Federal Open Market Committee
as set forth in the Authorization for Foreign Currency By unanimous vote, the Committee approved several
Operations and the Foreign Currency Directive, the amendments to the Authorization for Domestic Open
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, through the Man- Market Operations (shown below). The amendments
ager, System Open Market Account (“Manager”), shall consolidate language authorizing repurchase agree-
be guided by the following procedural understandings ments and reverse repurchase agreements into one pa-
with respect to consultations and clearances with the ragraph, add a paragraph authorizing the use of agents
Committee, the Foreign Currency Subcommittee, and to execute transactions in certain mortgage-backed se-
the Chairman of the Committee, unless otherwise di- curities (MBS), and add language to the final paragraph
rected by the Committee. All operations undertaken that reflects the Committee’s current focus on using
pursuant to such clearances shall be reported promptly the composition and size of the Federal Reserve’s bal-
to the Committee. ance sheet as instruments of monetary policy. The fi-
1. The Manager shall clear with the Subcommittee nal paragraph now specifies that decisions to make ma-
(or with the Chairman, if the Chairman believes that terial changes in the composition and size of the port-
consultation with the Subcommittee is not feasible in folio of assets held in the System Open Market Ac-
the time available): count during the period between meetings of the Fed-
A. Any operation that would result in a change in eral Open Market Committee will be made in the same
the System's overall open position in foreign curren-

--- Page 6 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
manner as decisions to change the intended level of the borrow. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York may
federal funds rate during the intermeeting period: reject bids which could facilitate a dealer's ability to
control a single issue as determined solely by the Fed-
AUTHORIZATION FOR DOMESTIC OPEN
eral Reserve Bank of New York.
MARKET OPERATIONS
4. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open
(Amended January 27, 2009)
market operations, while assisting in the provision of
1. The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes short-term investments for foreign and international
and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, to accounts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of
the extent necessary to carry out the most recent do- New York and accounts maintained at the Federal Re-
mestic policy directive adopted at a meeting of the serve Bank of New York as fiscal agent of the United
Committee: States pursuant to Section 15 of the Federal Reserve
A. To buy or sell U.S. Government securities, in- Act, the Federal Open Market Committee authorizes
cluding securities of the Federal Financing Bank, and and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (a)
securities that are direct obligations of, or fully guar- for System Open Market Account, to sell U.S. Gov-
anteed as to principal and interest by, any agency of ernment securities to such accounts on the bases set
the United States in the open market, from or to se- forth in paragraph 1.A under agreements providing for
curities dealers and foreign and international ac- the resale by such accounts of those securities in 65
counts maintained at the Federal Reserve Bank of business days or less on terms comparable to those
New York, on a cash, regular, or deferred delivery available on such transactions in the market; and (b) for
basis, for the System Open Market Account at mar- New York Bank account, when appropriate, to under-
ket prices, and, for such Account, to exchange matur- take with dealers, subject to the conditions imposed on
ing U.S. Government and Federal agency securities purchases and sales of securities in paragraph l.B, re-
with the Treasury or the individual agencies or to al- purchase agreements in U.S. Government and agency
low them to mature without replacement; securities, and to arrange corresponding sale and repur-
B. To buy or sell in the open market U.S. Gov- chase agreements between its own account and such
ernment securities, and securities that are direct obli- foreign, international, and fiscal agency accounts main-
gations of, or fully guaranteed as to principal and in- tained at the Bank. Transactions undertaken with such
terest by, any agency of the United States, for the accounts under the provisions of this paragraph may
System Open Market Account under agreements to provide for a service fee when appropriate.
resell or repurchase such securities or obligations (in- 5. In the execution of the Committee’s decision re-
cluding such transactions as are commonly referred garding policy during any intermeeting period, the
to as repo and reverse repo transactions) in 65 busi- Committee authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve
ness days or less, at rates that, unless otherwise ex- Bank of New York, upon the instruction of the Chair-
pressly authorized by the Committee, shall be deter- man of the Committee, to adjust somewhat in excep-
mined by competitive bidding, after applying reason- tional circumstances the degree of pressure on reserve
able limitations on the volume of agreements with positions and hence the intended federal funds rate and
individual counterparties. to take actions that result in material changes in the
2. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open composition and size of the assets in the System Open
market operations, the Federal Open Market Commit- Market Account other than those anticipated by the
tee authorizes the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Committee at its most recent meeting. Any such ad-
to use agents in agency MBS-related transactions. justment shall be made in the context of the Commit-
3. In order to ensure the effective conduct of open tee’s discussion and decision at its most recent meeting
market operations, the Federal Open Market Commit- and the Committee’s long-run objectives for price sta-
tee authorizes the Federal Reserve Bank of New York bility and sustainable economic growth, and shall be
to lend on an overnight basis U.S. Government securi- based on economic, financial, and monetary develop-
ties held in the System Open Market Account to deal- ments during the intermeeting period. Consistent with
ers at rates that shall be determined by competitive bid- Committee practice, the Chairman, if feasible, will con-
ding. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall set sult with the Committee before making any adjustment.
a minimum lending fee consistent with the objectives
of the program and apply reasonable limitations on the
In light of its program to purchase large quantities of
total amount of a specific issue that may be auctioned
agency debt and mortgage-backed securities, the Com-
and on the amount of securities that each dealer may

--- Page 7 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J a n u a r y 2 7 - 2 8 , 2 0 0 9 Page 7
mittee voted to suspend temporarily the Guidelines for Federal Reserve balance sheet to support credit flows
the Conduct of System Operations in Federal Agency to, and spending by, households and businesses.
Issues (last amended January 28, 2003). Mr. Lacker
System Liquidity Programs and Balance Sheet
dissented, stating that he views targeted purchases of
Staff reported on developments in System liquidity
agency debt and mortgage-backed securities as distort-
programs and on changes in the System’s balance sheet
ing credit markets and would prefer that the Desk in-
since the Committee’s December 15-16 meeting. As of
stead purchase Treasury securities.
January 26, the System’s total assets and liabilities stood
The remainder of the Committee’s meeting was con- at just under $2 trillion, about $300 billion less than on
ducted as a joint meeting with the Board of Governors December 17, 2008. The drop, which resulted primar-
in order to facilitate policy discussion of developments ily from a decline in foreign central bank drawings on
with regard to the System’s liquidity facilities and bal- reciprocal currency arrangements and a reduction in
ance sheet during the intermeeting period and to con- issuers’ sales of commercial paper to the Commercial
sider the need for changes in the System’s approach to Paper Funding Facility (CPFF), seemed to reflect some
using those tools. improvement in the functioning of global interbank
markets and the commercial paper market after the
Market Developments and Open Market Opera-
year-end.
tions
The Manager of the System Open Market Account Most participants interpreted the evidence as indicating
reported on recent developments in domestic and for- that credit markets still were not working well, and that
eign financial markets. The Manager also reported on the Federal Reserve’s lending programs, asset pur-
System open market operations in Treasury securities chases, and currency swaps were providing much-
and in agency debt and mortgage-backed securities dur- needed support to economic activity by reducing dislo-
ing the period since the Committee’s December 15-16 cations in financial markets, lowering the cost of credit,
meeting. By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified and facilitating the flow of credit to businesses and
these transactions. There were no open market opera- households. Several indicated that they expected the
tions in foreign currencies for the System’s account soon-to-be-implemented Term Asset-Backed Securities
during the period since the Committee’s December 15- Loan Facility (TALF) to improve liquidity and reduce
16 meeting. disruptions in the markets for securities backed by stu-
dent loans, credit card receivables, auto loans, and small
Meeting participants discussed the potential benefits of
business loans guaranteed by the Small Business Ad-
conducting open market purchases of a substantial
ministration; they also noted that it might become nec-
quantity of longer-term Treasury securities for the Sys-
essary to enhance or expand the TALF or other pro-
tem Open Market Account. Participants generally
grams. However, in the view of one participant, finan-
agreed that purchasing such securities could be a useful
cial markets—including those for asset-backed securi-
adjunct to other monetary policy tools in some circum-
ties—were working reasonably well, given the current
stances. One participant preferred to begin purchasing
high level of pessimism and uncertainty about eco-
Treasury securities immediately, as a way to increase
nomic prospects and asset values, and the System’s
the monetary base, in lieu of expanding programs that
lending and asset-purchase programs were resulting in
aim to support particular segments of the credit mar-
undesirable distortions in the allocation of credit. Oth-
kets. Other participants were prepared to purchase
ers noted that such programs could have undesirable
longer-term Treasury securities if evolving circum-
consequences if expanded too far or continued too
stances were to indicate that such transactions would
long. Many participants agreed that it would be desir-
be particularly effective in improving conditions in pri-
able for the System to develop additional measures of
vate credit markets. However, they judged that pur-
the effects of its programs, and they encouraged addi-
chases of longer-term Treasury securities would only
tional research on analytical frameworks that could in-
modestly improve conditions in private credit markets
form Federal Reserve policy actions with respect to the
at present, and that completing already-announced
size and composition of its balance sheet.
plans to purchase large quantities of agency debt and
mortgage-backed securities and to support certain as- Several meeting participants noted that the expansion
set-backed securities markets was, in current circum- of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet along with con-
stances, likely to be a more effective way to employ the tinued growth of the money supply could help stabilize
longer-run inflation expectations in the face of increas-

--- Page 8 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
ing economic slack and very low inflation in coming Credit Facility (PDCF), the Asset-Backed Commercial
quarters. Over a longer horizon, however, the Federal Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility
Reserve will need to scale back its liquidity programs (AMLF), the CPFF, and the Money Market Investor
and the size of its balance sheet as the economy recov- Funding Facility (MMIFF) to October 30, 2009.
ers, to avoid the risk of an unwanted increase in ex-
Staff Review of the Economic and Financial Situa-
pected inflation and a buildup of inflation pressures.
tion
Participants observed that many of the Federal Re-
The information reviewed at the meeting indicated a
serve’s liquidity programs are priced so that they will
continued sharp contraction in real economic activity.
become unattractive to borrowers as conditions in fi-
Sales and starts of new homes remained on a steep
nancial markets improve; these programs will shrink
downward trend, consumer spending continued its sig-
automatically. In other cases, the Federal Reserve
nificant decline, the deterioration in business equip-
eventually may have to take a more active role in scal-
ment investment intensified, and foreign demand
ing back programs by adjusting their terms and condi-
weakened. Conditions in the labor market continued
tions. More generally, the Federal Reserve may need to
to deteriorate rapidly in December: Private payroll
develop additional tools to manage the size of its bal-
employment fell sharply, and the unemployment rate
ance sheet and the level of the federal funds rate as the
rose. Industrial production dropped more severely
economy recovers. As of late January, however, with
than in earlier months. Headline consumer prices fell
financial conditions strained and the economic outlook
in November and December, reflecting declines in
weak, most participants agreed that the Committee
consumer energy prices; core consumer prices were
should continue to focus on supporting the functioning
about flat in those months. While conditions in some
of financial markets and stimulating the economy
financial markets showed limited improvement, ex-
through purchases of agency debt and mortgage-
traordinary financial stresses remained apparent and
backed securities and other measures—including the
credit conditions became still tighter for households
implementation of the TALF—that will keep the size
and businesses.
of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet at a high level
for some time. Employment continued to contract. Private nonfarm
payrolls fell sharply in December, with substantial
Participants also discussed the advisability of extending
losses over a wide range of industries. Indicators of job
the termination dates of a number of temporary liquid-
vacancies and hiring declined further, and layoffs con-
ity facilities and reciprocal currency arrangements from
tinued to mount. The unemployment rate increased to
April 30 to October 30, 2009. Participants generally
7.2 percent in December, the share of individuals work-
were of the view that, despite modest improvements in
ing part time for economic reasons surged, and the la-
some sectors, conditions in credit markets overall re-
bor force participation rate edged down for a second
mained severely disrupted. Most expressed support for
consecutive month.
extending the termination dates in order to reassure
market participants that the facilities would remain in In December, industrial production posted a sharp de-
place as a backstop to private-sector credit arrange- cline after falling substantially in November; the con-
ments while financial conditions remained strained; traction was broad-based. The decrease in production
they were prepared to extend the facilities beyond year- of consumer goods reflected cutbacks in motor vehicle
end if conditions warrant. Participants also noted that assemblies as well as in the output of consumer durable
extending the termination date of these liquidity facili- goods such as appliances, furniture, and carpeting.
ties to October 30 would not rule out the possibility of Output in high-tech sectors contracted in the fourth
closing particular facilities sooner if improvements in quarter, reflecting reduced production of semiconduc-
financial conditions were to indicate they were no tors, communications equipment, and computers. The
longer needed to support credit markets and economic production of aircraft and parts recorded an increase in
activity and to help preserve price stability. December after being held down in the autumn by a
strike and by problems with some outsourced compo-
Following the discussion, the Committee voted unani-
nents. Available forward-looking indicators pointed to
mously to extend the termination dates of existing re-
a further contraction in manufacturing output in com-
ciprocal currency arrangements and the Term Securities
ing months.
Lending Facility (TSLF) to October 30, 2009. The
Board of Governors then voted unanimously to extend Real consumer spending appeared to decline sharply
the termination dates of the TSLF, the Primary Dealer again in the fourth quarter, likely reflecting the com-

--- Page 9 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J a n u a r y 2 7 - 2 8 , 2 0 0 9 Page 9
bined effects of decreases in house and equity prices, a or declined. Vacancy rates for office, retail, and indus-
weakening labor market, and tight credit conditions. trial properties continued to move up in the fourth
Real spending on goods excluding motor vehicles was quarter, and the results of the January Senior Loan Of-
estimated to have fallen noticeably in December, more ficer Opinion Survey indicated that financing for new
than reversing an increase in November. Outlays on projects had become even more difficult to acquire.
motor vehicles edged down in November and Decem-
Real nonfarm inventories (excluding motor vehicles)
ber following a sharper decline in October. Early indi-
appeared to have fallen in the last few months of 2008.
cators of spending in January pointed to continued soft
However, with sales declining even more sharply, the
demand. Readings on consumer sentiment remained at
ratio of book-value inventories to sales increased in
very low levels by historical standards through the end
October and November.
of 2008 and showed little improvement in early Janu-
ary. The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed sharply in
November, as a steep decline in imports outweighed a
Real residential construction contracted in November
sizable drop in exports. Much of the fall in exports was
and December. Single-family housing starts dropped at
attributable to a decline in exports of fuels, chemicals,
a much faster rate in those months than they had in the
and other industrial supplies, which in part reflected
first 10 months of the year. Multifamily starts also fell
lower prices for these goods. All other major catego-
in those months, as did permit issuance for both cate-
ries of exports moved down as well. More than half of
gories. Housing demand remained very weak and, al-
the decline in imports was due to a decrease in imports
though the stock of unsold new single-family homes
of oil that mostly reflected a dramatic decrease in prices
continued to move down in November, inventories of
but also some reduction in volume. All other major
unsold homes remained elevated relative to the pace of
categories of imports also recorded sizable decreases.
sales. Sales of existing single-family homes dropped
less than sales of new homes in November and turned Economic activity in the advanced foreign economies
up in December, but the relative strength in sales of appeared to contract sharply in the fourth quarter, as
existing homes appeared to be at least partly attribut- the pace of job losses rose and measures of consumer
able to increases in foreclosure-related and other dis- spending on durable goods and business spending on
tressed sales. Although the interest rate on conforming investment goods showed declines. In Japan and
30-year fixed-rate mortgages declined markedly over Europe, trade and industrial production dropped
the intermeeting period, the Senior Loan Officer Opin- steeply, and measures of consumer and business senti-
ion Survey on Bank Lending Practices that was con- ment declined. In Canada, employment fell markedly
ducted in January indicated that banks had tightened in November and December after edging up in Octo-
lending standards on prime mortgage loans over the ber. Incoming data suggested that economic activity in
preceding three months. The market for nonconform- the emerging market economies slowed significantly in
ing loans remained severely impaired. Several indexes the fourth quarter, with real gross domestic product
indicated that house prices continued to decline rapidly. (GDP) plunging in several Asian economies and ap-
pearing little changed in China. Industrial production,
In the business sector, investment in equipment and
trade, and measures of consumer sentiment registered
software appeared to contract noticeably in the fourth
declines across many other countries in both emerging
quarter, with decreases registered in all major spending
Asia and Latin America.
categories. In December, business purchases of autos
and trucks moved down. Spending on high-tech capi- In the United States, overall personal consumption ex-
tal goods appeared to decline in the fourth quarter. penditure (PCE) prices were estimated to have fallen in
Orders and shipments for many types of equipment December, largely reflecting significant reductions in
declined in October and November, and imports of energy prices. Increases in consumer food prices began
capital goods dropped back in those months. Forward- to moderate toward the end of 2008. Excluding food
looking indicators of investment in equipment and and energy prices, PCE prices appeared to have decel-
software pointed to likely further declines. Construc- erated over the final three months of the year. The
tion spending related to petroleum refining and power moderation in core PCE prices was widespread across
generation and distribution continued to increase categories of goods and services. After rising rapidly
briskly in the second half of 2008, responding to the during the first nine months of the year, producer pric-
surge in energy prices in the first half of that year, but es excluding food and energy fell sharply in the last
real investment for many types of buildings stagnated three months of 2008. Measures of longer-term infla-

--- Page 10 ---

Page 10 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
tion expectations edged up in early January, but re- der the Federal Reserve’s Term Auction Facility were
mained lower than they had been in all but the last few undersubscribed, although one auction following the
weeks of 2008. In December, average hourly earnings year-end did see a relatively large number of bidders.
moved up moderately. The TSLF auctions were also undersubscribed. Use of
the PDCF continued to fall significantly over the pe-
The decisions of the Federal Open Market Committee
riod.
(FOMC) at its December 15-16 meeting reportedly
were more aggressive than investors had been expect- Conditions in markets for repurchase agreements, or
ing. Market participants reportedly were somewhat repos, also showed some signs of improvement. With
surprised both by the size of the reduction in the target the overnight Treasury general collateral repo rate near
federal funds rate, to a range of 0 to ¼ percent, and by zero for much of the period, market participants re-
the statements that policy rates would likely remain low portedly were reluctant to lend Treasury collateral out
for some time and that the FOMC might engage in of concern that counterparties might fail to return bor-
additional nontraditional policy actions such as the pur- rowed securities. However, the pace of delivery fails
chase of longer-term Treasury securities. Over the in- continued to run well below the high rates of Septem-
termeeting period, investors marked down their expec- ber and October, reflecting in part reductions in trans-
tations for the path of the federal funds rate, as meas- action volumes as well as industry efforts to mitigate
ured by money market futures rates. The path first fails, including the January 5 recommendation of the
moved down immediately after the December FOMC Treasury Market Practices Group to implement a fi-
meeting. Later in the period, the policy path tilted low- nancial charge on settlement fails. Conditions in the
er in response to weaker-than-expected economic data market for repo transactions backed by agency debt
releases and increased concerns about the health of and mortgage-backed securities also improved some-
some financial institutions. In contrast, yields on me- what, with average bid-asked spreads declining from
dium- and longer-term nominal Treasury coupon secu- high levels.
rities increased, on net, over the period. Yields
The market for Treasury coupon securities showed
dropped sharply following the release of the FOMC
signs of increased impairment late in 2008, followed by
statement, reportedly in part because investors inter-
some improvement early in 2009. Trading volumes fell
preted it as suggesting that the Federal Reserve might
to very low levels at the end of 2008, although they
increase its holdings of longer-term Treasury securities.
recovered a bit after the end of the year. Bid-asked
Those price movements were more than reversed after
spreads in the on-the-run market declined sharply at
the turn of the year, despite the worsening economic
the beginning of 2009 after having increased at the end
outlook, apparently reflecting a waning of year-end
of 2008. The on-the-run premium for the 10-year no-
safe-haven demands and an anticipation of substantially
minal Treasury note was little changed at very elevated
increased Treasury debt issuance to finance larger-than-
levels over the intermeeting period. On balance, the
expected deficits associated with the new Administra-
Treasury market remained much less liquid than nor-
tion’s economic stimulus plans. Although implied in-
mal.
flation compensation derived from Treasury Inflation-
Protected Securities (TIPS) increased over the period, Treasury- and government-only money market mutual
this increase reportedly was largely attributable to im- funds (MMMFs) faced pressures stemming from very
proved trading conditions in the TIPS market rather low short-term interest rates, and many such funds re-
than upward revisions to inflation expectations. portedly had waived management fees in an effort to
retain investors. By contrast, prime MMMFs had net
Conditions in short-term funding markets showed
inflows over the intermeeting period. The MMIFF
some signs of easing, although significant stresses re-
continued to register no activity despite changes that
mained. The spreads of London interbank offered
eased some of the terms of the program. Market par-
rates, or Libor, over comparable-maturity overnight
ticipants nonetheless pointed to the MMIFF as a po-
index swap rates declined across most maturities over
tentially important backup facility.
the period: The one-month spread fell to its lowest
level since August 2007; the three-month spread also Conditions in the commercial paper (CP) market im-
declined but remained elevated. Though depository proved over the intermeeting period, likely reflecting
institutions continued to make substantial use of the recent measures taken in support of this market, greater
discount window, the amount of primary credit out- demand from institutional investors, and the passing of
standing declined. Recent auctions of term funds un- year-end. Yields and spreads on 30-day A1/P1 nonfi-

--- Page 11 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J a n u a r y 2 7 - 2 8 , 2 0 0 9 Page 11
nancial and financial CP as well as on asset-backed nancial market stability, the Treasury, the FDIC, and
commercial paper (ABCP) declined modestly and re- the Federal Reserve announced on January 16 that they
mained low. Yields and spreads on 30-day A2/P2 CP, had entered into an agreement with Bank of America
which is not eligible for purchase under the CPFF, to provide a package of guarantees, liquidity access, and
dropped sharply after the beginning of the year as some capital. Developments at nonbank financial institutions
institutional investors reportedly reentered the market. were mixed. Equity prices of insurance companies
The dollar amounts of outstanding unsecured financial edged down over the period, while their CDS spreads
and nonfinancial CP and ABCP rose slightly, on net, declined from extremely high levels. Hedge funds
over the intermeeting period. This small change was posted negative average returns in December.
more than accounted for by the increase in CP held by
Debt of the domestic nonfinancial sectors expanded at
the CPFF. In contrast, credit extended under the
a somewhat faster pace in the fourth quarter of 2008
AMLF declined over the intermeeting period.
than in the first three quarters of the year. Borrowing
Liquidity in the corporate bond market improved over by the federal government continued to surge, boosted
the intermeeting period, with increases in trading vol- by programs aimed at reducing financial market strains.
ume for both investment- and speculative-grade bonds Borrowing by state and local governments picked up as
and declines in bid-asked spreads for speculative-grade the conditions in municipal bond market improved
bonds. Yields and spreads on corporate bonds de- somewhat. Household debt appeared to have con-
creased noticeably, particularly for speculative-grade tracted in the fourth quarter, with both mortgage and
firms, but spreads remained high by historical stan- consumer credit sharply curtailed due to weak house-
dards. Gross issuance of bonds by nonfinancial in- hold spending and tight credit conditions. Business
vestment-grade companies remained solid, but issuance debt expanded only modestly, given the high cost of
of speculative-grade bonds was limited. Conditions in borrowing, tighter lending terms, and the deterioration
the leveraged loan market remained very poor and issu- in the macroeconomic environment.
ance of leveraged syndicated loans was also very weak.
Commercial bank credit fell for the second consecutive
Secondary market prices for leveraged loans stayed near
month in December. Commercial and industrial loans
record lows and the average bid-asked spread in that
declined in November and December, likely reflecting
market continued to be very wide. The market for
a combination of tighter credit supply and reduced loan
commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) con-
demand as well as some unwinding of the surge during
tinued to show signs of strain, with the CMBX index—
September and October. The Senior Loan Officer
an index based on credit default swap (CDS) spreads
Opinion Survey conducted in January indicated that
on AAA-rated CMBS—widening during the intermeet-
banks had continued to tighten credit standards and
ing period from already very elevated levels.
terms on all major loan categories over the past three
Broad equity market indexes fell over the intermeeting months. Survey respondents also indicated that they
period. After improving during the early part of the had reduced the size of credit lines for a wide range of
intermeeting period, market sentiment toward financial existing business and household customers.
firms appeared to worsen later in the period. Those
M2 expanded at a considerably more rapid pace in De-
firms substantially underperformed the broader market
cember than in previous months. Flows into both de-
as a number of large and regional banks reported siz-
mand deposits and savings deposits surged, possibly
able losses stemming from weak trading results, asset
reflecting a reallocation of wealth towards assets that
write-downs, and additional increases in loan-loss pro-
had government insurance or guarantees. Small time
visions in anticipation of a further deterioration in
deposits also increased strongly, as banks continued to
credit quality. CDS spreads for U.S. bank holding
bid aggressively for these deposits. Currency continued
companies rose sharply in mid-January to near their
to grow briskly, apparently boosted by solid foreign
historical highs, and equity prices for such companies
demand for U.S. banknotes. In December, retail
fell on net, ending the period below their November
MMMF balances increased modestly after a decline in
lows. A number of banking organizations issued debt
November.
through the FDIC’s Temporary Liquidity Guarantee
Program; spreads on such debt declined to levels close Conditions in foreign financial markets were relatively
to those on agency debt. The Treasury’s Troubled As- calm over the intermeeting period, although concerns
set Relief Program provided additional support to sev- about bank earnings and the stability of the global
eral banking institutions. In particular, to support fi- banking system led to widespread declines in equity

--- Page 12 ---

Page 12 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
prices later in the period. Governments in major for- ticipants agreed to collect and publish, on a quarterly
eign economies initiated several actions aimed at basis, projections of the longer-run values to which
strengthening the banking sector and easing credit they expect these three variables to converge. Partici-
market strains. Sovereign bond yields in the advanced pants’ projections through 2011, and for the longer-
foreign economies fell early in the period, likely reflect- run, are described in the Summary of Economic Pro-
ing declining inflation and expectations of lower policy jections that is attached as an addendum to these min-
rates, but moved up subsequently, perhaps in response utes.
to concerns about fiscal deficits. The dollar increased
In their discussion of the economic and financial situa-
on balance against the currencies of major U.S. trading
tion and the outlook for the economy, participants
partners.
agreed that the economy had weakened further going
Staff Economic Outlook into 2009. The incoming data, as well as information
In the forecast prepared for the meeting, the staff re- received from contacts in the business and banking
vised down its outlook for economic activity in the first communities, indicated a sharp and widespread eco-
half of 2009, as the implications of weaker-than- nomic contraction both domestically and abroad, re-
anticipated economic data releases more than offset an flecting in large part the adverse effects of the intensifi-
upward revision to the staff’s assumption of the cation of the financial crisis and the interaction be-
amount of forthcoming fiscal stimulus. Conditions in tween deteriorating economic and financial conditions.
the labor market deteriorated sharply over the inter- Participants generally saw credit conditions as ex-
meeting period. Industrial production declined steeply, tremely tight, with financial markets fragile and some
and household and business spending fell more than parts of the banking sector under substantial stress.
anticipated. Sales and starts of new homes remained However, modest signs of improvement were evident
on a steep downtrend. Foreign demand also was in some financial markets—particularly those that were
weaker than expected. Financial markets continued to receiving support from Federal Reserve liquidity facili-
be strained overall, credit remained unusually tight for ties and other government actions. Participants antici-
both households and businesses, and equity prices had pated that a gradual recovery in U.S. economic activity
fallen further. The staff’s projections of real GDP would begin during the third or fourth quarter of this
growth in the second half of 2009 and in 2010 were year as the economy begins to respond to fiscal stimu-
revised upward slightly, reflecting greater monetary and lus, relatively low energy prices, and continuing efforts
fiscal stimulus as well as the effects of more moderate to stabilize the financial sector and increase the avail-
oil prices and long-term interest rates, but they contin- ability of credit. Several participants noted that firms’
ued to show no more than a gradual economic recov- efforts to control inventories as sales declined had con-
ery. The staff again expected that unemployment tributed to the rapid downturn in production and em-
would rise substantially through the beginning of 2010 ployment in recent quarters, but expected that the re-
before edging down over the remainder of that year. sulting absence of widespread inventory overhangs
Forecasts for core and overall PCE inflation in 2009 might spur a prompt pickup in production in many
and 2010 were little changed, with growth in both core sectors later this year once sales begin to level out or
and overall PCE prices expected to be unusually low turn up. Headline inflation would pick up some as the
over the next few years in response to slack in resource effects of previous declines in oil and other commodity
utilization and relatively flat prices anticipated for many prices wore off. But in an environment of considerable
commodities and for imports. economic slack, little if any inflation pressure from en-
ergy or other import prices, and possible declines in
Meeting Participants’ Views and Committee Pol-
inflation expectations, headline and core inflation were
icy Action
expected to be quite low for several years. Participants
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, all meeting
were, however, quite uncertain about the outlook. All
participants—the four members of the Board of Gov-
but a few saw the risks to growth as tilted to the down-
ernors and the presidents of the twelve Federal Reserve
side; in light of financial stresses and tight credit condi-
Banks—provided projections for economic growth, the
tions, they saw a significant risk that the economic re-
unemployment rate, and consumer price inflation for
covery would be both delayed and initially quite weak.
each year from 2009 through 2011. To provide the
In particular, most participants saw the renewed dete-
public with information about their views of likely
rioration in the banking sector’s financial condition as
longer-term economic trends, and as additional context
posing a significant downside risk to the economic out-
for the Committee’s monetary policy discussions, par-

--- Page 13 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J a n u a r y 2 7 - 2 8 , 2 0 0 9 Page 13
look absent additional initiatives to stabilize the bank- contraction to continue in coming quarters. Equip-
ing system. ment investment had declined particularly sharply, re-
flecting weak sales, tighter credit, and substantial uncer-
Participants noted that consumers were continuing to
tainty about future economic conditions and govern-
cut back expenditures in response to sharply declining
ment policies. Lower energy and commodity prices,
employment, further declines in wealth, and tighter
while supporting consumer spending, had reduced in-
credit conditions. Some participants mentioned that
vestment in oil, gas, and mineral extraction. Outside of
business contacts had indicated that firms were reduc-
the agricultural sector, business contacts had reported
ing payrolls aggressively and also freezing wages and
sizable cutbacks in their planned capital expenditures
salaries, further restricting growth in personal income
for 2009.
and thus probably damping consumer spending. Look-
ing ahead, participants anticipated that tax cuts and State and local government budgets had come under
some other elements of the proposed fiscal stimulus significant pressure as the slowing economy led to de-
package would add to after-tax incomes and thus boost clining revenues. Several participants noted that gov-
consumer spending, though the magnitude of the im- ernments in their regions were responding by cutting
petus was far from clear. For example, unless the cuts spending rather than supplementing revenues. The
were clearly perceived to be permanent, the boost to fiscal stimulus bill, which was being considered by the
consumer spending might prove short-lived, as was the Congress as the Committee met, would support state
case with the tax rebates distributed in the spring of and local government spending as well as boost federal
2008. spending, helping to buoy demands for goods and ser-
vices. Participants generally thought that fiscal stimulus
Participants saw no indication that the housing sector
was a necessary and important complement to the steps
was beginning to stabilize. Though sales of existing
the Federal Reserve and other agencies were taking,
homes appeared to have flattened out, a large fraction
and that it would help foster economic recovery, but
of those transactions seemed to have resulted from
had questions about the details of the proposed legisla-
foreclosures or other forced sales; moreover, new
tion and the extent to which it would boost demands
home sales, housing starts, and permits all continued to
for and production of goods and services.
decline steeply. Lower house prices and mortgage rates
had increased housing affordability, but concerns that Participants indicated they had been surprised by the
house prices may fall further appeared to be holding speed and magnitude of the slowdown in economic
back potential buyers. growth abroad and the resulting drop in demand for
U.S. exports. It was noted that the surprisingly sharp
The pace of commercial construction also had slowed.
decline in both U.S. exports and imports might also
A number of participants expressed concern that the
reflect tight credit conditions, including the reduced
commercial real estate sector could deteriorate sharply
availability of trade credit. Moreover, participants did
in the months ahead. They noted that a large number
not expect foreign economies to rebound quickly, sug-
of commercial real estate mortgages will come due at a
gesting that net exports would not provide much sup-
time when banks likely will still be facing balance-sheet
port for U.S. economic activity in coming quarters.
constraints, the ability to securitize commercial real
estate mortgages may remain severely restricted, and Participants agreed that inflation pressures had dimin-
vacancy rates in commercial properties could well be ished appreciably in recent quarters, and they expected
climbing. Some participants worried that the outcome significantly lower headline and core inflation during
could be an increase in defaults on commercial real the next few years than during recent years. Indeed,
estate mortgages and forced sales of commercial prop- most anticipated that inflation will slow for a time to
erties, which could push prices down further and gen- rates somewhat lower than those they judge consistent
erate additional losses on banks’ commercial real estate with the dual goals of price stability and maximum em-
loan portfolios. However, the commercial real estate ployment, initially reflecting the recent declines in the
sector had expanded more moderately during the re- prices of energy and other commodities and later re-
cent expansion than during the expansion of the late sponding to several years of substantial economic slack.
1980s, suggesting that the downturn in the current cy- Many participants noted some risk of a protracted pe-
cle could be milder than that seen in the early 1990s. riod of excessively low inflation, especially if inflation
expectations were to move down in response to lower
Participants also noted that other categories of business
actual inflation and increasing economic slack, and a
investment were contracting; they expected the rapid

--- Page 14 ---

Page 14 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
few even saw some risk of deflation. Several others, expressed a willingness to expand the size and duration
however, anticipated that longer-run inflation expecta- of those purchases in the near future; others stood
tions would remain well anchored, supported in part by ready to expand the program if conditions warrant but
the Federal Reserve’s aggressive expansion of its bal- noted that the program had only recently been imple-
ance sheet and the resulting growth of the monetary mented and preferred to wait for more information
base, and therefore thought it unlikely that inflation about economic and financial developments and the
would decline below levels they saw as consistent with program’s effects before considering an expansion.
the dual goals of price stability and maximum employ-
At the conclusion of the discussion, with Mr. Lacker
ment. Moreover, some noted a risk that expected infla-
dissenting, the Committee voted to authorize and direct
tion might actually increase to an undesirably high level
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until it was
if the public does not understand that the Federal Re-
instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the Sys-
serve’s liquidity facilities will be wound down and its
tem Account in accordance with the following domes-
balance sheet will shrink as economic and financial
tic policy directive:
conditions improve.
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
Several participants indicated that they thought the
monetary and financial conditions that will fos-
FOMC should explore establishing quantitative guide-
ter price stability and promote sustainable
lines or targets for a monetary aggregate, perhaps the
growth in output. To further its long-run ob-
growth rate of the monetary base or M2; in their view
jectives, the Committee seeks conditions in re-
such guidelines would provide useful information to
serve markets consistent with federal funds
the public and help anchor inflation expectations. Oth-
trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The
ers were skeptical that a single quantitative measure
Committee directs the Desk to purchase GSE
could adequately convey the Federal Reserve’s current
debt and agency-guaranteed MBS during the in-
approach to monetary policy because the stimulative
termeeting period with the aim of providing
effect of the Federal Reserve’s liquidity-providing and
support to the mortgage and housing markets.
asset-purchase programs depends not only on the scale
The timing and pace of these purchases should
but also on the mix of lending programs and securities
depend on conditions in the markets for such
purchases. In addition, a few participants noted that
securities and on a broader assessment of con-
the sizes of some Federal Reserve liquidity programs
ditions in primary mortgage markets and the
are determined by banks’ and market participants’ need
housing sector. By the end of the second quar-
to use those programs and thus will tend to increase
ter of this year, the Desk is expected to pur-
when financial conditions worsen and shrink when fi-
chase up to $100 billion in housing-related GSE
nancial conditions improve; the size and composition
debt and up to $500 billion in agency-
of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet needs to be able
guaranteed MBS. The System Open Market
to adjust in response.
Account Manager and the Secretary will keep
In their discussion of monetary policy for the inter- the Committee informed of ongoing develop-
meeting period, Committee members agreed that keep- ments regarding the System’s balance sheet that
ing the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ could affect the attainment over time of the
percent would be appropriate. They also agreed to Committee’s objectives of maximum employ-
continue using liquidity and asset-purchase programs to ment and price stability.”
support the functioning of financial markets and stimu-
The vote encompassed approval of the following
late the economy. Members further agreed that these
statement to be released at 2:15 p.m.:
programs were likely to maintain the size of the Federal
Reserve’s balance sheet at a high level. Members noted
“The Federal Open Market Committee decided
that it may be necessary to expand these programs, but
today to keep its target range for the federal
had somewhat different views about the best way of
funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee
doing so. One member expressed the view that it
continues to anticipate that economic condi-
would be best to expand holdings of U.S. Treasury se-
tions are likely to warrant exceptionally low lev-
curities rather than to expand targeted liquidity pro-
els of the federal funds rate for some time.
grams. All other members indicated that they thought
it appropriate to continue the program of purchasing
agency debt and mortgage-backed securities. Several

--- Page 15 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J a n u a r y 2 7 - 2 8 , 2 0 0 9 Page 15
Information received since the Committee met ance sheet in light of evolving financial market
in December suggests that the economy has developments and to assess whether expansions
weakened further. Industrial production, hous- of or modifications to lending facilities would
ing starts, and employment have continued to serve to further support credit markets and eco-
decline steeply, as consumers and businesses nomic activity and help to preserve price stabil-
have cut back spending. Furthermore, global ity.”
demand appears to be slowing significantly.
Voting for this action: Messrs. Bernanke and Dudley,
Conditions in some financial markets have im-
Ms. Duke, Messrs. Evans, Kohn, Lockhart, and Warsh,
proved, in part reflecting government efforts to
and Ms. Yellen.
provide liquidity and strengthen financial institu-
tions; nevertheless, credit conditions for house- Voting against this action: Mr. Lacker.
holds and firms remain extremely tight. The
Mr. Lacker dissented because he preferred to expand
Committee anticipates that a gradual recovery in
the monetary base by purchasing U.S. Treasury securi-
economic activity will begin later this year, but
ties rather than through targeted credit programs. Mr.
the downside risks to that outlook are signifi-
Lacker was fully supportive of the significant expansion
cant.
of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and the intention
to maintain the size of the balance sheet at a high level.
In light of the declines in the prices of energy
However, while he recognized that spreads were ele-
and other commodities in recent months and
vated and volumes low in many credit markets, he saw
the prospects for considerable economic slack,
no evidence of market failures that made targeted credit
the Committee expects that inflation pressures
programs, including the forthcoming TALF, necessary.
will remain subdued in coming quarters. More-
Moreover, he was concerned that such programs chan-
over, the Committee sees some risk that infla-
nel credit away from other worthy borrowers, amount
tion could persist for a time below rates that
to fiscal policy, would exacerbate moral hazard, and
best foster economic growth and price stability
might be hard to unwind. He supported, instead, main-
in the longer term.
taining the size of the balance sheet at a high level
through purchases of U.S. Treasury securities. In his
The Federal Reserve will employ all available
view, such purchases would limit distortions to private
tools to promote the resumption of sustainable
credit flows, minimize adverse incentive effects, and
economic growth and to preserve price stability.
maintain a clear distinction between monetary and fis-
The focus of the Committee's policy is to sup-
cal policies.
port the functioning of financial markets and
stimulate the economy through open market It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
operations and other measures that are likely to would be held on Tuesday, March 17, 2009. The meet-
keep the size of the Federal Reserve's balance ing adjourned at 1:05 p.m. on January 28, 2009.
sheet at a high level. The Federal Reserve con-
Notation Vote
tinues to purchase large quantities of agency
By notation vote completed on January 5, 2009, the
debt and mortgage-backed securities to provide
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
support to the mortgage and housing markets,
FOMC meeting held on December 15-16, 2008.
and it stands ready to expand the quantity of
such purchases and the duration of the purchase Conference Call
program as conditions warrant. The Committee On January 16, 2009, the Committee met by confer-
also is prepared to purchase longer-term Treas- ence call to discuss issues associated with establishing
ury securities if evolving circumstances indicate an explicit numerical objective for inflation. The
that such transactions would be particularly ef- Committee made no decisions on whether to establish
fective in improving conditions in private credit such an objective. Most meeting participants expressed
markets. The Federal Reserve will be imple- the view that an explicit numerical objective for longer-
menting the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan run inflation would be fully consistent with the Federal
Facility to facilitate the extension of credit to Reserve’s dual mandate of promoting maximum em-
households and small businesses. The Commit- ployment and price stability and would not impede fos-
tee will continue to monitor carefully the size tering the stability of the financial system. A number
and composition of the Federal Reserve's bal- of participants emphasized that additional clarity on the

--- Page 16 ---

Page 16 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
longer-run inflation goal would further enhance Federal pants also discussed several technical issues related to
Reserve communications but would not involve any the implementation and communication of an explicit
substantive change in monetary policy strategy. Many numerical inflation objective. They expressed a range
participants agreed that establishing and maintaining a of views about whether such an objective should be
transparent numerical inflation objective would be expressed in terms of the consumer price index or the
helpful—at least to some degree—in anchoring infla- PCE price deflator, the merits of a point value versus a
tion expectations and thereby improve the overall ef- range, the length of time over which policy would aim
fectiveness of monetary policy; others judged that the to achieve any such objective, and the frequency with
potential benefits of an explicit numerical inflation ob- which the Committee would reevaluate this framework.
jective might be largely attained by extending the hori- At this meeting, the staff also briefed the Committee
zon of their regular projections for economic activity on the coordinated set of measures for supporting
and inflation. Some indicated that the establishment of Bank of America that had been taken by the Treasury,
a numerical inflation objective could be particularly the FDIC, and the Federal Reserve earlier that day.
helpful under present circumstances in forestalling an
unwelcome decline in longer-run inflation expecta-
tions—and hence in contributing to economic recov-
ery—while also assuring the public that actions taken
to counter economic weakness will not lead to high
_____________________________
inflation over the longer-run. However, several par-
Brian F. Madigan
ticipants expressed concern that an initiative to clarify
Secretary
the Committee’s longer-run inflation objective could be
confusing to the public in the current context of eco-
nomic weakness and financial market strains. Partici-

--- Page 17 ---

Page 1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the January 27-28, 2009 FOMC would be unusually gradual and prolonged: All partici-
meeting, the members of the Board of Governors and pants anticipated that unemployment would remain
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of substantially above its longer-run sustainable rate at the
whom participate in deliberations of the FOMC, pro- end of 2011, even absent further economic shocks; a
vided projections for economic growth, unemploy- few indicated that more than five to six years would be
ment, and inflation in 2009, 2010, 2011, and over the needed for the economy to converge to a longer-run
longer run. Projections were based on information path characterized by sustainable rates of output
available through the conclusion of the meeting, on growth and unemployment and by an appropriate rate
each participant’s assumptions regarding a range of of inflation. Participants generally judged that their
factors likely to affect economic outcomes, and on his projections for both economic activity and inflation
or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. were subject to a degree of uncertainty exceeding his-
“Appropriate monetary policy” is defined as the future torical norms. Nearly all participants viewed the risks
policy that, based on current information, is deemed to the growth outlook as skewed to the downside, and
most likely to foster outcomes for economic activity all participants saw the risks to the inflation outlook as
and inflation that best satisfy the participant’s interpre- either balanced or tilted to the downside.
tation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of
The Outlook
maximum employment and price stability. Longer-run
Participants’ projections for the change in real GDP in
projections represent each participant’s assessment of
2009 had a central tendency of -1.3 to -0.5 percent,
the rate to which each variable would be expected to
compared with the central tendency of -0.2 to 1.1 per-
converge over time under appropriate monetary policy
cent for their projections last October. In explaining
and in the absence of further shocks.
these downward revisions, participants referred to the
FOMC participants viewed the outlook for economic further intensification of the financial crisis and its ef-
activity and inflation as having weakened significantly fect on credit and wealth, the waning of consumer and
since last October, when their last projections were business confidence, the marked deceleration in global
made. As indicated in Table 1 and depicted in Figure 1, economic activity, and the weakness of incoming data
participants projected that real GDP would contract on spending and employment. Participants anticipated
this year, that the unemployment rate would increase a broad-based decline in aggregate output during the
substantially, and that consumer price inflation would first half of this year; they noted that consumer spend-
be significantly lower than in recent years. Given the ing would likely be damped by the deterioration in la-
strength of the forces currently weighing on the econ- bor markets, the tightness of credit conditions, the con-
omy, participants generally expected that the recovery tinuing decline in house prices, and the recent sharp
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Governors and Reserve Bank presidents, January 2009
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2009 2010 2011 Longer Run 2009 2010 2011 Longer Run
Change in real GDP. . . . . . -1.3 to -0.5 2.5 to 3.3 3.8 to 5.0 2.5 to 2.7 -2.5 to 0.2 1.5 to 4.5 2.3 to 5.5 2.4 to 3.0
October projection. . . . -0.2 to 1.1 2.3 to 3.2 2.8 to 3.6 n.a. -1.0 to 1.8 1.5 to 4.5 2.0 to 5.0 n.a.
Unemployment rate. . . . . . 8.5 to 8.8 8.0 to 8.3 6.7 to 7.5 4.8 to 5.0 8.0 to 9.2 7.0 to 9.2 5.5 to 8.0 4.5 to 5.5
October projection. . . . 7.1 to 7.6 6.5 to 7.3 5.5 to 6.6 n.a. 6.6 to 8.0 5.5 to 8.0 4.9 to 7.3 n.a.
PCE inflation. . . . . . . . . . . 0.3 to 1.0 1.0 to 1.5 0.9 to 1.7 1.7 to 2.0 -0.5 to 1.5 0.7 to 1.8 0.2 to 2.1 1.5 to 2.0
October projection. . . . 1.3 to 2.0 1.4 to 1.8 1.4 to 1.7 n.a. 1.0 to 2.2 1.1 to 1.9 0.8 to 1.8 n.a.
Core PCE inflation3. . . . . . 0.9 to 1.1 0.8 to 1.5 0.7 to 1.5 0.6 to 1.5 0.4 to 1.7 0.0 to 1.8
October projection. . . . 1.5 to 2.0 1.3 to 1.8 1.3 to 1.7 1.3 to 2.1 1.1 to 1.9 0.8 to 1.8
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of
the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expendi-
tures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in
the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant's projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projec-
tions represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the
absence of further shocks to the economy. The October projections were made in conjunction with the FOMC meeting on October 28-29, 2008.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants' projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

--- Page 18 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2009–11 and over the longer run
Percent
Change in real GDP 5
Central tendency of projections
4
Range of projections
3
Actual 2
1
+
_0
1
2
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Longer
Run
Percent
Unemployment rate
9
8
7
6
5
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Longer
Run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
+
_0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Longer
Run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
+
_0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual.

--- Page 19 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t io n s f o r t h e M e e t i n g o f J a n u a r y 2 7 - 2 8 , 2 0 0 9 Page 3
reduction in stock market wealth, and they saw reduc- The central tendency of participants’ projections for
tions in consumer demand contributing to further total PCE inflation this year was 0.3 to 1.0 percent,
weakness in business investment. However, partici- about a percentage point lower than the central ten-
pants expected that the economy would begin to re- dency of their projections last October. Many partici-
cover—albeit gradually—during the second half of the pants noted that recent readings on inflation had been
year, mainly reflecting the effects of fiscal stimulus and surprisingly low, and some anticipated that the unex-
of Federal Reserve measures providing support to pected declines in the prices of energy and other com-
credit markets. modities that had occurred in the latter part of 2008
would continue to hold down inflation at the consumer
Looking further ahead, participants’ growth projections
level in 2009. Participants also marked down their pro-
had a central tendency of 2.5 to 3.3 percent for 2010
jections for core PCE inflation this year in light of their
and 3.8 to 5.0 percent for 2011. Participants generally
views about the indirect effects of lower energy prices
expected that strains in financial markets would ebb
and the influence of increased resource slack.
only slowly and hence that the pace of recovery in 2010
would be damped. Nonetheless, participants generally Looking beyond this year, participants’ projections for
anticipated that real GDP growth would gain further total PCE inflation had a central tendency of 1.0 to 1.5
momentum in 2011, reaching a pace that would tempo- percent for 2010, 0.9 to 1.7 percent for 2011, and 1.7 to
rarily exceed their estimates of the longer-run sustain- 2.0 percent over the longer run. Participants’ longer-
able rate of economic growth and would thereby help run projections for total PCE inflation reflected their
reduce the slack in resource utilization. Most partici- individual assessments of the measured rates of infla-
pants expected that, absent further shocks, economic tion consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate
growth would eventually converge to a rate of 2.5 to for promoting price stability and maximum employ-
2.7 percent, reflecting longer-term trends in the growth ment. Most participants judged that a longer-run PCE
of productivity and the labor force. inflation rate of 2 percent would be consistent with the
dual mandate; others indicated that 1½ or 1¾ percent
Participants anticipated that labor market conditions
inflation would be appropriate. Modestly positive
would deteriorate substantially further over the course
longer-run inflation would allow the Committee to
of this year, and nearly all expected that unemployment
stimulate economic activity and support employment
would still be well above its longer-run sustainable rate
by setting the federal funds rate temporarily below the
at the end of 2011. Participants’ projections for the
inflation rate when the economy is buffeted by a large
average unemployment rate during the fourth quarter
negative shock to demands for goods and services.
of 2009 had a central tendency of 8.5 to 8.8 percent,
Participants generally expected that core and overall
markedly higher than last December’s actual unem-
inflation would converge over time, and that persistent
ployment rate of 7.2 percent—the latest available figure
economic slack would continue to weigh on inflation
at the time of the January FOMC meeting. Nearly all
outcomes for the next few years and hence that total
participants’ projections were more than a percentage
PCE inflation in 2011 would still be below their as-
point higher than their previous forecasts made last
sessments of the appropriate inflation rate for the
October, reflecting the sharp rise in actual unemploy-
longer run.
ment that occurred during the final months of 2008 as
well as participants’ weaker outlook for economic activ- Risks to the Outlook
ity this year. Most participants anticipated that output Participants continued to view uncertainty about the
growth in 2010 would not be substantially above its outlook for economic activity as higher than normal.1
longer-run trend rate and hence that unemployment The risks to their projections for real GDP growth
would decline only modestly next year. With economic were judged as being skewed to the downside and the
activity and job creation generally projected to acceler- associated risks to their projections for the unemploy-
ate in 2011, participants anticipated that joblessness ment rate were tilted to the upside. Participants high-
would decline more appreciably that year, as is evident
from the central tendency of 6.7 to 7.5 percent for their
1 Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for the
unemployment rate projections. Participants expected
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con-
that the unemployment rate would decline further after
sumer price inflation over the period from 1987 to 2007. At
2011, and most saw it settling in at a rate of 4.8 to 5.0
the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty”
percent over time.
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess
the uncertainty and risks attending participants’ projections.

--- Page 20 ---

P age 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges linked to their judgments about the uncertainty and
Percentage points risks to the outlook for economic activity. Some par-
Variable 2009 2010 2011
ticipants noted the risk that inflation expectations
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . . . ±1.2 ±1.4 ±1.4
might become unanchored and drift downward in re-
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . . . ±0.5 ±0.8 ±1.0 sponse to persistently low inflation outcomes, while
others pointed to the possibility of an upward shift if
Total consumer prices2 . . . . . . . ±0.9 ±1.0 ±0.9
investors became concerned that stimulative policy
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root
mean squared error of projections that were released in the winter from measures might not be unwound in a timely fashion
1987 through 2007 for the current and following two years by various once the economy begins to recover.
private and government forecasters. As described in the box “Forecast
Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent Diversity of Views
probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, unemployment, and con-
Figures 2.A and 2.B provide further details on the di-
sumer prices will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection
errors made in the past. Further information is in David Reifschneider versity of participants’ views regarding likely outcomes
and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Out- for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate, re-
look from Historical Forecasting Errors,” Finance and Economics Dis-
cussion Series 2007-60 (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve Sys- spectively. For 2009 to 2011, the dispersion in partici-
tem, November). pants’ projections for each variable was roughly the
1. For definitions, refer to general note in table 1.
same as for their projections last October. This disper-
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
that has been most widely used in government and private economic sion mainly indicated the diversity of participants’ as-
forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous sessments regarding the stimulative effects of fiscal
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The slightly narrower
policy, the pace of recovery in financial markets, and
estimated width of the confidence interval for inflation in the third year
compared with that for the second year is likely the result of using a lim- the evolution of households’ desired saving rates. The
ited sample period for computing these statistics. dispersion in participants’ longer-run projections re-
lighted the considerable degree of uncertainty about the flected differences in their estimates regarding the sus-
future course of the financial crisis and its impact on tainable rates of output growth and unemployment to
the real economy; for example, rising unemployment which the economy would converge under appropriate
and weaker growth could exacerbate delinquencies on policy and in the absence of any further shocks.
household and business loans, leading to higher losses
Figures 2.C and 2.D provide corresponding informa-
for financial firms and so to a further tightening of
tion regarding the diversity of participants’ views re-
credit conditions that would in turn put further down-
garding the inflation outlook. The dispersion in par-
ward pressure on spending to a greater degree than
ticipants’ projections for total PCE inflation in 2009
currently foreseen. In addition, some participants
was substantially greater than for their projections
noted that a substantial degree of uncertainty was asso-
made last October, due to increased diversity of par-
ciated with gauging the stimulative effects of nontradi-
ticipants’ views regarding the near-term evolution of
tional monetary policy tools that are now being em-
prices of energy and raw materials and the extent to
ployed given that conventional policy easing was lim-
which changes in those prices would be likely to pass
ited by the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates.
through into overall inflation. The dispersion in par-
Others referred to uncertainties regarding the size,
ticipants’ projections for core PCE inflation in 2009
composition, and effectiveness of the fiscal stimulus
was noticeably lower than last October, but the disper-
package—which was still under consideration at the
sion in their projections for core inflation in 2010 and
time of the FOMC meeting—and of further measures
2011 was markedly wider, reflecting varying assess-
to stabilize the banking system.
ments about the timing and pace of economic recovery,
As in October, most participants continued to view the the sensitivity of inflation to slack in resource utiliza-
uncertainty surrounding their inflation projections as tion, the prevalence of downward nominal wage rigid-
higher than historical norms. A slight majority of par- ity, and the likelihood that inflation expectations will
ticipants judged the risks to the inflation outlook as remain firmly anchored. A few participants anticipated
roughly balanced, while the rest viewed these risks as that inflation in 2011 would be close to their longer-run
skewed to the downside. Participants indicated that projections. However, most participants’ projections
elevated uncertainty about global growth was clouding for total PCE inflation in 2011 were below their longer-
the outlook for prices of energy and other commodities run projections, primarily reflecting the anticipated ef-
and hence contributing to greater uncertainty in their fects of substantial slack over the next three years; this
inflation projections. Many participants stated that inflation gap was about ¼ to ½ percentage point for
their assessments regarding the level of uncertainty and some participants but exceeded a full percentage point
balance of risks to the inflation outlook were closely for others.

--- Page 21 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t io n s f o r t h e M e e t i n g o f J a n u a r y 2 7 - 2 8 , 2 0 0 9 Page 5
Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2009–11 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2009
January projections 12
October projections
10
8
6
4
2
-2.6--2.4--2.2--2.0--1.8--1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2-0.0-0.2-0.4-0.6-0.8-1.0-1.2-1.4-1.6-1.8-2.0-2.2-2.4-2.6-2.8-3.0-3.2-3.4-3.6-3.8-4.0-4.2-4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-5.4-
-2.5 -2.3 -2.1 -1.9 -1.7 -1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2010
12
10
8
6
4
2
-2.6--2.4--2.2--2.0--1.8--1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2-0.0-0.2-0.4-0.6-0.8-1.0-1.2-1.4-1.6-1.8-2.0-2.2-2.4-2.6-2.8-3.0-3.2-3.4-3.6-3.8-4.0-4.2-4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-5.4-
-2.5 -2.3 -2.1 -1.9 -1.7 -1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2011
12
10
8
6
4
2
-2.6--2.4--2.2--2.0--1.8--1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2-0.0-0.2-0.4-0.6-0.8-1.0-1.2-1.4-1.6-1.8-2.0-2.2-2.4-2.6-2.8-3.0-3.2-3.4-3.6-3.8-4.0-4.2-4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-5.4-
-2.5 -2.3 -2.1 -1.9 -1.7 -1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer Run
12
10
8
6
4
2
-2.6--2.4--2.2--2.0--1.8--1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2-0.0-0.2-0.4-0.6-0.8-1.0-1.2-1.4-1.6-1.8-2.0-2.2-2.4-2.6-2.8-3.0-3.2-3.4-3.6-3.8-4.0-4.2-4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-5.4-
-2.5 -2.3 -2.1 -1.9 -1.7 -1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 22 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2009–11 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2009
January projections 12
October projections
10
8
6
4
2
4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2-
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2010
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2-
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2011
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2-
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer Run
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2-
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 23 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t io n s f o r t h e M e e t i n g o f J a n u a r y 2 7 - 2 8 , 2 0 0 9 Page 7
Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2009–11 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2009
January projections 12
October projections
10
8
6
4
2
-0.5- -0.3- -0.1- 0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1-
-0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2010
12
10
8
6
4
2
-0.5- -0.3- -0.1- 0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1-
-0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2011
12
10
8
6
4
2
-0.5- -0.3- -0.1- 0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1-
-0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer Run
12
10
8
6
4
2
-0.5- -0.3- -0.1- 0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1-
-0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 24 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 2.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inflation, 2009–11
Number of participants
2009
January projections 12
October projections
10
8
6
4
2
-0.1- 0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1-
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2010
12
10
8
6
4
2
-0.1- 0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1-
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2011
12
10
8
6
4
2
-0.1- 0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1-
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 25 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t io n s f o r t h e M e e t i n g o f J a n u a r y 2 7 - 2 8 , 2 0 0 9 Page 9
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the past and the risks around the projections
the members of the Board of Governors and are broadly balanced, the numbers reported in
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks table 2 would imply a probability of about 70
inform discussions of monetary policy among percent that actual GDP would expand be-
policymakers and can aid public understand- tween 1.8 percent to 4.2 percent in the current
ing of the basis for policy actions. Consider- year and 1.6 percent to 4.4 percent in the sec-
able uncertainty attends these projections, ond and third years. The corresponding 70
however. The economic and statistical models percent confidence intervals for overall infla-
and relationships used to help produce eco- tion would be 1.1 percent to 2.9 percent in the
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de- current year, 1.0 percent to 3.0 percent in the
scriptions of the real world. And the future second year, and 1.1 percent to 2.9 percent in
path of the economy can be affected by myr- the third year.
iad unforeseen developments and events. Because current conditions may differ
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, from those that prevailed on average over his-
participants consider not only what appears to tory, participants provide judgments as to
be the most likely economic outcome as em- whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
bodied in their projections, but also the range jections of each variable is greater than, smaller
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
their occurring, and the potential costs to the forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in
economy should they occur. table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
Table 2 summarizes the average historical to whether the risks to their projections are
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including weighted to the upside, downside, or are
those reported in past Monetary Policy Re- broadly balanced. That is, participants judge
ports and those prepared by Federal Reserve whether each variable is more likely to be
Board staff in advance of meetings of the above or below their projections of the most
Federal Open Market Committee. The pro- likely outcome. These judgments about the
jection error ranges shown in the table illus- uncertainty and the risks attending each par-
trate the considerable uncertainty associated ticipant’s projections are distinct from the di-
with economic forecasts. For example, sup- versity of participants’ views about the most
pose a participant projects that real GDP and likely outcomes. Forecast uncertainty is con-
total consumer prices will rise steadily at an- cerned with the risks associated with a particu-
nual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and 2 lar projection, rather than with divergences
percent. If the uncertainty attending those across a number of different projections.
projections is similar to that experienced in

# Tables

## Page_14_Table_1


| “The Federal Open Market Committee decided         |
|----------------------------------------------------|
| today to keep its target range for the federal     |
| funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee        |
| continues to anticipate that economic condi-       |
| tions are likely to warrant exceptionally low lev- |
| els of the federal funds rate for some time.       |


## Page_15_Table_1


| Information received since the Committee met        |
|-----------------------------------------------------|
| in December suggests that the economy has           |
| weakened further. Industrial production, hous-      |
| ing starts, and employment have continued to        |
| decline steeply, as consumers and businesses        |
| have cut back spending. Furthermore, global         |
| demand appears to be slowing significantly.         |
| Conditions in some financial markets have im-       |
| proved, in part reflecting government efforts to    |
| provide liquidity and strengthen financial institu- |
| tions; nevertheless, credit conditions for house-   |
| holds and firms remain extremely tight. The         |
| Committee anticipates that a gradual recovery in    |
| economic activity will begin later this year, but   |
| the downside risks to that outlook are signifi-     |
| cant.                                               |
| In light of the declines in the prices of energy    |
| and other commodities in recent months and          |
| the prospects for considerable economic slack,      |
| the Committee expects that inflation pressures      |
| will remain subdued in coming quarters. More-       |
| over, the Committee sees some risk that infla-      |
| tion could persist for a time below rates that      |
| best foster economic growth and price stability     |
| in the longer term.                                 |
| The Federal Reserve will employ all available       |
| tools to promote the resumption of sustainable      |
| economic growth and to preserve price stability.    |
| The focus of the Committee's policy is to sup-      |
| port the functioning of financial markets and       |
| stimulate the economy through open market           |
| operations and other measures that are likely to    |
| keep the size of the Federal Reserve's balance      |
| sheet at a high level. The Federal Reserve con-     |
| tinues to purchase large quantities of agency       |
| debt and mortgage-backed securities to provide      |
| support to the mortgage and housing markets,        |
| and it stands ready to expand the quantity of       |
| such purchases and the duration of the purchase     |
| program as conditions warrant. The Committee        |
| also is prepared to purchase longer-term Treas-     |
| ury securities if evolving circumstances indicate   |
| that such transactions would be particularly ef-    |
| fective in improving conditions in private credit   |
| markets. The Federal Reserve will be imple-         |
| menting the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan       |
| Facility to facilitate the extension of credit to   |
| households and small businesses. The Commit-        |
| tee will continue to monitor carefully the size     |
| and composition of the Federal Reserve's bal-       |


## Page_15_Table_2


| ance sheet in light of evolving financial market   |
|----------------------------------------------------|
| developments and to assess whether expansions      |
| of or modifications to lending facilities would    |
| serve to further support credit markets and eco-   |
| nomic activity and help to preserve price stabil-  |
| ity.”                                              |


## Page_17_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |      |      |            |      |      |      |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|------------|------|------|------|
| 2009                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | 2010 | 2011 | Longer Run | 2009 | 2010 | 2011 |
| -1.3 to -0.5 2.5 to 3.3 3.8 to 5.0 2.5 to 2.7
-0.2 to 1.1 2.3 to 3.2 2.8 to 3.6 n.a.
8.5 to 8.8 8.0 to 8.3 6.7 to 7.5 4.8 to 5.0
7.1 to 7.6 6.5 to 7.3 5.5 to 6.6 n.a.
0.3 to 1.0 1.0 to 1.5 0.9 to 1.7 1.7 to 2.0
1.3 to 2.0 1.4 to 1.8 1.4 to 1.7 n.a.
0.9 to 1.1 0.8 to 1.5 0.7 to 1.5
1.5 to 2.0 1.3 to 1.8 1.3 to 1.7 |      |      |            |      |      |      |