# 20090429_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:36:09*
*Pages: 20, Tables: 2*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Page 1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
April 28-29, 2009
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit- Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of
tee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve the Staff Director for Management, Board of
System was held in the offices of the Board of Gover- Governors
nors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 28, 2009,
at 2:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, April 29, Ms. Barger and Mr. English, Deputy Directors, Di-
2009, at 9:00 a.m. visions of Banking Supervision and Regulation
and Monetary Affairs, respectively, Board of
PRESENT: Governors
Mr. Bernanke, Chairman
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Ms. Duke Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Evans
Mr. Kohn Messrs. Levin, Nelson, Reifschneider, and Wasch-
Mr. Lacker er, Associate Directors, Divisions of Monetary
Mr. Lockhart Affairs, Monetary Affairs, Research and Statis-
Mr. Tarullo tics, and Research and Statistics, respectively,
Mr. Warsh Board of Governors
Ms. Yellen
Mr. Meyer, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary
Mr. Bullard, Ms. Cumming, Mr. Hoenig, Ms. Pia- Affairs, Board of Governors
nalto, and Mr. Rosengren, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee Mr. Carpenter, Deputy Associate Director, Divi-
sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Fisher, Plosser, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Philadel- Mr. Palumbo, Assistant Director, Division of Re-
phia, and Minneapolis, respectively search and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Luecke, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Ms. Judson and Mr. Nichols,² Economists, Divi-
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary sions of Monetary Affairs and Research and
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel Statistics, respectively, Board of Governors
Mr. Sheets, Economist
Mr. Stockton, Economist Ms. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Office of
the Secretary, Board of Governors
Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman,
Sullivan, Wilcox, and Williams, Associate Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-
Economists sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Mosser, Temporary Manager, System Open Mr. Barron, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Market Account Bank of Atlanta
Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Frierson,¹ Deputy Secretary, Office of the Sec- ¹ Attended Wednesday’s session only.
retary, Board of Governors ² Attended Tuesday’s session only.

--- Page 2 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Messrs. Rosenblum and Sniderman, Executive Vice stantial risks, implying considerable uncertainty regard-
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas ing those assumptions and the resulting projections of
and Cleveland, respectively the balance sheet and the monetary base.
The staff briefed the Committee on recent develop-
Mr. Hakkio, Ms. Mester, and Messrs. Rasche and
ments related to the Term Asset-Backed Securities
Rolnick, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Re-
Loan Facility (TALF), which was authorized by the
serve Banks of Kansas City, Philadelphia, St.
Board of Governors last November under section
Louis, and Minneapolis, respectively
13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act. Under the TALF,
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York extended three-
Messrs. Burke, Hornstein, and Olivei, Vice Presi-
year loans secured by AAA-rated asset-backed securi-
dents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York,
ties (ABS); these securities were backed by new and
Richmond, and Boston, respectively
recently originated loans made by financial institutions.
The first two monthly subscriptions of the TALF set-
Mr. Rich, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve
tled during the intermeeting period. At this meeting,
Bank of New York
the Committee discussed the potential benefits of ac-
cepting newly issued, AAA-rated commercial mort-
gage-backed securities and insurance premium finance
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
ABS as eligible collateral for TALF loans. Meeting par-
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
ticipants also discussed the possibility that some new
The Manager of the System Open Market Account
TALF loans would have a longer maturity of five years.
reported on recent developments in domestic and for-
eign financial markets. The Manager also reported on Secretary’s note: The Board of Governors
System open market operations in Treasury securities subsequently approved the broadening of
and in agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securi- the list of TALF-eligible collateral and the
ties (MBS) during the period since the Committee’s addition of five-year loans to the facility, as
March 17-18 meeting. By unanimous vote, the Com- announced on May 1, 2009.
mittee ratified those transactions. There were no open
By unanimous vote, the Committee decided to extend
market operations in foreign currencies for the Sys-
the reciprocal currency (“swap”) arrangements with the
tem’s account over the intermeeting period.
Bank of Canada and the Banco de Mexico for an addi-
The staff reported on recent developments in System tional year, beginning in mid-December 2009; these
liquidity programs and on changes in the System’s bal- arrangements are associated with the Federal Reserve’s
ance sheet. As of April 22, the System’s total assets participation in the North American Framework
and liabilities were close to $2.2 trillion, about $130 Agreement of 1994. The arrangement with the Bank of
billion higher than just before the March meeting. Sys- Canada is in the amount of $2 billion equivalent, and
tem holdings of agency debt and agency MBS ex- that with the Banco de Mexico is in the amount of $3
panded by $215 billion over the same period. Credit billion equivalent. The vote to renew the System’s par-
extended through the Federal Reserve’s liquidity facili- ticipation in these swap arrangements was taken at this
ties decreased, owing, at least in part, to the recent im- meeting because of the provision in the arrangements
provement in short-term funding markets. that requires each party to provide six months’ prior
notice of an intention to terminate its participation.
The staff also provided the Committee with projections
that were intended to illustrate the potential evolution Staff Review of the Economic Situation
of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over coming The information reviewed at the April 28-29 meeting
years under a variety of assumptions about the eco- indicated that the pace of decline in some components
nomic and financial outlook and the associated path of of final demand appeared to have slowed recently.
monetary policy. The general contours of the projec- Consumer spending firmed in the first quarter after
tions—a rapid near-term increase in Federal Reserve dropping markedly during the second half of 2008.
assets and the monetary base, followed by a decline for Housing activity remained depressed but seemed to
a time—were the same in each case, but the timing and have leveled off in February and March. In contrast,
magnitude varied significantly depending upon the un- businesses cut production and employment substantial-
derlying assumptions. Moreover, many aspects of the ly in recent months—likely reflecting, in part, inventory
economic and financial outlook were subject to sub- overhangs that persisted into the early part of the

--- Page 3 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 8 - 2 9 , 2 0 0 9 Page 3
year—and fixed investment continued to contract. timent strengthened a bit in early April, as households
Headline and core consumer prices rose at a moderate expressed somewhat more optimism about long-term
pace over the first three months of the year. economic conditions; however, even with this im-
provement, the measure was only slightly above the
Labor market conditions deteriorated further in March.
historical low for the series recorded last November.
Private nonfarm payroll employment registered its fifth
consecutive large monthly decrease, with losses wide- The latest readings from the housing market suggested
spread across industries. Moreover, the average work- that the contraction in housing activity might have
week of production and nonsupervisory workers on moderated over the first quarter. Single-family housing
private payrolls ticked down in March from the low starts flattened out in February and March, and, after
level recorded in January and February, and total hours adjusting for activity outside of permit-issuing areas,
worked for this group stayed below the fourth-quarter the level of permits in March remained above the level
average. The civilian unemployment rate climbed to of starts. The contraction in the multifamily sector also
8.5 percent, and the labor force participation rate edged showed signs of slowing, as the drop in starts in the
down from its February level. The four-week moving first quarter was well below the pace experienced dur-
average of initial claims for unemployment insurance ing the fourth quarter of 2008. Recent data also indi-
remained elevated in April, and the number of individ- cated that housing demand might have stabilized. Sales
uals receiving unemployment benefits relative to the of new single-family homes held steady in March after
size of the labor force reached its highest level since edging up in February, but the level of such sales re-
1982. mained low, leaving the supply of new homes relative
to the pace of sales very high by historical standards.
Industrial production fell substantially in March and for
Existing home sales in March were slightly below the
the first quarter as a whole, with cutbacks widespread
average pace for January and February. Most national
across sectors, and manufacturing capacity utilization
indexes of house prices stayed on a downward trajecto-
decreased to a very low level. First-quarter domestic
ry. Lower mortgage rates and house prices contributed
production of light motor vehicles reached the lowest
to an increase in housing affordability. Rates for con-
level in more than three decades as inventories of such
forming 30-year fixed-rate mortgages extended the sig-
vehicles, while low, remained high relative to sales.
nificant decline that began late last year. Rates on jum-
The output of high-technology products decreased in
bo loans came down as well, although the spread be-
March and in the first quarter overall, with production
tween the rates on jumbo and conforming loans was
of computers and semiconductors extending the
still wide and the market for private-label nonprime
downward trend that had begun in the second half of
MBS remained impaired.
2008. In contrast, the production of communications
equipment edged up in the first quarter. The output of Real spending on equipment and software dropped
other consumer durables and business equipment markedly in the first quarter, with declines about as
stayed low, and broad indicators of near-term manufac- steep and widespread as in the fourth quarter of 2008.
turing activity suggested that factory output would con- Orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods
tract over the next few months. excluding aircraft fell in March, turning negative again
after having been flat in February. The fundamental
The available data suggested that real consumer spend-
determinants of equipment and software investment
ing rose moderately in the first quarter after having fal-
stayed weak in the first quarter: Business output con-
len in the second half of last year. Real spending on
tinued to drop sharply, and credit availability was still
goods and services excluding motor vehicles fell in
tight. In the April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey
March but was up, on balance, for the first quarter as a
on Bank Lending Practices, the net percentages of res-
whole. Real outlays on new and used motor vehicles
pondents that reported they tightened their business
expanded in the first quarter following six consecutive
lending policies over the previous three months, al-
quarterly declines. Despite the upturn in consumer
though continuing to be very elevated, edged down for
spending, the fundamentals for this sector remained
the second consecutive survey. Real spending on non-
weak: Wages and salaries dropped, house prices were
residential structures contracted in the first quarter.
markedly lower than a year ago, and, despite recent
Despite the significant cuts in production in recent
increases, equity prices were down substantially from
quarters, inventories remained sizable early in the year,
their levels of 12 months earlier. As measured by the
although the overhang appeared to be less severe than
Reuters/University of Michigan survey, consumer sen-

--- Page 4 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
in late 2008. Given the elevated level of inventories, kets. However, investors were apparently surprised by
firms continued their efforts to reduce their stocks. the Committee’s announcement that it would increase
significantly further the size of the Federal Reserve’s
The U.S. international trade deficit diminished in Feb-
balance sheet by purchasing up to $300 billion in Trea-
ruary to its lowest level since November 1999, as im-
sury securities and expanding purchases of agency MBS
ports fell and exports rose a bit. Most major categories
and agency debt. In addition, market participants re-
of exports increased, especially sales of consumer
portedly interpreted the statement that the federal
goods, and within that category, pharmaceuticals. Ex-
funds rate was likely to remain exceptionally low “for
ports of capital goods rose despite a modest decrease in
an extended period” as stronger than the phrase “for
exports of aircraft, and exports of automotive products
some time” in the previous statement. Rates on Euro-
increased following a marked drop in January; in con-
dollar futures contracts and yields on Treasury and
trast, exports of services declined in February. All ma-
agency securities fell considerably in response to the
jor categories of imports decreased. The fall in oil im-
statement. The initial drop in the expected path for the
ports was driven by lower volumes as prices moved up
federal funds rate was reversed over subsequent weeks,
slightly; prices of non-oil imports moved down, but
however, likely in response to the somewhat better
falling volumes accounted for most of the decline in
economic outlook. Similarly, a portion of the substan-
this category.
tial declines in yields on nominal Treasury coupon se-
Economic conditions again worsened in the advanced curities that followed the FOMC announcement was
foreign economies in the first quarter. Industrial pro- subsequently unwound amid the improved economic
duction continued to drop through February, employ- outlook, an easing of concern about financial institu-
ment declined substantially, and retail sales were weak. tions, and perhaps some reversal of flight-to-quality
However, indicators of developments late in the first flows. Yields on inflation-indexed Treasury securities
quarter, particularly the purchasing managers indexes fell a bit more than those on their nominal counter-
for all of the major advanced economies, increased, parts, which decreased modestly, on net, over the pe-
suggesting some moderation in the pace of contraction riod. As a result, inflation compensation rose at short-
of economic activity going forward. The first-quarter er horizons but changed little at longer horizons. Poor
data also offered a few tentative signs that the decelera- liquidity in the market for Treasury inflation-protected
tion of economic activity in emerging markets might securities continued to make these readings difficult to
have started to abate. In particular, the growth of real interpret.
gross domestic product (GDP) in China appeared to
Conditions in short-term funding markets improved
pick up on a quarterly basis following fiscal stimulus
somewhat over the intermeeting period. In unsecured
measures and steps to foster credit expansion.
bank funding markets, spreads of dollar London inter-
In the United States, overall consumer prices increased bank offered rates (Libor) over comparable-maturity
over the first three months of 2009 after falling in the overnight index swap (OIS) rates edged down, al-
fourth quarter of 2008: Energy prices rebounded though Libor fixings beyond the one-month maturity
somewhat after their substantial late-year drop, and stayed elevated. Spreads on A2/P2-rated commercial
core prices picked up. In contrast, the producer price paper and AA-rated asset-backed commercial paper
index for core intermediate materials fell, though at a narrowed a bit, on net, staying at the low end of their
noticeably slower pace than in late 2008. Indexes of respective ranges over the past year. Functioning in the
commodity prices rose in March but stayed far below repurchase agreement (repo) market showed additional
their year-earlier values. Near-term inflation expecta- improvement, as bid-asked spreads and “haircuts” on
tions increased in early April but did not appear to in- most collateral either narrowed or held steady, although
fluence longer-term expectations, whose levels in April repo volumes were still low. Consistent with modestly
were still at the low end of the range seen over the past better conditions in the term repo market, all seven
few years. Hourly earnings of production and nonsu- auctions under the Term Securities Lending Facility
pervisory workers edged up in March. were undersubscribed over the intermeeting period,
including two auctions that garnered no bids.
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
The decision by the Federal Open Market Committee Trading conditions in the secondary market for nomin-
(FOMC) at the March meeting to leave the target range al Treasury securities also showed some signs of im-
for the federal funds rate unchanged was widely antic- provement. Premiums paid for on-the-run Treasury
ipated and had little effect on short-term money mar- securities fell, and average bid-asked spreads for Trea-

--- Page 5 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 8 - 2 9 , 2 0 0 9 Page 5
sury notes were relatively stable near their pre-crisis was tepid, as robust bond issuance was partly offset by
levels. Still, daily trading volumes for Treasury securi- declines in commercial paper and bank loans. Federal
ties remained low. debt rose briskly in the first quarter.
Broad stock price indexes rose significantly, reportedly M2 expanded rapidly in March. A strong increase in
buoyed by announcements of policy measures to en- liquid deposits, the largest component of M2, likely
hance credit markets and clean up banks’ balance reflected further reallocations by households toward
sheets and perhaps by some reduction in concerns safer assets. Retail money market mutual funds and
about the economic outlook. Financial stocks outper- small time deposits contracted modestly. Currency
formed broader markets, boosted by relatively favora- growth was apparently bolstered by elevated foreign
ble first-quarter earnings reports from a few major demand.
firms. The spread between the forward trend earnings-
Commercial bank credit contracted in March and was
price ratio for S&P 500 firms and an estimate of the
estimated to have dropped again in April. The decline
real long-run Treasury yield—a rough gauge of the eq-
in bank credit in March was due importantly to a de-
uity risk premium—narrowed during the intermeeting
crease in loans to businesses that reflected, in part, pay-
period but was still very high by historical standards.
downs with the proceeds of bond issuance. Commer-
Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index de-
cial real estate loans also fell. Bank lending to house-
creased but stayed well above historical norms.
holds was weak, although credit extended under revolv-
On net, yields on lower-rated investment-grade and ing home equity lines of credit again expanded robustly.
speculative-grade corporate bonds dropped, resulting in Residential mortgage loans on banks’ books fell, on
a narrowing of spreads in yields on such bonds over balance, in March and the first part of April; banks re-
those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities. portedly sold a considerable amount of single-family
Even so, corporate bond spreads remained extremely mortgages to the government-sponsored enterprises.
high by historical standards. Consumer loans held by banks also shrank, amid heavy
securitization. The Senior Loan Officer Opinion Sur-
Indicators of functioning in the corporate bond mar-
vey conducted in April indicated that banks continued
ket—such as bid-asked spreads estimated by the
to tighten their credit standards and terms on all major
staff—suggested that conditions in the speculative-
loan categories over the previous three months.
grade segment of the market had become less strained
since last autumn. Corresponding measures for in- Stock markets around the world rose substantially over
vestment-grade bonds hovered at moderately elevated the intermeeting period amid somewhat better senti-
levels. The leveraged loan market showed some im- ment regarding economic prospects, reports of better-
provement over the past few months, with the average than-expected performance from some financial firms
bid-asked spread narrowing and the average bid price in the United States and Europe, and continued sup-
moving up from a very depressed level. The basis be- port from monetary policies. Pressures in bank fund-
tween an index of credit default swap spreads and ing markets seemed to ease over the period: Spreads
measures of investment-grade corporate spreads—a between both euro and sterling Libor and their respec-
rough proxy for unexploited arbitrage opportunities in tive OIS rates narrowed significantly, and financial
the corporate credit market—stayed at high levels, re- conditions in most emerging market economies im-
portedly reflecting an ongoing lack of financing capaci- proved. The dollar depreciated against the other major
ty at major financial institutions. No issuance of com- currencies in an environment of seemingly increased
mercial MBS occurred over the intermeeting period. investor appetite for risk.
The debt of the domestic private nonfinancial sector During the intermeeting period, foreign authorities
appeared to have contracted in the first quarter at took additional steps to address the weaknesses in their
about the same pace as in the fourth quarter of 2008. economies and financial systems. The European Cen-
Activity in the mortgage market reflected mainly refi- tral Bank and the Bank of Canada, along with several
nancing, and staff estimates indicated that residential other central banks in both the advanced and emerging
mortgage debt contracted again in the first quarter, de- market economies, cut policy rates, while the Bank of
pressed by the very low pace of home sales, falling England and the Bank of Japan continued their asset
house prices, and write-downs of nonperforming loans. purchases to provide further monetary stimulus. Sev-
Consumer credit was essentially flat in January and eral governments, including Japan and Taiwan, an-
February. Expansion of nonfinancial business debt nounced new fiscal stimulus packages, and a number of

--- Page 6 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
European countries took additional measures to sup- Participants’ Views and Committee Policy Action
port their banking sectors. In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, all meeting
participants—the five members of the Board of Gov-
Staff Economic Outlook
ernors and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve
In the forecast for the meeting, which was prepared
Banks—provided projections for economic growth, the
prior to the release of the advance estimates of the
unemployment rate, and consumer price inflation for
first-quarter national income and product accounts, the
each year from 2009 through 2011 and over a longer
staff revised up its outlook for economic activity in
horizon. Longer-run projections represent each partic-
response to recent favorable financial developments as
ipant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable
well as better-than-expected readings on final sales.
would be expected to converge over time under appro-
Consumer purchases appeared to have stabilized after
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further
falling in the second half of 2008, and the steep decline
shocks. Participants’ forecasts through 2011 and over
in the housing sector seemed to be abating. However,
the longer run are described in the Summary of Eco-
the contraction in the labor market persisted into
nomic Projections, which is attached as an addendum
March, industrial production again fell rapidly, and the
to these minutes.
broad-based decline in equipment and software in-
vestment continued. Conditions in financial markets In their discussion of the economic situation and out-
improved more than had been expected: Private bor- look, participants agreed that the information received
rowing rates moved lower, stock prices rose substan- since the March meeting provided some tentative evi-
tially, and some measures of financial stress eased. The dence that the pace of contraction in real economic
staff’s projections for economic activity in the second activity was starting to diminish. Participants noted
half of 2009 and in 2010 were revised up, with real that financial market conditions had generally streng-
GDP expected to edge higher in the second half and thened, and surveys and anecdotal reports pointed to a
then increase moderately next year. The key factors pickup in household and business confidence, which
expected to drive the acceleration in activity were the nonetheless remained at very low levels. Some signs
boost to spending from fiscal stimulus, the bottoming pointing toward economic stabilization were seen in
out of the housing market, a turn in the inventory cycle data on consumer spending, housing, and factory or-
from liquidation to modest accumulation, and ongoing ders. Although economic activity was being damped
gradual recovery of financial markets. The staff again by the efforts of businesses to pare excess inventories,
expected that the unemployment rate would rise the substantial drawdown in inventories over recent
through the beginning of 2010 before edging down months was viewed as raising the prospects for a gra-
over the rest of that year. The staff forecast for overall dual expansion in industrial production later this year.
and core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) Participants anticipated that the acceleration in final
inflation over the next two years was revised up demand and economic activity over the next few quar-
slightly. The staff raised its near-term estimate of core ters would be modest. Growth of consumption ex-
PCE inflation because recent data on core and overall penditures was likely to be restrained by the weakness
PCE price inflation came in a bit higher than antic- in labor markets and the lagged effects of past reduc-
ipated. Beyond the near term, however, the staff antic- tions in household wealth. Business investment spend-
ipated that the low level of resource utilization and a ing would probably shrink further. Adverse global
gradual decline in inflation expectations would lead to a economic and financial conditions would continue to
deceleration in core PCE prices. Looking out to 2011, weigh on the demand for U.S. exports.
the staff anticipated that financial markets and institu-
Financial market developments over the intermeeting
tions would continue to recuperate, monetary policy
period were mainly seen as positive. Equity prices in-
would remain stimulative, fiscal stimulus would be fad-
creased, money markets were functioning better, and
ing, and inflation expectations would be relatively well
corporate issuance of bonds and convertible securities
anchored. Under such conditions, the staff projected
was relatively brisk. Measures of volatility and financial
that real GDP would expand at a rate well above that
stress moved down and risk spreads narrowed in many
of its potential, that the unemployment rate would de-
markets, perhaps partly because of investors’ percep-
cline significantly, and that overall and core PCE infla-
tions of diminished downside tail risks. Even so, risk
tion would stay in a low range.
spreads remained unusually wide and markets contin-
ued to be fragile. Despite the improvement in financial
markets, credit conditions stayed quite restrictive for

--- Page 7 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 8 - 2 9 , 2 0 0 9 Page 7
many households and businesses. The April Senior investment and would tend to induce manufacturers to
Loan Officer Opinion Survey showed that a large net begin rebuilding depleted stocks of inventories later
fraction of banks had tightened their terms and stan- this year, thereby reinforcing the pickup in industrial
dards for credit during the previous three months, al- production. The outlook in some other sectors seemed
beit a modestly smaller fraction than indicated by the less propitious; for example, one participant described
January survey. Moreover, meeting participants noted survey data indicating that firms in the service sector
that the volume of credit extended to households and were expecting sales to decrease further in coming
businesses was still contracting as a result of shrinking months, and others referred to cutbacks in drilling and
demand, declining credit quality, capital constraints on mining.
financial institutions, and the limited availability of fi-
The economies of many key trading partners were seen
nancing through securitization markets.
as experiencing quite severe contractions. Participants
Consumer spending firmed somewhat during the first noted that banking institutions in a number of coun-
quarter despite the rising unemployment rate and sig- tries remained exposed to substantial further losses,
nificant financial strains. Participants generally ex- and the process of repairing the balance sheets of such
pected that household demand would gradually streng- institutions would likely continue to restrain growth in
then over coming quarters in response to the rise in those economies over coming quarters and hence
household wealth from the substantial increase in equi- damp the outlook for U.S. export demand. A few
ty prices that had occurred over the intermeeting pe- countries did show some signs that weakness was abat-
riod as well as the support for income provided by fis- ing, perhaps reflecting, in part, rapid implementation of
cal policy. Nevertheless, participants judged that the fiscal stimulus; furthermore, the recent firming of
recovery in consumer demand over the next few quar- commodity prices gave an indication that global weak-
ters would be slow, reflecting adverse labor market ness might be starting to subside.
conditions and continuing adjustments to earlier reduc-
Although the near-term economic outlook had im-
tions in household wealth.
proved modestly since March, participants emphasized
Some participants referred to the possibility that activi- the tentative nature of the incoming data, which are
ty in the housing market might finally be approaching a volatile and subject to revision. The experience of pre-
trough. Indicators of new home sales appeared to be vious recessions underscored the challenges of identify-
stabilizing, and inventories of unsold homes diminished ing the onset of economic recovery using real-time in-
somewhat. Participants also reported some signs that dicators. Also, empirical analysis of past episodes in
the decline in home prices might be slowing. the United States and abroad in which economic down-
turns had been triggered by financial crises generally
Labor market conditions were still deteriorating. Un-
concluded that such contractions tended to be more
employment claims were exceptionally elevated, and
severe and protracted than other recessions. Moreover,
the ratio of permanent job cuts to temporary layoffs
participants continued to see significant downside risks
was substantially higher than in previous economic
to the economic outlook. In particular, while financial
downturns. Staff reductions were under way even at
strains and risk spreads had lessened somewhat over
traditionally stable employers such as hospitals and
the intermeeting period, participants agreed that the
nonprofit institutions. An unusually large proportion
global financial system remained vulnerable to further
of employed persons indicated that they were engaged
shocks. In discussing the Supervisory Capital Assess-
in part-time work because they could not obtain full-
ment Program, which was being conducted jointly by
time jobs.
the Federal Reserve and other bank supervisory author-
Participants cited the magnitude of the retrenchment in ities, a number of participants noted that investors were
production and capital spending, but they also noted concerned that the upcoming publication of stress test
that manufacturing surveys and informal contacts sug- results might trigger volatility in financial markets.
gested a noticeable upturn in business sentiment: A Some participants also referred to mounting losses in
number of participants highlighted regional surveys commercial real estate, which could have substantial
reporting that greater numbers of industrial firms antic- adverse consequences for regional banks and other
ipated that their orders and shipments would start ex- financial institutions with significant concentrations of
panding over the next six months. Some participants such assets.
expected that a gradual strengthening of retail sales
would lead to an abatement of the decline in capital

--- Page 8 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Looking further ahead, participants considered a num- chases in accordance with the amounts that had pre-
ber of factors that would be likely to restrain the pace viously been announced—that is, up to $1.25 trillion of
of economic recovery over the medium term. Strains agency MBS and up to $200 billion of agency debt by
in credit markets were expected to recede only gradual- the end of this year, and up to $300 billion of Treasury
ly as financial institutions continued to rebuild their securities by autumn. Some members noted that a fur-
capital and remained cautious in their approach to as- ther increase in the total amount of purchases might
set-liability management, especially given that the out- well be warranted at some point to spur a more rapid
look for credit performance was likely to improve slow- pace of recovery; all members concurred with waiting
ly. Some sectors—such as financial services and resi- to see how the economy and financial conditions re-
dential construction—might well account for a smaller spond to the policy actions already in train before de-
share of the economy in coming years, and the result- ciding whether to adjust the size or timing of asset pur-
ing reallocation of labor across sectors could weigh on chases. The Committee reaffirmed the need to moni-
labor markets for some time. Households would likely tor carefully the size and composition of the Federal
remain cautious, and their desired saving rates would Reserve’s balance sheet in light of economic and finan-
be relatively high over the extended period that would cial developments. The Committee also discussed its
be required to bring their stock of wealth back up to strategy for communicating the anticipated path of its
more normal levels relative to income. The stimulus asset purchases and the circumstances under which
from fiscal policy was expected to diminish over time adjustments to that path would be appropriate. All
as the government budget moved to a sustainable path. members agreed that the statement should note that
Demand for U.S. exports would also take time to re- the timing and overall amounts of the Committee’s
vive, reflecting the gradual recovery of major trading asset purchases would continue to be evaluated in light
partners. of the evolving economic outlook and conditions in
financial markets.
Most participants expected inflation to remain subdued
over the next few years, and they saw some risk that At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
elevated unemployment and low capacity utilization voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
could cause inflation to remain persistently below the of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex-
rates that they judged as most consistent with sustaina- ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance
ble economic growth and price stability. Nonetheless, with the following domestic policy directive:
recent monthly readings on consumer price inflation
“The Federal Open Market Committee
had been above the low rates observed late last year,
seeks monetary and financial conditions
and survey measures of longer-run inflation expecta-
that will foster price stability and promote
tions had remained reasonably stable, leading many
sustainable growth in output. To further its
participants to judge that the risk of a protracted period
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks
of deflation had diminished. Some participants hig-
conditions in reserve markets consistent
hlighted the potential pitfalls of making inflation pro-
with federal funds trading in a range from 0
jections based on contemporaneously available meas-
to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the
ures of resource slack, especially during periods when
Desk to purchase agency debt, agency MBS,
the economy was facing large supply shocks and signif-
and longer-term Treasury securities during
icant sectoral reallocation. Several participants referred
the intermeeting period with the aim of
to contacts who had expressed concerns that the ex-
providing support to private credit markets
pansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet might
and economic activity. The timing and pace
not be reversed in a sufficiently timely manner and
of these purchases should depend on condi-
hence that inflation could rise above rates consistent
tions in the markets for such securities and
with price stability.
on a broader assessment of private credit
In their discussion of monetary policy for the inter- market conditions. The Committee antic-
meeting period, Committee members agreed that the ipates that the combination of outright pur-
Federal Reserve’s large-scale securities purchases were chases and various liquidity facilities out-
providing financial stimulus that would contribute to standing will cause the size of the Federal
the gradual resumption of sustainable economic growth Reserve’s balance sheet to expand signifi-
in a context of price stability. Members also agreed cantly in coming months. The Desk is ex-
that it would be appropriate to continue making pur- pected to purchase up to $200 billion in

--- Page 9 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 8 - 2 9 , 2 0 0 9 Page 9
housing-related agency debt by the end of economic recovery and to preserve price
this year. The Desk is expected to purchase stability. The Committee will maintain the
at least $500 billion in agency MBS by the target range for the federal funds rate at 0
end of the second quarter of this year and is to ¼ percent and anticipates that economic
expected to purchase up to $1.25 trillion of conditions are likely to warrant exceptional-
these securities by the end of this year. The ly low levels of the federal funds rate for an
Desk is expected to purchase up to $300 extended period. As previously announced,
billion of longer-term Treasury securities by to provide support to mortgage lending and
the end of the third quarter. The System housing markets and to improve overall
Open Market Account Manager and the conditions in private credit markets, the
Secretary will keep the Committee informed Federal Reserve will purchase a total of up
of ongoing developments regarding the Sys- to $1.25 trillion of agency mortgage-backed
tem’s balance sheet that could affect the at- securities and up to $200 billion of agency
tainment over time of the Committee’s ob- debt by the end of the year. In addition, the
jectives of maximum employment and price Federal Reserve will buy up to $300 billion
stability.” of Treasury securities by autumn. The
Committee will continue to evaluate the
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
timing and overall amounts of its purchases
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.:
of securities in light of the evolving eco-
“Information received since the Federal nomic outlook and conditions in financial
Open Market Committee met in March in- markets. The Federal Reserve is facilitating
dicates that the economy has continued to the extension of credit to households and
contract, though the pace of contraction businesses and supporting the functioning
appears to be somewhat slower. Household of financial markets through a range of li-
spending has shown signs of stabilizing but quidity programs. The Committee will con-
remains constrained by ongoing job losses, tinue to carefully monitor the size and
lower housing wealth, and tight credit. composition of the Federal Reserve’s bal-
Weak sales prospects and difficulties in ob- ance sheet in light of financial and econom-
taining credit have led businesses to cut ic developments.”
back on inventories, fixed investment, and
staffing. Although the economic outlook Voting for this action: Messrs. Bernanke and Dudley,
has improved modestly since the March Ms. Duke, Messrs. Evans, Kohn, Lacker, Lockhart,
meeting, partly reflecting some easing of fi- Tarullo, and Warsh, and Ms. Yellen.
nancial market conditions, economic activi-
ty is likely to remain weak for a time.
Voting against this action: None.
Nonetheless, the Committee continues to
anticipate that policy actions to stabilize fi-
Governor Kohn reported to the Committee on the
nancial markets and institutions, fiscal and
progress of a Federal Reserve workgroup in its review
monetary stimulus, and market forces will
of the information provided to the public regarding
contribute to a gradual resumption of sus-
Federal Reserve programs and activities. That review
tainable economic growth in a context of
was being conducted to identify opportunities for pro-
price stability.
viding additional information to the public without
In light of increasing economic slack here compromising the Federal Reserve’s mandated policy
and abroad, the Committee expects that in- objectives. The workgroup had been devoting particu-
flation will remain subdued. Moreover, the lar attention to approaches to enhancing the transpa-
Committee sees some risk that inflation rency of the Federal Reserve’s liquidity and credit facili-
could persist for a time below rates that ties, including regular reporting on the number, types,
best foster economic growth and price sta- and concentration of borrowers from each program;
bility in the longer term. the amount and nature of collateral accepted; detailed
background information on special purpose vehicles;
In these circumstances, the Federal Reserve
and contracts with private-sector firms that had been
will employ all available tools to promote

--- Page 10 ---

Page 10 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
engaged to help carry out some of these programs. In Notation Vote
the Committee’s discussion of these issues, it was noted By notation vote completed on April 7, 2009, the
that disclosing the identities of individual borrowers Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
would very likely discourage use of the Federal Re- FOMC meeting held on March 17-18, 2009.
serve’s liquidity and credit facilities because prospective
borrowers would be concerned that their creditors and
counterparties would see borrowing from the Federal
Reserve as a sign of financial weakness. The resulting
stigma would undermine the effectiveness of those
programs in promoting financial stability and economic
recovery.
_____________________________
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee Brian F. Madigan
would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, June 23-24, Secretary
2009. The meeting adjourned at 11:50 a.m. on April
29, 2009.

--- Page 11 ---

Page 1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the April 28-29, 2009, FOMC the strong adverse forces that have been acting on the
meeting, the members of the Board of Governors and economy likely to abate only slowly, participants gener-
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of ally expected a gradual recovery: All anticipated that
whom participate in deliberations of the FOMC, sub- unemployment, though declining in coming years,
mitted projections for output growth, unemployment, would remain well above its longer-run sustainable rate
and inflation in 2009, 2010, 2011, and over the longer at the end of 2011; most indicated they expected the
run. Projections were based on information available economy to take five or six years to converge to a long-
through the end of the meeting and on each partici- er-run path characterized by a sustainable rate of output
pant’s assumptions about factors likely to affect eco- growth and by rates of unemployment and inflation
nomic outcomes, including his or her assessment of consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives,
appropriate monetary policy. “Appropriate monetary but several said full convergence would take longer.
policy” is defined as the future path of policy that the Participants projected very low inflation this year; most
participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for expected inflation to edge up over the next few years
economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or toward the rate they consider consistent with the dual
her interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objec- objectives. Most participants—though fewer than in
tives of maximum employment and stable prices. January—viewed the risks to the growth outlook as
Longer-run projections represent each participant’s skewed to the downside. Most participants saw the
assessment of the rate to which each variable would be risks to the inflation outlook as balanced; fewer than in
expected to converge over time under appropriate January viewed those risks as tilted to the downside.
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks. With few exceptions, participants judged that their pro-
jections for economic activity and inflation remained
As indicated in table 1 and depicted in figure 1, all
subject to a degree of uncertainty exceeding historical
FOMC participants projected that real GDP would
norms.
contract this year, that the unemployment rate would
increase in coming quarters, and that inflation would be The Outlook
slower this year than in recent years. Almost all partici- Participants’ projections for 2009 real GDP growth had
pants viewed the near-term outlook for economic activ- a central tendency of negative 2.0 percent to negative
ity as having weakened relative to the projections they 1.3 percent, somewhat below the central tendency of
made at the time of the January FOMC meeting, but negative 1.3 percent to negative 0.5 percent for their
they continued to expect a recovery in sales and pro- January projections. Participants noted that the data
duction to begin during the second half of 2009. With received between the January and April FOMC meet-
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Governors and Reserve Bank presidents, April 2009
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2009 2010 2011 Longer run 2009 2010 2011 Longer run
Change in real GDP. . . . . . -2.0 to -1.3 2.0 to 3.0 3.5 to 4.8 2.5 to 2.7 -2.5 to -0.5 1.5 to 4.0 2.3 to 5.0 2.4 to 3.0
January projection. . . . . -1.3 to -0.5 2.5 to 3.3 3.8 to 5.0 2.5 to 2.7 -2.5 to 0.2 1.5 to 4.5 2.3 to 5.5 2.4 to 3.0
Unemployment rate. . . . . . 9.2 to 9.6 9.0 to 9.5 7.7 to 8.5 4.8 to 5.0 9.1 to 10.0 8.0 to 9.6 6.5 to 9.0 4.5 to 5.3
January projection. . . . . 8.5 to 8.8 8.0 to 8.3 6.7 to 7.5 4.8 to 5.0 8.0 to 9.2 7.0 to 9.2 5.5 to 8.0 4.5 to 5.5
PCE inflation. . . . . . . . . . . 0.6 to 0.9 1.0 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.9 1.7 to 2.0 -0.5 to 1.2 0.7 to 2.0 0.5 to 2.5 1.5 to 2.0
January projection. . . . . 0.3 to 1.0 1.0 to 1.5 0.9 to 1.7 1.7 to 2.0 -0.5 to 1.5 0.7 to 1.8 0.2 to 2.1 1.5 to 2.0
Core PCE inflation3. . . . . . 1.0 to 1.5 0.7 to 1.3 0.8 to 1.6 0.7 to 1.6 0.5 to 2.0 0.2 to 2.5
January projection. . . . . 0.9 to 1.1 0.8 to 1.5 0.7 to 1.5 0.6 to 1.5 0.4 to 1.7 0.0 to 1.8
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and of inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of
the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expendi-
tures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in
the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projec-
tions represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the
absence of further shocks to the economy. The January projections were made in conjunction with the FOMC meeting on January 27-28, 2009.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year includes all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

--- Page 12 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2009–11 and over the longer run
Percent
Change in real GDP 5
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections 4
3
Actual 2
1
+
_0
1
2
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
+
_0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
+
_0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual.

--- Page 13 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t io n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 8 - 2 9 , 2 0 0 9 Page 3
ings pointed to a larger decline in output and employ- In light of their expectation that the recovery will begin
ment during the first quarter than they had anticipated gradually, with output initially rising at a below-
at the time of the January meeting. However, partici- potential rate, participants anticipated that labor market
pants also saw recent indications that the economic conditions would continue to deteriorate over the re-
downturn was slowing in the second quarter, and they mainder of this year. Their projections for the average
continued to expect that sales and production would unemployment rate during the fourth quarter of 2009
begin to recover—albeit gradually—during the second had a central tendency of 9.2 to 9.6 percent, noticeably
half of the year, reflecting the effects of monetary and higher than the actual unemployment rate of 8.5 per-
fiscal stimulus and of measures to support credit mar- cent in March—the latest reading available at the time
kets and stabilize the financial system along with market of the April FOMC meeting. All participants revised
forces. In particular, participants noted some im- up their forecasts of the unemployment rate at the end
provement in financial conditions in recent months, of this year relative to their January projections, reflect-
signs that consumer spending was leveling out, and ten- ing the sharper-than-expected rise in actual unemploy-
tative indications that activity in the housing sector ment that occurred during the first quarter as well as
might be nearing its bottom. In addition, they ob- the downward revisions in their forecasts of output
served that the large reduction in stocks of unsold growth in 2009. Most participants anticipated that
goods that resulted from firms’ aggressive inventory growth next year would not substantially exceed its
cutting during the first quarter would make firms more longer-run sustainable rate and hence that the unem-
likely to increase production as their sales stabilize and ployment rate would decline only modestly in 2010;
then begin to turn up later this year. Participants ex- some also pointed to the friction of a reallocation of
pected, however, that recoveries in consumer spending resources away from shrinking economic sectors as
and residential investment initially would be damped by likely to restrain progress in reducing unemployment.
further deterioration in labor markets, still-tight credit With output growth and job creation generally pro-
conditions, and a continuing, if less pronounced, de- jected to pick up appreciably in 2011, participants antic-
cline in house prices. Moreover, they anticipated that ipated that joblessness would decline more noticeably,
very low capacity utilization, sluggish growth in sales, as evident from the central tendency of 7.7 to 8.5 per-
and the high cost and limited availability of financing cent for their projections of the unemployment rate in
would contribute to further weakness in business fixed late 2011. Even so, they expected that the unemploy-
investment this year. ment rate at the end of 2011 would still be declining
toward its longer-run sustainable level. Participants
Looking further ahead, participants’ projections for real
projected that unemployment would decline further
GDP growth in 2010 had a central tendency of 2.0 to
after 2011; most saw the unemployment rate eventually
3.0 percent, and those for 2011 had a central tendency
converging to 4.8 to 5.0 percent.
of 3.5 to 4.8 percent. Participants generally expected
that strains in credit markets and in the banking system The central tendency of participants’ projections for
would ebb slowly, and hence that the pace of recovery 2009 PCE inflation was 0.6 to 0.9 percent, an interval
would continue to be damped in 2010. But they antic- that is somewhat narrower but neither higher nor lower
ipated that the upturn would strengthen in 2011 to a than the central tendency of their January projections.
pace exceeding the growth rate of potential GDP as Looking beyond this year, participants’ projections for
financial conditions continue to improve, and that it total PCE inflation had central tendencies of 1.0 to 1.6
would remain above that rate long enough to eliminate percent for 2010 and 1.0 to 1.9 percent for 2011. The
slack in resource utilization over time. Several partici- central tendency of projections for core inflation in
pants anticipated that rapid growth in the monetary 2009 was 1.0 to 1.5 percent; those for 2010 and 2011
base in 2009—a result of the Federal Reserve’s sizable were 0.7 to 1.3 percent and 0.8 to 1.6 percent, respec-
purchases of longer-term assets—would result in a tively. Most participants expected that economic slack,
more pronounced pickup in output and employment though diminishing, would continue to damp inflation
growth in 2010 and a somewhat quicker convergence to pressures for the next few years and hence that total
longer-run equilibrium. Most participants expected PCE inflation in 2011 would still be below their as-
that, absent further shocks, real GDP growth eventually sessments of its appropriate longer-run level. Some
would converge to a rate of 2.5 to 2.7 percent per year, thought that persistent economic slack would be ac-
reflecting longer-term trends in the growth of produc- companied by declining inflation over the next few
tivity and the labor force. years. Most, however, projected that, as the economy
recovers, inflation would increase gradually and move

--- Page 14 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
toward their individual assessments of the measured Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
rate of inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve’s Percentage points
Variable 2009 2010 2011
dual mandate for maximum employment and price sta-
bility. Several participants, noting that the public’s
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . ±1.0 ±1.5 ±1.6
longer-run inflation expectations have not changed ap- Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . ±0.5 ±0.8 ±1.0
preciably, anticipated that inflation would return more
Total consumer prices2 . . . . . ±0.8 ±1.0 ±1.0
promptly to levels consistent with their judgments
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root
about appropriate longer-run inflation. mean squared error of projections for 1989 through 2008 that were
released in the spring by various private and government forecasters. As
In April as in January, the central tendency of projec- described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions,
tions of the longer-run inflation rate was 1.7 to 2.0 per- there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real
GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges implied by
cent. Most participants judged that a longer-run PCE
the average size of projection errors made in the past. Further informa-
inflation rate of 2 percent would be consistent with the tion is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging the
Federal Reserve’s dual mandate; others indicated that Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting
Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washing-
inflation of 1½ or 1¾ percent would be appropriate. ton: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).
Modestly positive longer-run inflation would allow the
1. For definitions, refer to general note in table 1.
Committee to stimulate economic activity and support 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
employment by setting the federal funds rate temporari- that has been most widely used in government and private economic
forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous
ly below the inflation rate when the economy suffers a
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.
large negative shock to demands for goods and servic-
unanchored and drift downward in response to persis-
es.
tently low inflation outcomes; several pointed to the
Uncertainty and Risks possibility of an upward shift in expected and actual
A majority of participants continued to view the risks inflation if investors become concerned that stimulative
to their projections for real GDP growth as skewed to monetary policy measures and the attendant expansion
the downside and saw the associated risks to their pro- of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet might not be
jections for the unemployment rate as tilted to the up- unwound in a timely fashion as the economy recovers.
side, but a larger number than in January now saw the Most participants again saw the uncertainty surround-
risks as broadly balanced. Participants shared the ing their inflation projections as exceeding historical
judgment that their projections of future economic ac- norms.
tivity and unemployment continued to be subject to
Diversity of Views
greater-than-average uncertainty.1 Some participants
Figures 2.A and 2.B provide further details on the di-
highlighted the still-considerable uncertainty about the
versity of participants’ views regarding likely outcomes
future course of the financial crisis and the risk that a
for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate in
resurgence of financial turmoil could adversely impact
2009, 2010, and 2011. The dispersion in participants’
the real economy. In addition, some noted the difficul-
April projections reflects, among other factors, the di-
ty in gauging the macroeconomic effects of the credit-
versity of their assessments regarding the effects of fis-
easing policies that are now being employed by the
cal stimulus and the likely pace of recovery in the finan-
Federal Reserve and other central banks, given limited
cial sector. Though the dispersion in projections for
experience with such tools.
each variable was roughly the same in April as in Janu-
Most participants judged the risks to the inflation out- ary, the downward shift in the distribution of partici-
look as roughly balanced; some continued to view these pants’ projections of real GDP growth in 2009, coupled
risks as skewed to the downside, while one saw infla- with essentially unchanged distributions of projections
tion risks as tilted to the upside. Some participants for growth in 2010 and 2011, resulted in an upward
noted the risk that inflation expectations might become shift from January to April in the distribution of projec-
tions for the unemployment rate in all three years. The
dispersion in participants’ longer-run projections re-
1 Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for the flected differences in their estimates regarding the sus-
change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con- tainable rates of output growth and unemployment to
sumer price inflation over the period from 1989 to 2008. At
which the economy would converge under appropriate
the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty”
policy and in the absence of any further shocks; these
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in
distributions did not change appreciably from January
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess
to April.
the uncertainty and risks attending participants’ projections.

--- Page 15 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t io n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 8 - 2 9 , 2 0 0 9 Page 5
Figures 2.C and 2.D provide corresponding informa- balance sheet, and perhaps also from changes in the
tion about the diversity of participants’ views regarding public’s expectations of future inflation. In contrast,
the inflation outlook. The dispersion in participants’ the tight distribution of participants’ projections for
projections for total and core PCE inflation during longer-run inflation illustrates their substantial agree-
2009 and the following two years illustrates their vary- ment about the measured rate of inflation that is most
ing assessments of the inflation outcomes that will re- consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of
sult from persistent economic slack, from expansion maximum employment and stable prices.
and subsequent contraction of the Federal Reserve’s

--- Page 16 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2009–11 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2009
14
April projections
January projections 12
10
8
6
4
2
-2.6--2.4--2.2--2.0--1.8--1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2-0.0-0.2-0.4-0.6-0.8-1.0-1.2-1.4-1.6-1.8-2.0-2.2-2.4-2.6-2.8-3.0-3.2-3.4-3.6-3.8-4.0-4.2-4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-5.4-
-2.5 -2.3 -2.1 -1.9 -1.7 -1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2010
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-2.6--2.4--2.2--2.0--1.8--1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2-0.0-0.2-0.4-0.6-0.8-1.0-1.2-1.4-1.6-1.8-2.0-2.2-2.4-2.6-2.8-3.0-3.2-3.4-3.6-3.8-4.0-4.2-4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-5.4-
-2.5 -2.3 -2.1 -1.9 -1.7 -1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2011
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-2.6--2.4--2.2--2.0--1.8--1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2-0.0-0.2-0.4-0.6-0.8-1.0-1.2-1.4-1.6-1.8-2.0-2.2-2.4-2.6-2.8-3.0-3.2-3.4-3.6-3.8-4.0-4.2-4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-5.4-
-2.5 -2.3 -2.1 -1.9 -1.7 -1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-2.6--2.4--2.2--2.0--1.8--1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2-0.0-0.2-0.4-0.6-0.8-1.0-1.2-1.4-1.6-1.8-2.0-2.2-2.4-2.6-2.8-3.0-3.2-3.4-3.6-3.8-4.0-4.2-4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-5.4-
-2.5 -2.3 -2.1 -1.9 -1.7 -1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 17 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t io n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 8 - 2 9 , 2 0 0 9 Page 7
Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2009–11 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2009
14
April projections
January projections 12
10
8
6
4
2
4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8-10.0-
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2010
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8-10.0-
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2011
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8-10.0-
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.4- 4.6- 4.8- 5.0- 5.2- 5.4- 5.6- 5.8- 6.0- 6.2- 6.4- 6.6- 6.8- 7.0- 7.2- 7.4- 7.6- 7.8- 8.0- 8.2- 8.4- 8.6- 8.8- 9.0- 9.2- 9.4- 9.6- 9.8-10.0-
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 18 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2009–11 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2009
14
April projections
January projections 12
10
8
6
4
2
-0.5- -0.3- -0.1- 0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
-0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2010
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-0.5- -0.3- -0.1- 0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
-0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2011
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-0.5- -0.3- -0.1- 0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
-0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-0.5- -0.3- -0.1- 0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
-0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 19 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o j e c t io n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f A p r i l 2 8 - 2 9 , 2 0 0 9 Page 9
Figure 2.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inflation, 2009–11
Number of participants
2009
14
April projections
January projections 12
10
8
6
4
2
-0.1- 0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2010
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-0.1- 0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2011
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-0.1- 0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 20 ---

Page 10 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by experienced in the past and the risks around
the members of the Board of Governors and the projections are broadly balanced, the num-
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks bers reported in table 2 would imply a proba-
inform discussions of monetary policy among bility of about 70 percent that actual GDP
policymakers and can aid public understand- would expand between 2 percent to 4 percent
ing of the basis for policy actions. Considera- in the current year, 1.5 percent to 4.5 percent in
ble uncertainty attends these projections, the second year, and 1.4 percent to 4.6 percent
however. The economic and statistical models in the third year. The corresponding 70 per-
and relationships used to help produce eco- cent confidence intervals for overall inflation
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de- would be 1.2 percent to 2.8 percent in the cur-
scriptions of the real world. And the future rent year and 1.0 percent to 3.0 percent in the
path of the economy can be affected by my- second and third years.
riad unforeseen developments and events. Because current conditions may differ
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, from those that prevailed on average over his-
participants consider not only what appears to tory, participants provide judgments as to
be the most likely economic outcome as em- whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
bodied in their projections, but also the range jections of each variable is greater than, smaller
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
their occurring, and the potential costs to the forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in
economy should they occur. table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
Table 2 summarizes the average historical to whether the risks to their projections are
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including weighted to the upside, downside, or are
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports broadly balanced. That is, participants judge
and those prepared by Federal Reserve Board whether each variable is more likely to be
staff in advance of meetings of the Federal above or below their projections of the most
Open Market Committee. The projection likely outcome. These judgments about the
error ranges shown in the table illustrate the uncertainty and the risks attending each partic-
considerable uncertainty associated with eco- ipant’s projections are distinct from the diversi-
nomic forecasts. For example, suppose a par- ty of participants’ views about the most likely
ticipant projects that real gross domestic outcomes. Forecast uncertainty is concerned
product (GDP) and total consumer prices will with the risks associated with a particular pro-
rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 jection, rather than with divergences across a
percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty number of different projections.
attending those projections is similar to that

# Tables

## Page_9_Table_1


| Voting for this action: Messrs. Bernanke and Dudley,   |
|--------------------------------------------------------|
| Ms. Duke, Messrs. Evans, Kohn, Lacker, Lockhart,       |
| Tarullo, and Warsh, and Ms. Yellen.                    |
| Voting against this action: None.                      |


## Page_11_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |      |      |            |      |      |      |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|------------|------|------|------|
| 2009                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | 2010 | 2011 | Longer run | 2009 | 2010 | 2011 |
| -2.0 to -1.3 2.0 to 3.0 3.5 to 4.8 2.5 to 2.7
-1.3 to -0.5 2.5 to 3.3 3.8 to 5.0 2.5 to 2.7
9.2 to 9.6 9.0 to 9.5 7.7 to 8.5 4.8 to 5.0
8.5 to 8.8 8.0 to 8.3 6.7 to 7.5 4.8 to 5.0
0.6 to 0.9 1.0 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.9 1.7 to 2.0
0.3 to 1.0 1.0 to 1.5 0.9 to 1.7 1.7 to 2.0
1.0 to 1.5 0.7 to 1.3 0.8 to 1.6
0.9 to 1.1 0.8 to 1.5 0.7 to 1.5 |      |      |            |      |      |      |