# 20090624_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:36:11*
*Pages: 22, Tables: 2*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Page 1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
June 23-24, 2009
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Commit- Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of
tee and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve the Staff Director for Management, Board of
System was held in the offices of the Board of Gover- Governors
nors in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, June 23, 2009,
at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, June 24, Mr. English, Deputy Director, Division of Mone-
2009, at 9:00 a.m. tary Affairs, Board of Governors
PRESENT: Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Mr. Bernanke, Chairman Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Dudley, Vice Chairman
Ms. Duke Messrs. Greenlee, Nelson, Reifschneider, and
Mr. Evans Wascher, Associate Directors, Divisions of
Mr. Kohn Banking Supervision and Regulation, Monetary
Mr. Lacker Affairs, Research and Statistics, and Research
Mr. Lockhart and Statistics, respectively, Board of Gover-
Mr. Tarullo nors
Mr. Warsh
Ms. Yellen Mr. Gagnon, Visiting Associate Director, Division
of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Bullard and Hoenig, Ms. Pianalto, and Mr.
Rosengren, Alternate Members of the Federal Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research
Open Market Committee and Statistics, Board of Governors
Messrs. Fisher, Plosser, and Stern, Presidents of Messrs. Carpenter and Perli, Deputy Associate Di-
the Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas, Philadel- rectors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
phia, and Minneapolis, respectively Governors
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Mr. Kiley, Assistant Director, Division of Research
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Luecke, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Alvarez,¹ General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Ms. Lindner, Group Manager, Division of Re-
Mr. Sheets, Economist search and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Economist
Mr. Wood, Senior Economist, Division of Interna-
Messrs. Altig, Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Slifman, tional Finance, Board of Governors
Weinberg, and Wilcox, Associate Economists
Messrs. Driscoll, King,¹ and McCarthy, Econo-
Mr. Sack, Manager, System Open Market Account mists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Ms. Johnson, Secretary of the Board, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors Ms. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Office of
the Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Frierson,¹ Deputy Secretary, Office of the Sec-
retary, Board of Governors ¹ Attended Tuesday’s session only.

--- Page 2 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi- rect obligations of any agency of the Unit-
sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors ed States, held in the System Open Market
Account, to dealers at rates that shall be
Messrs. Fuhrer and Rosenblum, Executive Vice determined by competitive bidding. The
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston Federal Reserve Bank of New York shall
and Dallas, respectively set a minimum lending fee consistent with
the objectives of the program and apply
Mr. Judd, Advisor to the President, Federal Re- reasonable limitations on the total amount
serve Bank of San Francisco of a specific issue that may be auctioned
and on the amount of securities that each
Messrs. Feldman, Hilton, Krane, McAndrews, dealer may borrow. The Federal Reserve
Mses. Mester and Mosser, and Messrs. Bank of New York may reject bids which
Schweitzer, Sellon, and Waller, Senior Vice could facilitate a dealer’s ability to control
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Minne- a single issue as determined solely by the
apolis, New York, Chicago, New York, Phila- Federal Reserve Bank of New York.”
delphia, New York, Cleveland, Kansas City,
The staff reported on projections of the Federal Re-
and St. Louis, respectively
serve’s balance sheet under various assumptions about
economic and financial conditions and the associated
Ms. Logan, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
path of monetary policy. Staff projections suggested
of New York
that the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet
might peak late this year and decline gradually thereaf-
ter. The staff also presented information on the possi-
Developments in Financial Markets and the Fed-
ble implications of substantial changes in the size and
eral Reserve’s Balance Sheet
composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet for
The Manager of the System Open Market Account
the System’s net income. The analysis indicated that
(SOMA) reported on recent developments in domestic
the Federal Reserve was likely to earn substantial net
and foreign financial markets. The Manager also re-
interest income over the next few years under most
ported on System open market operations in Treasury
interest rate scenarios. The staff presented one scena-
securities and in agency debt and agency mortgage-
rio, however, in which aggressive increases in short-
backed securities (MBS) during the period since the
term interest rates significantly reduced System net in-
Committee’s April 28-29 meeting. By unanimous vote,
come relative to a baseline scenario. The analysis also
the Committee ratified those transactions. There were
suggested that the market value of the Federal Re-
no open market operations in foreign currencies for the
serve’s securities holdings could decline appreciably
System’s account over the intermeeting period.
under some scenarios. However, while the Federal
The Committee reviewed a staff proposal that would Reserve would retain the option of selling securities
authorize the Desk to lend, as part of the Federal Re- before they mature or are prepaid as a means of tight-
serve’s regular overnight securities lending operations, ening policy when appropriate, it was not expected to
securities held in the SOMA portfolio that are direct have to do so. Changes in market valuations were thus
obligations of federal agencies. Lending agency securi- seen as unlikely to have significant implications for the
ties was viewed as a technical modification to the exist- System’s net income.
ing overnight securities lending program that would
In a related discussion, the staff briefed the Committee
support functioning of agency debt markets. The
on a number of possible tools that the Federal Reserve
Committee voted unanimously to amend paragraph 3
might employ to foster effective control of the federal
of the Authorization for Domestic Open Market Oper-
funds rate in the context of a much expanded balance
ations with the text underlined below.
sheet. Some of those tools were focused primarily on
“3. In order to ensure the effective con- shaping or strengthening the demand for reserves,
duct of open market operations, the Fed- while others were designed to provide greater control
eral Open Market Committee authorizes over the supply of reserves. In discussing the staff
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to presentation, meeting participants generally agreed that
lend on an overnight basis U.S. Govern- the Federal Reserve either already had or could develop
ment securities and securities that are di- tools to remove policy accommodation when appropri-

--- Page 3 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 3 - 2 4 , 2 0 0 9 Page 3
ate. Ensuring that policy accommodation can ultimately reducing interest rates on mortgage loans and other
be withdrawn smoothly and at the appropriate time long-term credit to households and businesses relative
would remain a top priority of the Federal Reserve. to what they otherwise would have been. But the
Committee had not set specific objectives for longer-
The staff also provided the Committee with an analysis
term interest rates, and participants did not consider it
of the potential adverse effects of very high reserve
appropriate to allow the Desk discretion to adjust the
balances on bank capital ratios. An important issue
size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s asset
was whether the further increase in reserve balances
purchases in response to short-run fluctuations in mar-
that is likely to result from the Federal Reserve’s al-
ket interest rates. Some participants noted that, in
ready-announced program of asset purchases could
principle, the Committee could formulate a plan for
lead banks to limit their lending and acquisition of se-
asset purchases that would respond to economic and
curities in order to prevent an excessive decline in their
financial developments in a way that might better pro-
capital ratios. The analysis concluded that, with few
mote monetary policy objectives. Most, however,
exceptions, banks’ regulatory leverage ratios (defined as
thought that formulating and communicating such a
tier 1 capital divided by total average assets) were likely
plan would be very difficult, potentially leading to an
to remain comfortably above regulatory minimums,
increase in market uncertainty regarding Federal Re-
even with the substantial growth in reserve balances
serve actions and intentions. Many participants agreed,
projected to occur in coming months and even if there
however, that it was appropriate for the Desk to make
were some erosion in bank capital. In part, that result
small adjustments to the size and timing of purchases
reflected the fact that many institutions had raised capi-
aimed at fostering market liquidity and improving mar-
tal lately; in addition, the leverage ratios for most insti-
ket functioning. Participants discussed the merits of
tutions were well above the regulatory minimums at the
including securities backed by adjustable-rate mortgag-
end of the first quarter.
es in MBS purchases and of tapering off purchases of
The staff also reviewed the experience to date with the securities as the asset purchase programs were being
Federal Reserve’s purchases of Treasury securities, completed, but the Committee did not reach a decision
agency debt securities, and agency MBS. A number of on those issues at the meeting.
potential modifications to those programs were pre-
The staff presented policymakers with proposals for
sented for the Committee’s consideration, including
extensions, modifications, and terminations of various
possible expansions in their size, extensions of the du-
liquidity programs. A number of the credit and liquidi-
ration of securities purchased, steps to increase the
ty facilities that the Federal Reserve had established in
flexibility of those purchases both within each program
the course of the financial crisis were scheduled to ex-
and across programs in response to short-term market
pire on October 30. Use of most of the liquidity facili-
developments, and possible approaches to winding
ties had declined in recent months as market conditions
down purchases as the programs near completion. The
had improved. Still, meeting participants judged that
Federal Reserve was already purchasing a very large
market conditions remained fragile, and that concerns
fraction of new current-coupon agency MBS and agen-
about counterparty credit risk and access to liquidity,
cy debt, and further increasing the scale of those pro-
both of which had ebbed notably in recent months,
grams could compromise market functioning. Some
could increase again. Moreover, participants viewed
participants thought that increases in purchases of
the availability of the liquidity facilities as a factor that
Treasury securities might have little or no effect on
had contributed to the reduction in financial strains. If
long-term interest rates unless the increases were very
the Federal Reserve’s backup liquidity facilities were
sizable, given the large amount of current and projected
terminated prematurely, such developments might put
supply of Treasury securities. Others were concerned
renewed pressure on some financial institutions and
that announcements of substantial additional purchases
markets and tighten credit conditions for businesses
could add to perceptions that the federal debt was be-
and households. The period over year-end was seen as
ing monetized. While most members did not see large-
posing heightened risks given the usual pressures in
scale purchases of Treasury securities as likely to be a
financial markets at that time. In these circumstances,
source of inflation pressures given the weak economic
participants agreed that most facilities should be ex-
outlook, public concern about monetization could have
tended into early next year. However, participants also
adverse implications for inflation expectations. The
judged that improved market conditions and declining
asset purchase programs were intended to support eco-
use of the facilities warranted scaling back, suspending,
nomic activity by improving market functioning and

--- Page 4 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
or tightening access to several programs, including the ity Options Program (TOP), effective im-
Term Auction Facility (TAF), the Term Securities mediately. Should market conditions ap-
Lending Facility (TSLF), and the Asset-Backed Com- pear to warrant the resumption of Sched-
mercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity ule 1 TSLF or TOP auctions, the Account
Facility (AMLF). Manager is to consult with the Chairman
and, if possible, the Board and the Federal
Following the presentation and discussion of the staff
Open Market Committee.”
proposal, the Board voted unanimously to extend the
AMLF, the Commercial Paper Funding Facility Board members and FOMC participants noted their
(CPFF), the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF), expectation that a number of these facilities may not
and the TSLF through February 1, 2010. The Board need to be extended beyond February 1, 2010, if the
did not extend the Money Market Investor Funding recent improvements in market conditions continue.
Facility (MMIFF) beyond October 30. The extension However, if financial stresses do not moderate as ex-
of the TSLF required the approval of the Federal Open pected, the Board and the FOMC were prepared to
Market Committee (FOMC), as that facility was estab- extend the terms of some or all of the facilities as
lished under the joint authority of the Board and the needed to promote financial stability and economic
FOMC. The Board and the FOMC jointly decided to growth.
suspend some TSLF auctions and to reduce the size
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
and frequency of others. In addition, the FOMC ex-
The information reviewed at the June 23-24 meeting
tended the temporary reciprocal currency arrangements
suggested that the economy remained very weak,
(swap lines) between the Federal Reserve and other
though declines in activity seemed to be lessening.
central banks to February 1, 2010. The FOMC unan-
Employment was still falling, and manufacturers had
imously passed the following resolution to extend the
cut production further in response to excess invento-
temporary swap arrangements and the TSLF:
ries and soft demand. But the reductions in employ-
“The Federal Open Market Committee ex- ment and industrial production had slowed somewhat,
tends until February 1, 2010, its authoriza- consumer spending appeared to be holding reasonably
tions for the Federal Reserve Bank of New steady after shrinking in the second half of 2008, and
York to engage in temporary reciprocal sales and construction of single-family homes had ap-
currency arrangements (“swap arrange- parently flattened out. In addition, the recent declines
ments”) with foreign central banks under in capital spending were smaller than those recorded
the conditions previously established by earlier in the year. Consumer price inflation was fairly
the Committee. quiescent in recent months, although the upturn in
energy prices appeared likely to boost headline inflation
The Federal Open Market Committee ex-
in June.
tends until February 1, 2010, its authoriza-
tions for the Federal Reserve Bank of New The demand for labor weakened further in May, albeit
York to provide a Term Securities Lending less rapidly than in earlier months. Nonfarm payrolls
Facility, subject to the same collateral, in- continued to shrink, but the decline was the smallest
terest rate, and other conditions previously since September. In addition, average weekly hours of
established by the Committee. However, production and nonsupervisory workers on private
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York is payrolls, which had dropped substantially from Sep-
directed to suspend Schedule 1 TSLF auc- tember to March, were essentially unchanged in April
tions, effective immediately. The Federal and May. Thus aggregate hours worked by this group
Reserve Bank of New York is directed to fell at a slower pace in April and May than on average
conduct Schedule 2 TSLF auctions in- over the previous seven months. The unemployment
itially on a monthly basis in amounts of rate, however, rose further in May, to 9.4 percent. De-
$75 billion; the Reserve Bank is directed to spite the high level of joblessness, the labor force par-
reduce over time the amounts provided ticipation rate moved up for a second consecutive
through the TSLF as market conditions month to a level close to where it was at the beginning
warrant. The Federal Reserve Bank of of the recession. The four-week moving average of
New York is directed to suspend opera- initial claims for unemployment insurance fell back a
tions of the Term Securities Lending Facil-

--- Page 5 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 3 - 2 4 , 2 0 0 9 Page 5
little, but the number of individuals receiving unem- houses seemed to have abated. However, the pace of
ployment insurance benefits continued to increase. new home sales was still very low in April, and the
months’ supply of new homes remained quite elevated
Industrial production decreased in April and May but at
relative to sales despite a decrease in the stock of un-
a slower pace than in the first quarter. Manufacturing
sold new single-family homes to a level roughly one-
output also fell in those months, and the factory oper-
half of its mid-2006 peak. Sales of existing single-
ating rate dipped further in May. In the high-tech sec-
family homes had been fairly steady from late 2008
tor, computer output fell at a pace similar to that in the
through May. The relative stability of the resale market
first quarter, but near-term indicators of production
over this period coincided with a heightened propor-
turned somewhat less negative and global semiconduc-
tion of transactions involving bank-owned and other
tor sales climbed in April for the second consecutive
distressed properties. The apparent stabilization in
month. The production of motor vehicles and parts
housing demand was likely due, in part, to the im-
dropped sharply in May, principally because of ex-
provement in housing affordability that resulted from
tended plant shutdowns at General Motors and Chrys-
low mortgage rates and declining house prices. Rates
ler. The production of commercial aircraft moved up.
for conforming 30-year fixed-rate mortgages rose on
Outside the transportation and high-tech sectors, most
net between late April and late June but remained be-
industries continued to cut production in both April
low the levels seen over most of 2008. Although the
and May, though at a slower pace than over the preced-
market for private-label nonprime mortgages remained
ing five months.
closed, spreads between rates for jumbo and standard
Real personal consumption expenditures rose some- conforming loans narrowed substantially since March.
what in the first quarter after falling in the second half Meanwhile, national house prices continued to decline.
of 2008, and available data suggested that spending was
Real investment in equipment and software (E&S) con-
holding reasonably steady in the second quarter. On
tinued to contract; however, the decline in the second
the basis of the latest retail sales data, real expenditures
quarter appeared likely to be smaller than in either of
on goods other than motor vehicles appeared to have
the two preceding quarters. Outlays on transportation
risen slightly in May and to have changed little, on net,
equipment seemed to be firming after shrinking for an
since the turn of the year. Sales of light motor vehicles
extended period, and the incoming data on shipments
in April and May were slightly higher than the first-
and orders of nondefense capital goods pointed to a
quarter average. Real outlays on services were reported
moderation in the rate of decrease in other major com-
to have picked up some in April from the average
ponents of E&S. The contraction in spending on
monthly gain seen over the first three months of the
computing equipment appeared to be leveling off, al-
year. The fundamental determinants of consumer de-
though businesses continued to cut their real outlays on
mand appeared to have improved a bit: Despite the
software. Real spending on equipment outside of high-
ongoing decline in employment, real disposable per-
tech and transportation seemed to have dropped less
sonal income rose in the first quarter and posted
rapidly in the second quarter than in the first quarter.
another sizable gain in April as various provisions of
Data suggested a substantial increase in outlays for
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
nonresidential construction in March and April, con-
boosted transfer payments and reduced personal taxes.
centrated in energy-related sectors. Outside of the
In addition, equity prices recorded substantial gains in
energy-related sectors, demand for nonresidential
April and May, reversing a small portion of the prior
building remained extremely weak and financing diffi-
wealth declines. Measures of consumer sentiment,
cult to obtain. Although the months’ supply of non-
while remaining at levels typically seen during reces-
farm business inventories remained elevated, large pro-
sions, improved markedly from the historical lows rec-
duction cutbacks in recent quarters allowed producers
orded around the turn of the year.
to stem the rise in stocks relative to sales. The princi-
Single-family housing starts edged up in May, and ad- pal determinants of investment were still weak: Busi-
justed permit issuance for single-family houses was a ness output dropped further in the first quarter, the
little above the level of starts, as it had been since Janu- user cost of capital was higher than it was a year earlier,
ary. In contrast, activity in the much smaller multifami- and credit remained tight. However, corporate bond
ly sector fell significantly further, reflecting a sharp de- yields eased considerably in the weeks leading to the
terioration in the fundamentals in that sector. The June meeting, and monthly surveys of business condi-
steep decline in the demand for new single-family

--- Page 6 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
tions and sentiment were generally less downbeat than ty prices, which had moved higher over the first four
earlier in the year. months of 2009, rose more rapidly since the end of
April. Nevertheless, these prices remained well below
The U.S. international trade deficit widened slightly in
their year-earlier levels. The incoming data on labor
April, as a decrease in imports was more than offset by
costs were mixed. Although the rise in hourly compen-
a drop in exports. Most major categories of exports
sation in the nonfarm business sector picked up slightly
fell, with exports of machinery, industrial supplies, and
in the first quarter, the employment cost index decele-
consumer goods exhibiting significant declines. The
rated further. Increases in average hourly earnings also
value of imports of goods and services also edged
slowed further in April and May.
down after remaining about unchanged in March. Im-
ports of machinery and industrial supplies displayed Staff Review of the Financial Situation
significant decreases, and imports of services fell mod- The decision by the FOMC at its April 28-29 meeting
erately. Imports of consumer goods increased. The to leave the target range for the federal funds rate un-
value of oil imports also rose, as higher prices out- changed and the accompanying statement indicating
weighed lower volumes. that the FOMC would maintain the size of the large-
scale asset purchase program were largely anticipated,
The decline in output in the advanced foreign econo-
but yields on Treasury securities rose slightly, as a few
mies deepened in the first quarter. Domestic demand
investors apparently had seen some chance that the
fell in all major economies, led by double-digit declines
Committee would expand the purchase program. The
in fixed investment and sizable negative contributions
release of the April FOMC minutes three weeks later
of inventories to growth. Recent indicators, however,
prompted a reversal of this move, as market partici-
suggested that the pace of contraction likely moderated
pants reportedly focused on the suggestion that the
in the second quarter. Purchasing managers indexes
total size of the purchase program might need to be
rebounded from the exceptionally low levels reached in
increased at some point to spur a more rapid pace of
the first quarter, and industrial production stabilized
recovery. The expected path of the federal funds rate
somewhat. In emerging market economies, incoming
implied by futures prices was largely unchanged by the
data showed that first-quarter real gross domestic
release of the Committee’s statement and minutes.
product (GDP) contracted sharply in Mexico, Hong
However, in the days following the release of the May
Kong, Malaysia, and Singapore, edged up in Korea, and
employment report, which was read as being signifi-
expanded considerably in India and Indonesia. For the
cantly less negative than anticipated, market partici-
second quarter, indicators suggested a broader stabiliza-
pants marked up their expected path for the federal
tion of activity in emerging market economies. In Chi-
funds rate. Yields on nominal Treasury coupon securi-
na, retail sales and fixed-asset investment rose strongly.
ties increased, on net, over the intermeeting period.
Financial conditions continued to improve in most
These moves likely reflected a number of factors, in-
emerging market economies.
cluding investors’ perceptions of an improvement in
In the United States, headline consumer prices were the economic outlook, decreased concerns about the
little changed between March and May, held down by risk of deflation, a reversal of flight-to-quality flows,
declines in the prices of food and energy over that pe- and selling of long-duration assets as exposure to mort-
riod. Core inflation was slightly higher from March to gage prepayment risk dropped with a rise in mortgage
May than during the preceding three months, although rates. In addition, inflation compensation rose over the
core prices posted fairly small increases apart from a intermeeting period as yields on inflation-indexed Trea-
tax-induced jump in tobacco prices. Near-term infla- sury securities increased much less than those on their
tion expectations in the Reuters/University of Michi- nominal counterparts. Some of the rise in inflation
gan Surveys of Consumers remained steady in May and compensation may have reflected an increase in infla-
then rose somewhat in the preliminary June survey. tion expectations, but an improvement in liquidity in
Survey measures of long-term inflation expectations the market for Treasury inflation-protected securities
showed no signs of moving lower despite the consider- and mortgage-related hedging flows may have boosted
able margin of labor- and product-market slack present inflation compensation as well.
in the economy. At earlier stages of processing, the
Pressures in short-term bank funding markets eased
producer price index for core intermediate materials
further, as evidenced by declines in London interbank
continued to decline through May, albeit at a slower
offered rate (Libor) fixings and in spreads between
pace than that seen at the end of 2008. Spot commodi-
one- and three-month Libor and comparable-maturity

--- Page 7 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 3 - 2 4 , 2 0 0 9 Page 7
overnight index swap (OIS) rates. These spreads nar- cies issued conflicting opinions regarding the credit
rowed to levels not seen since early 2008, transaction quality of senior CMBS tranches.
volume rose modestly, and tentative signs of increased
Market sentiment toward the financial sector improved
liquidity reportedly emerged. The market for repur-
over the intermeeting period, reflecting, in part, the
chase agreements saw slight improvement, with bid-
release of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program
asked spreads for most types of transactions narrowing
(SCAP) results for the nation’s 19 largest bank holding
a bit and haircuts roughly unchanged. Spreads on
companies (BHCs) on May 7. Nearly all the BHCs
A2/P2-rated commercial paper and AA-rated asset-
evaluated had enough Tier 1 capital to absorb the high-
backed commercial paper were little changed, on net,
er losses envisioned under the hypothetical more ad-
since late April, remaining at the low end of their
verse scenario; however, 10 institutions were required
ranges over the previous 18 months.
to enhance their capital structure to put greater empha-
Over the intermeeting period, functioning in the mar- sis on common equity. Following the announcement
ket for Treasury securities generally improved and trad- of the SCAP results, the 19 evaluated institutions
ing picked up, but some strains remained. The on-the- raised, or announced plans to raise, around $70 billion
run/off-the-run premium narrowed considerably at the in common equity through public offerings, conversion
short end of the yield curve. Such spreads, however, of preferred stock, and asset sales. These offerings
remained somewhat wide for longer-dated issues, ap- accounted for most of the record-high total financial
parently reflecting concerns about volatility linked to equity issuance in May. The evaluated BHCs have also
mortgage-related hedging flows. Some strains, perhaps issued additional debt under the Federal Deposit Insur-
associated with these flows, emerged at times in the ance Corporation’s Temporary Liquidity Guarantee
MBS market; market participants reacted to the large Program (TLGP), as well as nonguaranteed debt. On
and rapid changes in MBS yields by widening bid-asked June 9, the Treasury announced that 10 large financial
spreads on these securities. institutions were eligible to repay the $68 billion in cap-
ital that they had received through the Troubled Asset
Broad stock price indexes rose, on net, over the inter-
Relief Program (TARP). CDS spreads for banking or-
meeting period, reflecting generally better-than-
ganizations declined considerably over the intermeeting
expected economic news and further declines in risk
period, although they remained well above historical
premiums. The spread between an estimate of the ex-
norms. Stock price indexes for the banking sector and
pected real equity return over the next 10 years for S&P
the broader financial sectors rose significantly.
500 firms and an estimate of the real 10-year Treasury
yield—a rough gauge of the equity risk premium— The level of private-sector debt was estimated to have
narrowed noticeably but remained high by historical remained about unchanged in the second quarter, as a
standards. Option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 further modest decline in household debt about offset
index declined but remained elevated. a slight increase in nonfinancial business debt. Gross
bond issuance by nonfinancial corporations was robust
Yields on speculative-grade and investment-grade cor-
in May. Investment-grade issuance rebounded after a
porate bonds dropped, and spreads over yields on
lull in April. Speculative-grade issuance was the highest
comparable-maturity Treasury securities narrowed con-
since June 2007, but issuance of lower-rated specula-
siderably. Estimates of bid-asked spreads in the sec-
tive-grade bonds remained minimal. Meanwhile, the
ondary market for speculative-grade corporate bonds
federal government issued large amounts of debt, and
fell significantly to about their average levels in the few
state and local government debt was estimated to have
years before the summer of 2007, while estimates of
expanded moderately.
such spreads for investment-grade corporate bonds
remained somewhat elevated. Market sentiment to- The expansion of M2 slowed significantly in April and
ward the syndicated leveraged loan market also im- May, as the reallocation of household wealth toward
proved, with the average bid price increasing noticeably the safety and liquidity of M2 assets evidently mod-
and bid-asked spreads narrowing a bit further. The erated. Retail money market mutual funds and small
inclusion of commercial mortgage-backed securities time deposits contracted in both months, probably in
(CMBS) in the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Fa- response to declining interest rates on these assets.
cility (TALF) program resulted initially in a narrowing The rise in currency diminished, likely reflecting pri-
of commercial mortgage credit default swap (CDS) marily a waning in foreign demand.
spreads; however, spreads later widened as rating agen-

--- Page 8 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Commercial bank credit increased slightly in May fol- the remainder of 2009 and for 2010. Consumer spend-
lowing six consecutive monthly declines, but the turna- ing appeared to have stabilized since the start of the
round reflected a rise in securities holdings and in the year, sales and starts of new homes were flattening out,
volatile “other” loans category—that is, loans other and the recent declines in capital spending did not look
than commercial and industrial (C&I), real estate, and as severe as those that had occurred around the turn of
consumer loans. C&I loans dropped in May, amid the year. Recent declines in payroll employment and
subdued origination activity and broad-based paydowns industrial production, while still sizable, were smaller
of outstanding loans. Home equity loans edged than those registered earlier in 2009. Household wealth
down—the first monthly decline in this category since was higher, corporate bond rates had fallen, the value
October 2006—partly because of banks’ reductions in of the dollar was lower, the outlook for foreign activity
existing lines of credit. Closed-end residential mort- was better, and financial stress appeared to have eased
gages decreased; originations were reportedly strong somewhat more than had been anticipated in the staff
but were more than offset by loan sales to the govern- forecast prepared for the prior FOMC meeting. The
ment-sponsored enterprises. The amount of outstand- projected boost to aggregate demand from these fac-
ing consumer loans originated by banks shrank during tors more than offset the negative effects of higher oil
April and May; the quantity of consumer loans on prices and mortgage rates. The staff projected that real
banks’ balance sheets decreased even more because of GDP would decline at a substantially slower rate in the
a number of large credit card securitizations. second quarter than it had in the first quarter and then
increase in the second half of 2009, though less rapidly
The dollar depreciated substantially during the inter-
than potential output. The staff also revised up its pro-
meeting period against all other major currencies. This
jection for the increase in real GDP in 2010, to a pace
decline appeared to be driven by a renewed sense of
above the growth rate of potential GDP. As a conse-
optimism about global growth prospects, leading inves-
quence, the staff projected that the unemployment rate
tors to shift away from safe-haven assets in the United
would rise further in 2009 but would edge down in
States to riskier assets elsewhere. Libor-to-OIS spreads
2010. Meanwhile, the staff forecast for inflation was
in euros and sterling decreased, and several foreign
marked up. Recent readings on core consumer prices
banks took advantage of improved financial conditions
had come in a bit higher than expected; in addition, the
to raise capital and increase issuance of debt outside of
rise in energy prices, less-favorable import prices, and
government guarantee programs. The improved access
the absence of any downward movement in inflation
to capital markets and better economic outlook buoyed
expectations led the staff to raise its medium-term in-
bank stocks, which helped headline equity indexes
flation outlook. Nonetheless, the low level of resource
move higher. Most stock markets in emerging market
utilization was projected to result in an appreciable de-
economies rose considerably, and mutual fund flows
celeration in core consumer prices through 2010.
into those markets strengthened.
Looking ahead to 2011 and 2012, the staff anticipated
The European Central Bank lowered its main policy
that financial markets and institutions would continue
rate 25 basis points to 1 percent and announced that it
to recuperate, monetary policy would remain stimula-
would purchase up to €60 billion in covered bonds.
tive, fiscal stimulus would be fading, and inflation ex-
The Bank of England, the Bank of Canada, and the
pectations would be relatively well anchored. Under
Bank of Japan kept their policy rates constant over the
such conditions, the staff projected that real GDP
intermeeting period, but the Bank of England increased
would expand at a rate well above that of its potential,
the size of its planned asset purchases from £75 billion
that the unemployment rate would decline significantly,
to £125 billion. The Bank of Japan continued purchas-
and that overall and core personal consumption ex-
ing commercial paper, corporate bonds, equities, and
penditures inflation would stay low.
government bonds. Chinese authorities held the ren-
minbi nearly unchanged against the dollar, and several Participants’ Views and Committee Policy Action
central banks intervened to purchase dollars, attempt- In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, all meeting
ing to slow the dollar’s depreciation against their cur- participants—the five members of the Board of Gov-
rencies. ernors and the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve
Banks—provided projections for economic growth, the
Staff Economic Outlook
unemployment rate, and consumer price inflation for
In the forecast prepared for the June meeting, the staff
each year from 2009 through 2011 and over a longer
revised upward its outlook for economic activity during
horizon. Longer-run projections represent each partic-

--- Page 9 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 3 - 2 4 , 2 0 0 9 Page 9
ipant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable seen as an important reason for reduced lending and
would be expected to converge over time under appro- tighter terms, and banks could face substantial losses in
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further their loan portfolios in coming quarters. Many partici-
shocks. Participants’ forecasts through 2011 and over pants noted that obtaining financing for commercial
the longer run are described in the Summary of Eco- real estate projects remained extremely difficult amid
nomic Projections, which is attached as an addendum worsening fundamentals in the sector.
to these minutes.
Consumer spending appeared no longer to be declining
In their discussion of the economic situation and out- but nonetheless remained weak. The continued slug-
look, participants generally agreed that the information gishness in consumer expenditures mainly reflected
received since the April meeting indicated that the eco- falling employment, sharply lower wealth as a result of
nomic contraction was slowing and that the decline in earlier steep declines in asset prices, and tight credit
activity could cease before long. Business and house- conditions. Because these factors were not seen as like-
hold confidence had picked up some, and survey data ly to dissipate quickly, most participants judged that
and anecdotal reports showed improved expectations consumer spending would continue to be subdued for
for the future. The inventory adjustment process was some time. Given the significant uncertainties in the
continuing, housing and consumption demand appar- economic outlook, a sizable reduction in the saving rate
ently had leveled off, and financial market strains had seemed unlikely in the near term; some saw the possi-
eased further. Nonetheless, most participants saw the bility of further increases in the household saving rate.
economy as still quite weak and vulnerable to further Participants also observed that, while personal income
adverse shocks. Conditions in the labor market re- had expanded briskly of late, those increases had been
mained poor, and the unemployment rate continued to boosted by special one-time factors such as fiscal stim-
rise. These factors, along with past declines in wealth, ulus and large cost-of-living adjustments for Social Se-
would weigh on consumer spending. Although finan- curity recipients. Personal income was likely to con-
cial market conditions had improved, credit was still tract for a time going forward as the effects of these
quite tight in many sectors. Economic activity in for- factors waned, and there was some risk that consumer
eign economies was unlikely to be sufficiently strong to spending might also decline as a consequence.
provide a substantial boost to U.S. exports. Against
Indicators of single-family starts and sales suggested
this backdrop, participants generally judged that, while
that housing activity may be leveling out, but most par-
U.S. output would probably begin to grow again in the
ticipants viewed the sector as still vulnerable to further
second half of the year, the rate of increase was likely to
weakness. Some expressed concern that the increases
be relatively slow. Most believed that downside risks to
in mortgage rates seen over the intermeeting period
economic growth had diminished somewhat since the
had the potential to further depress the demand for
April meeting, but were still significant.
housing and thus impede an economic recovery. Oth-
Developments in financial markets over the intermeet- ers noted that foreclosures were continuing at a very
ing period were seen as broadly positive, reflecting, at high rate and could push house prices down further
least in part, a reduction in the perceived risk of further and add to inventories of unsold homes, holding back
severely adverse outcomes. In particular, many partici- housing activity and weighing on household wealth.
pants noted that the results of the SCAP helped bolster
Labor market conditions were of particular concern to
confidence in banks and led to large infusions of pri-
meeting participants. Although some improvements
vate capital in that sector. Corporate credit markets
were evident in new and continuing unemployment
continued to improve, and markets for asset-backed
insurance claims and the May payroll report was less
securities also showed an increasing amount of activity,
weak than expected, job losses remained substantial
supported in part by the TALF. Increases in equity
over the intermeeting period and the unemployment
prices had favorable effects on household wealth and
rate continued to rise rapidly. Rising labor force partic-
overall sentiment. Still, participants generally noted
ipation contributed to the increase in the unemploy-
that the improvement in market conditions was in part
ment rate. Some participants pointed out that house-
due to ongoing support from various government pro-
holds’ financial strains may be encouraging many indi-
grams and that underlying financial conditions re-
viduals to enter the labor market despite difficult labor
mained fragile. Credit was tight, with some banks quite
market conditions. Reports from district contacts sug-
reluctant to lend. Worsening credit quality, especially
gested that workweeks were being trimmed and that
for consumer and commercial real estate loans, was

--- Page 10 ---

Page 10 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
total hours worked were falling significantly. The large would not improve quickly thereafter. In addition,
number of people working part time for economic rea- many participants noted that productivity growth had
sons and the prevalence of permanent job reductions been surprisingly strong in recent quarters. Although
rather than temporary layoffs suggested that labor mar- the measured increase in productivity might reflect cyc-
ket conditions were even more difficult than indicated lical factors rather than changes in the underlying trend
by the unemployment rate. With the recovery pro- and was subject to data revisions, growth in unit labor
jected to be rather sluggish, most participants antic- costs was expected to continue to be restrained in com-
ipated that the employment situation was likely to be ing quarters. Substantial resource slack was also likely
downbeat for some time. to keep price inflation low in the future. Participants
noted the considerable uncertainty surrounding esti-
Anecdotal reports suggested that the weakness in activ-
mates of the output and unemployment gaps and the
ity was widespread across many industries and ex-
extent of their effects on prices. However, most agreed
tended to the service sector. However, some meeting
that, even taking account of such uncertainty, the
participants highlighted evidence from regional surveys
economy was almost certainly operating well below its
that pointed to a stabilization or even a slight pickup in
potential and that significant price pressures were un-
manufacturing in some areas, and positive signs were
likely to materialize in the near and medium terms.
apparent in the energy and agriculture sectors. Partici-
Still, in light of the signs that economic activity was
pants noted an improvement in business sentiment in
stabilizing, most participants saw less downside risk to
many districts, but contacts remained quite uncertain
their expectations for inflation. Moreover, participants
about the timing and extent of the recovery; elevated
pointed out that some measures of inflation expecta-
uncertainty was said to be inhibiting capital spending in
tions had edged up recently from very low readings,
many cases. Many businesses had been successful in
perhaps reflecting in part reduced concerns about def-
working down inventories of unsold goods. Some par-
lation, and were now at levels close to those prevailing
ticipants noted that, as this process continues, increases
prior to the onset of the crisis. A few participants were
in sales will have to be met by increases in production,
concerned that inflation expectations could continue to
which would, in turn, support growth in hours worked
rise, especially in light of the Federal Reserve’s greatly
and eventually in investment outlays.
expanded balance sheet and the associated large vol-
Many participants noted that the global nature of this ume of reserves in the banking system, and that as a
recession meant that growth abroad was not likely to result inflation could temporarily rise above levels con-
bolster U.S. exports and so contribute to a recovery in sistent with the Committee’s dual objectives of maxi-
the United States. In Europe, for example, unemploy- mum employment and stable prices. Most participants,
ment was also rising sharply and financial strains re- however, expected that inflation would remain subdued
mained significant. Some participants thought that for some time.
recovery there was likely to lag behind that of the Unit-
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
ed States. In Asia, the outlook appeared more promis-
ahead, Committee members agreed that the stance of
ing, with some evidence that the rate of decline in ac-
monetary policy should not be changed at this meeting.
tivity was diminishing. Recent information from China
Given the prospects for weak economic activity, sub-
suggested that economic growth may be picking up
stantial resource slack, and subdued inflation, the
there. Still, some participants mentioned that growth in
Committee agreed that it should maintain its target
that region was likely to remain importantly dependent
range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent. The
on exports to major industrial economies that were
future path of the federal funds rate would depend on
likely to recover slowly.
the Committee’s evolving expectations for the econo-
Although recent increases in oil and other commodity my, but for now, members thought it most likely that
prices were likely to raise headline inflation over the the federal funds rate would need to be maintained at
near term, most participants expected core inflation to an exceptionally low level for an extended period, given
remain subdued for some time. Several measures of their forecasts for only a gradual upturn in activity and
labor compensation had slowed in recent quarters as the lack of inflation pressures. The Committee also
unemployment mounted and wages were not likely to agreed that changes to its program of asset purchases
exert any significant upward pressures on prices, given were not warranted at this time. Although an expan-
the expectation that labor market conditions were likely sion of such purchases might provide additional sup-
to deteriorate further in coming months and probably port to the economy, the effects of further asset pur-

--- Page 11 ---

M i n u t e s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 3 - 2 4 , 2 0 0 9 Page 11
chases, especially purchases of Treasury securities, on The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
the economy and on inflation expectations were uncer- low to be released at 2:15 p.m.:
tain. Moreover, it seemed likely that economic activity
“Information received since the Federal
was in the process of leveling out, and the considerable
Open Market Committee met in April sug-
improvements in financial markets over recent months
gests that the pace of economic contrac-
were likely to lend further support to aggregate de-
tion is slowing. Conditions in financial
mand. Accordingly, the Committee agreed that the
markets have generally improved in recent
asset purchase programs should proceed for now on
months. Household spending has shown
the schedule announced at previous meetings.
further signs of stabilizing but remains
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee constrained by ongoing job losses, lower
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank housing wealth, and tight credit. Business-
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to ex- es are cutting back on fixed investment
ecute transactions in the System Account in accordance and staffing but appear to be making
with the following domestic policy directive: progress in bringing inventory stocks into
better alignment with sales. Although
“The Federal Open Market Committee
economic activity is likely to remain weak
seeks monetary and financial conditions
for a time, the Committee continues to an-
that will foster price stability and promote
ticipate that policy actions to stabilize fi-
sustainable growth in output. To further
nancial markets and institutions, fiscal and
its long-run objectives, the Committee
monetary stimulus, and market forces will
seeks conditions in reserve markets consis-
contribute to a gradual resumption of sus-
tent with federal funds trading in a range
tainable economic growth in a context of
from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee di-
price stability.
rects the Desk to purchase agency debt,
agency MBS, and longer-term Treasury se- The prices of energy and other commodi-
curities during the intermeeting period ties have risen of late. However, substan-
with the aim of providing support to pri- tial resource slack is likely to dampen cost
vate credit markets and economic activity. pressures, and the Committee expects that
The timing and pace of these purchases inflation will remain subdued for some
should depend on conditions in the mar- time.
kets for such securities and on a broader
In these circumstances, the Federal Re-
assessment of private credit market condi-
serve will employ all available tools to
tions. The Committee anticipates that the
promote economic recovery and to pre-
combination of outright purchases and
serve price stability. The Committee will
various liquidity facilities outstanding will
maintain the target range for the federal
cause the size of the Federal Reserve’s bal-
funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and continues
ance sheet to expand significantly in com-
to anticipate that economic conditions are
ing months. The Desk is expected to pur-
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of
chase up to $200 billion in housing-related
the federal funds rate for an extended pe-
agency debt by the end of this year. The
riod. As previously announced, to provide
Desk is expected to purchase up to $1.25
support to mortgage lending and housing
trillion of agency MBS by the end of the
markets and to improve overall conditions
year. The Desk is expected to purchase up
in private credit markets, the Federal Re-
to $300 billion of longer-term Treasury se-
serve will purchase a total of up to $1.25
curities by the end of the third quarter.
trillion of agency mortgage-backed securi-
The System Open Market Account Man-
ties and up to $200 billion of agency debt
ager and the Secretary will keep the Com-
by the end of the year. In addition, the
mittee informed of ongoing developments
Federal Reserve will buy up to $300 billion
regarding the System's balance sheet that
of Treasury securities by autumn. The
could affect the attainment over time of
Committee will continue to evaluate the
the Committee's objectives of maximum
timing and overall amounts of its purchas-
employment and price stability.”

--- Page 12 ---

Page 12 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
es of securities in light of the evolving Conference Call
economic outlook and conditions in finan- On June 3, 2009, the Committee met by conference call
cial markets. The Federal Reserve is moni- in a joint session with the Board of Governors to re-
toring the size and composition of its bal- view recent economic and financial developments, in-
ance sheet and will make adjustments to its cluding changes in the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.
credit and liquidity programs as war- In addition, by unanimous vote, Brian Sack was se-
ranted.” lected to serve as Manager, System Open Market Ac-
count, on the understanding that his selection was sub-
Voting for this action: Messrs. Bernanke and Dudley,
ject to being satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank
Ms. Duke, Messrs. Evans, Kohn, Lacker, Lockhart,
of New York.
Tarullo, and Warsh, and Ms. Yellen.
Secretary’s note: Advice subsequently was
Voting against this action: None.
received that the selection of Mr. Sack as
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee Manager was satisfactory to the Board of Di-
would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, August 11-12, rectors of the Federal Reserve Bank of New
2009. The meeting adjourned at 12:40 p.m. on June 24, York.
2009.
Notation Vote
By notation vote completed on May 19, 2009, the _____________________________
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the Brian F. Madigan
FOMC meeting held on April 28-29, 2009. Secretary

--- Page 13 ---

Page 1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the June 23-24, 2009, FOMC this year than in recent years, and most projected that
meeting, the members of the Board of Governors and core inflation would edge down this year. Almost all
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of participants viewed the near-term outlook for domestic
whom participate in deliberations of the FOMC, sub- output as having improved modestly relative to the
mitted projections for output growth, unemployment, projections they made at the time of the April FOMC
and inflation in 2009, 2010, 2011, and over the longer meeting, reflecting both a slightly less severe contrac-
run. Projections were based on information available tion in the first half of 2009 and a moderately stronger,
through the end of the meeting and on each partici- but still sluggish, recovery in the second half. With the
pant’s assumptions about factors likely to affect eco- strong adverse forces that have been acting on the
nomic outcomes, including his or her assessment of economy likely to abate only slowly, participants gener-
appropriate monetary policy. “Appropriate monetary ally expected the recovery to be gradual in 2010. Even
policy” is defined as the future path of policy that the though all participants had raised their near-term out-
participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for look for real GDP, in light of incoming data on labor
economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or markets, they increased their projections for the path of
her interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s dual objec- the unemployment rate from those published in April.
tives of maximum employment and stable prices. Participants foresaw only a gradual improvement in
Longer-run projections represent each participant’s labor market conditions in 2010 and 2011, leaving the
assessment of the rate to which each variable would be unemployment rate at the end of 2011 well above the
expected to converge over time under appropriate level they viewed as its longer-run sustainable rate.
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks. Participants projected low inflation this year. For 2010
and 2011, the central tendencies of the participants’
FOMC participants generally expected that, after de-
inflation forecasts pointed to fairly stable inflation that
clining over the first half of this year, output would
would be modestly below most participants’ estimates
expand sluggishly over the remainder of the year. Con-
of the rate consistent with the dual objectives; however,
sequently, as indicated in table 1 and depicted in figure
the divergence of participants’ views about the inflation
1, all FOMC participants projected that real gross do-
outlook remained wide. Most participants indicated
mestic product (GDP) would contract over the entirety
that they expected the economy to take five or six years
of this year and that the unemployment rate would in-
to converge to a longer-run path characterized by a
crease in coming quarters. All participants also ex-
sustainable rate of output growth and by rates of un-
pected that overall inflation would be somewhat slower
employment and inflation consistent with the Federal
Table 1. Economic projections of Federal Reserve Governors and Reserve Bank presidents, June 2009
Percent
Central tendency1 Range2
Variable
2009 2010 2011 Longer run 2009 2010 2011 Longer run
Change in real GDP. . . . . . -1.5 to -1.0 2.1 to 3.3 3.8 to 4.6 2.5 to 2.7 -1.6 to -0.6 0.8 to 4.0 2.3 to 5.0 2.4 to 2.8
April projection. . . . . . -2.0 to -1.3 2.0 to 3.0 3.5 to 4.8 2.5 to 2.7 -2.5 to -0.5 1.5 to 4.0 2.3 to 5.0 2.4 to 3.0
Unemployment rate. . . . . . 9.8 to 10.1 9.5 to 9.8 8.4 to 8.8 4.8 to 5.0 9.7 to 10.5 8.5 to 10.6 6.8 to 9.2 4.5 to 6.0
April projection. . . . . . 9.2 to 9.6 9.0 to 9.5 7.7 to 8.5 4.8 to 5.0 9.1 to 10.0 8.0 to 9.6 6.5 to 9.0 4.5 to 5.3
PCE inflation. . . . . . . . . . . 1.0 to 1.4 1.2 to 1.8 1.1 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0 1.0 to 1.8 0.9 to 2.0 0.5 to 2.5 1.5 to 2.1
April projection. . . . . . 0.6 to 0.9 1.0 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.9 1.7 to 2.0 -0.5 to 1.2 0.7 to 2.0 0.5 to 2.5 1.5 to 2.0
Core PCE inflation3. . . . . . 1.3 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.5 0.9 to 1.7 1.2 to 2.0 0.5 to 2.0 0.2 to 2.5
April projection. . . . . . 1.0 to 1.5 0.7 to 1.3 0.8 to 1.6 0.7 to 1.6 0.5 to 2.0 0.2 to 2.5
NOTE: Projections of change in real gross domestic product (GDP) and in inflation are from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth quarter of
the year indicated. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage rates of change in, respectively, the price index for personal consumption expendi-
tures (PCE) and the price index for PCE excluding food and energy. Projections for the unemployment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in
the fourth quarter of the year indicated. Each participant’s projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy. Longer-run projec-
tions represent each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the
absence of further shocks to the economy. The April projections were made in conjunction with the meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on April
28-29, 2009.
1. The central tendency excludes the three highest and three lowest projections for each variable in each year.
2. The range for a variable in a given year consists of all participants’ projections, from lowest to highest, for that variable in that year.
3. Longer-run projections for core PCE inflation are not collected.

--- Page 14 ---

Page 2 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 1. Central tendencies and ranges of economic projections, 2009–11 and over the longer run
Percent
Change in real GDP 6
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections 5
4
3
Actual 2
1
+
_0
1
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
9
8
7
6
5
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
4
3
2
1
+
_0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
4
3
2
1
+
_0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the notes to table 1. The data for the actual values of the variables are annual.

--- Page 15 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o je c t i o n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 3 - 2 4 , 2 0 0 9 Page 3
Reserve’s dual objectives, but several said full conver- hold down growth in U.S. exports. A number of par-
gence would take longer. In contrast to recent projec- ticipants also saw recent increases in some long-term
tions, a majority of participants perceived the risks to interest rates and in oil prices as factors that could
growth as roughly balanced, although several still damp a near-term economic recovery.
viewed those risks as tilted to the downside. Most par-
Looking further ahead, participants’ projections for real
ticipants saw the risks surrounding their inflation out-
GDP growth in 2010 and 2011 were not materially dif-
look as roughly balanced, and fewer participants than in
ferent from those provided in April. The projections
April characterized those risks as skewed to the down-
for growth in 2010 had a central tendency of 2.1 to 3.3
side. With few exceptions, participants judged that the
percent, and those for 2011 had a central tendency of
projections for economic activity and inflation re-
3.8 to 4.6 percent. Participants generally expected that
mained subject to a degree of uncertainty exceeding
household financial positions would improve only
historical norms.
gradually and that strains in credit markets and in the
The Outlook banking system would ebb slowly; hence, the pace of
Participants’ projections for the change in real GDP in recovery would continue to be damped in 2010. But
2009 had a central tendency of negative 1.5 percent to they anticipated that the upturn would strengthen in
negative 1.0 percent, somewhat above the central ten- late 2010 and in 2011 to a pace exceeding the growth
dency of negative 2.0 percent to negative 1.3 percent rate of potential GDP. Participants noted several fac-
for their April projections. Participants noted that the tors contributing to this pickup, including accommoda-
data received between the April and June FOMC meet- tive monetary policy, fiscal stimulus, and continued
ings pointed to a somewhat smaller decline in output improvement in financial conditions and household
during the first half of the year than they had antic- balance sheets. Beyond 2011, they expected that out-
ipated at the time of the April meeting. Moreover, par- put growth would remain above that of potential GDP
ticipants saw additional indications that the economic for a time, leading to a gradual elimination of slack in
downturn in the United States and worldwide was resource utilization. Over the longer run, most partici-
moderating in the second quarter, and they continued pants expected that, without further shocks, real GDP
to expect that sales and production would begin to re- growth eventually would converge to a rate of 2.5 to
cover gradually during the second half of the year, re- 2.7 percent per year, reflecting longer-term trends in
flecting the effects of monetary and fiscal stimulus, the growth of productivity and the labor force.
measures to support credit markets, and diminishing
Even though participants raised their output growth
financial stresses. As reasons for marking up their pro-
forecasts, they also moved up their unemployment rate
jections for near-term economic activity, participants
projections and continued to anticipate that labor mar-
pointed to a further improvement in financial condi-
ket conditions would deteriorate further over the re-
tions during the intermeeting period, signs of stabiliza-
mainder of the year. Their projections for the average
tion in consumer spending, and tentative indications of
unemployment rate during the fourth quarter of 2009
a leveling out of activity in the housing sector. In addi-
had a central tendency of 9.8 to 10.1 percent, about ½
tion, they observed that aggressive inventory reductions
percentage point above the central tendency of their
during the first half of this year appeared to have left
April projections and noticeably higher than the actual
firms’ stocks in better balance with sales, suggesting
unemployment rate of 9.4 percent in May—the latest
that production is likely to increase as sales stabilize
reading available at the time of the June FOMC meet-
and then start to turn up later this year. Participants
ing. All participants raised their forecasts of the unem-
expected, however, that recoveries in consumer spend-
ployment rate at the end of this year, reflecting the
ing and residential investment initially would be
sharper-than-expected rise in unemployment that oc-
damped by further deterioration in labor markets, the
curred over the intermeeting period. With little materi-
continued repair of household balance sheets, persis-
al change in projected output growth in 2010 and 2011,
tently tight credit conditions, and still-weak housing
participants still expected unemployment to decline in
demand. They also anticipated that very low capacity
those years, but the projected unemployment rate in
utilization, sluggish growth in sales, uncertainty about
each year was about ½ percentage point above the
the economic environment, and a continued elevated
April forecasts, reflecting the higher starting point of
cost and limited availability of financing would contri-
the projections. Most participants anticipated that out-
bute to continued weakness in business fixed invest-
put growth next year would not substantially exceed its
ment this year. Some participants noted that weak
longer-run sustainable rate and hence that the unem-
economic conditions in other countries probably would

--- Page 16 ---

Page 4 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
ployment rate would decline only modestly in 2010; Several participants, noting that the public’s longer-run
some also pointed to frictions associated with the re- inflation expectations had not changed appreciably,
allocation of labor from shrinking economic sectors to expected that inflation would return more promptly to
expanding sectors as likely to restrain progress in re- levels consistent with their judgments about longer-run
ducing unemployment. The central tendency of the inflation than these participants had projected in April.
unemployment rate at the end of 2010 was 9.5 to 9.8 A few participants also anticipated that projected infla-
percent. With output growth and job creation generally tion in 2011 would be modestly above their longer-run
projected to pick up appreciably in 2011, participants inflation projections because of the possible effects of
anticipated that joblessness would decline more notice- very low short-term interest rates and of the large ex-
ably, as evident from the central tendency of 8.4 to 8.8 pansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet on the
percent for their projections of the unemployment rate public’s inflation expectations. Overall, the range of
in the fourth quarter of 2011. They expected that the participants’ projections of inflation in 2011 remained
unemployment rate would decline considerably further quite wide.
in subsequent years as it moved back toward its longer-
As in April, the central tendency of projections of the
run sustainable level, which most participants still saw
longer-run inflation rate was 1.7 to 2.0 percent. Most
as between 4.8 and 5.0 percent; however, a few partici-
participants judged that a longer-run PCE inflation rate
pants raised their estimates of the longer-run unem-
of 2 percent would be consistent with the Federal Re-
ployment rate.
serve’s dual mandate; others indicated that inflation of
The central tendency of participants’ projections for 1½ percent or 1¾ percent would be appropriate.
personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation in Modestly positive longer-run inflation would allow the
2009 was 1.0 to 1.4 percent, about ½ percentage point Committee to stimulate economic activity and support
above the central tendency of their April projections. employment by setting the federal funds rate temporar-
Participants noted that higher-than-expected inflation ily below the inflation rate when the economy suffers a
data over the intermeeting period and the anticipated large negative shock to demands for goods and servic-
influence of higher oil and commodity prices on con- es.
sumer prices were factors contributing to the increase
Uncertainty and Risks
in their inflation forecasts. Looking beyond this year,
In contrast to the participants’ views over the past sev-
participants’ projections for total PCE inflation had
eral quarters, in June a majority of participants saw the
central tendencies of 1.2 to 1.8 percent for 2010 and
risks to their projections for real GDP growth and the
1.1 to 2.0 percent for 2011, modestly higher than the
unemployment rate as broadly balanced. In explaining
central tendencies from the April projections. Reflect-
why they perceived a reduction in downside risks to the
ing the large increases in energy prices over the inter-
outlook, these participants pointed to the tentative
meeting period, the forecasts for core PCE inflation
signs of economic stabilization, indications of some
(which excludes the direct effects of movements in
effectiveness of monetary and fiscal policy actions, and
food and energy prices) in 2009 were raised by less than
improvements in financial conditions. In contrast, sev-
the projections for total PCE inflation, while the fore-
eral participants still saw the risks to their GDP growth
casts for core and total PCE inflation in 2010 and 2011
forecasts as skewed to the downside and the associated
increased by similar amounts. The central tendency of
risks to unemployment as skewed to the upside. Al-
projections for core inflation in 2009 was 1.3 to 1.6
most all participants shared the judgment that their
percent; those for 2010 and 2011 were 1.0 to 1.5 per-
projections of future economic activity and unemploy-
cent and 0.9 to 1.7 percent, respectively. Most partici-
ment continued to be subject to greater-than-average
pants expected that sizable economic slack would con-
uncertainty.1 Many participants again high-lighted the
tinue to damp inflation pressures for the next few years
still-considerable uncertainty about the future course of
and hence that total PCE inflation in 2011 would still
the financial crisis and the risk that a resurgence of fi-
be below their assessments of its appropriate longer-
run level. Some thought that such slack would generate
a decline in inflation over the next few years. Most, 1 Table 2 provides estimates of forecast uncertainty for the
however, projected that, as the economy recovers, in- change in real GDP, the unemployment rate, and total con-
sumer price inflation over the period from 1989 to 2008. At
flation would increase gradually and move closer to
the end of this summary, the box titled “Forecast Uncertain-
their individual assessments of the measured rate of
ty” discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in
inflation consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess
mandate for maximum employment and price stability.
the uncertainty and risks attending participants’ projections.

--- Page 17 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o je c t i o n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 3 - 2 4 , 2 0 0 9 Page 5
nancial turmoil could adversely impact the real econo- Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
my. In addition, some noted the difficulty in gauging Percentage points
Variable 2009 2010 2011
the macroeconomic effects of the credit-easing policies
that have been employed by the Federal Reserve and
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . . ±1.0 ±1.5 ±1.6
other central banks, given the limited experience with Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . . ±0.4 ±0.8 ±1.0
such tools.
Total consumer prices2 . . . . . . ±0.9 ±1.0 ±1.0
Most participants judged the risks to the inflation out- NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root
mean squared error of projections for 1989 through 2008 that were
look as roughly balanced, with the number doing so
released in the summer by various private and government forecasters.
higher than in April. A few participants continued to As described in the box titled “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain
view these risks as skewed to the downside, and one assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes
for real GDP, unemployment, and consumer prices will be in ranges
saw the inflation risks as tilted to the upside. Some
implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past. Further
participants noted the risk that inflation expectations information is in David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), “Gauging
might drift downward in response to persistently low the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting
Errors,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washing-
inflation outcomes and continued significant slack in ton: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).
resource utilization. Several participants pointed to the 1. For definitions, refer to general note in table 1.
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
possibility of an upward shift in expected and actual
that has been most widely used in government and private economic
inflation if the stimulative monetary policy measures forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous
and the attendant expansion of the Federal Reserve’s year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.
balance sheet were not unwound in a timely fashion as
the economy recovers. Most participants again saw the these estimates, as they incorporated the effects of un-
uncertainty surrounding their inflation projections as expectedly high recent unemployment data and of the
exceeding historical norms. reallocation of labor from declining sectors to expand-
ing ones. The dispersion in participants’ longer-run
Diversity of Views
projections reflected differences in their estimates re-
Figures 2.A and 2.B provide further details on the di-
garding the sustainable rates of output growth and un-
versity of participants’ views regarding likely outcomes
employment to which the economy would converge
for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate in
under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence
2009, 2010, 2011, and over the longer run. The disper-
of any further shocks.
sion in participants’ June projections for the next three
years reflects, among other factors, the diversity of Figures 2.C and 2.D provide corresponding informa-
their assessments regarding the effects of fiscal stimulus tion about the diversity of participants’ views regarding
and nontraditional monetary policy actions as well as the inflation outlook. The distribution of the projec-
the likely pace of improvement in financial conditions. tions for total and core PCE inflation in 2009 moved
For real GDP growth, the distribution of projections upward, reflecting the higher inflation data released
for 2009 narrowed and shifted slightly higher, reflecting over the intermeeting period, while distributions for the
the somewhat better-than-expected data received dur- projections in 2010 and 2011 did not change signifi-
ing the intermeeting period. The distributions for 2010 cantly. The dispersion in participants’ projections for
and 2011 changed little. For the unemployment rate, total and core PCE inflation for 2009, 2010, and 2011
the surprisingly large increases in unemployment re- illustrates their varying assessments of the effects on
ported during the intermeeting period prompted an inflation and inflation expectations of persistent eco-
upward shift in the distribution. Because of the persis- nomic slack as well as of the recent expansion of the
tence exhibited in many of the unemployment fore- Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. These varying assess-
casts, there were similar upward shifts in the distribu- ments are especially evident in the wide dispersion of
tions for 2010 and 2011. The dispersion of these fore- inflation projections for 2011. In contrast, the tight
casts for all three years was roughly similar to that of distribution of participants’ projections for longer-run
April. The distribution of participants’ projections of inflation illustrates their substantial agreement about
longer-run real GDP growth was about unchanged. A the measured rate of inflation that is most consistent
few participants raised their longer-run projections of with the Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum
the unemployment rate, widening the dispersion of employment and stable prices.

--- Page 18 ---

Page 6 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 2.A. Distribution of participants’ projections for the change in real GDP, 2009–11 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2009 16
June projections
April projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-2.6--2.4--2.2--2.0--1.8--1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2-0.0-0.2-0.4-0.6-0.8-1.0-1.2-1.4-1.6-1.8-2.0-2.2-2.4-2.6-2.8-3.0-3.2-3.4-3.6-3.8-4.0-4.2-4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-
-2.5 -2.3 -2.1 -1.9 -1.7 -1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2010
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-2.6--2.4--2.2--2.0--1.8--1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2-0.0-0.2-0.4-0.6-0.8-1.0-1.2-1.4-1.6-1.8-2.0-2.2-2.4-2.6-2.8-3.0-3.2-3.4-3.6-3.8-4.0-4.2-4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-
-2.5 -2.3 -2.1 -1.9 -1.7 -1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2011
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-2.6--2.4--2.2--2.0--1.8--1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2-0.0-0.2-0.4-0.6-0.8-1.0-1.2-1.4-1.6-1.8-2.0-2.2-2.4-2.6-2.8-3.0-3.2-3.4-3.6-3.8-4.0-4.2-4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-
-2.5 -2.3 -2.1 -1.9 -1.7 -1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-2.6--2.4--2.2--2.0--1.8--1.6--1.4--1.2--1.0--0.8--0.6--0.4--0.2-0.0-0.2-0.4-0.6-0.8-1.0-1.2-1.4-1.6-1.8-2.0-2.2-2.4-2.6-2.8-3.0-3.2-3.4-3.6-3.8-4.0-4.2-4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-
-2.5 -2.3 -2.1 -1.9 -1.7 -1.5 -1.3 -1.1 -0.9 -0.7 -0.5 -0.3 -0.1 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 19 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o je c t i o n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 3 - 2 4 , 2 0 0 9 Page 7
Figure 2.B. Distribution of participants’ projections for the unemployment rate, 2009–11 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2009 16
June projections
April projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-5.4-5.6-5.8-6.0-6.2-6.4-6.6-6.8-7.0-7.2-7.4-7.6-7.8-8.0-8.2-8.4-8.6-8.8-9.0-9.2-9.4-9.6-9.8-10.0-10.2-10.4-10.6-
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1 10.3 10.5 10.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2010
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-5.4-5.6-5.8-6.0-6.2-6.4-6.6-6.8-7.0-7.2-7.4-7.6-7.8-8.0-8.2-8.4-8.6-8.8-9.0-9.2-9.4-9.6-9.8-10.0-10.2-10.4-10.6-
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1 10.3 10.5 10.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2011
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-5.4-5.6-5.8-6.0-6.2-6.4-6.6-6.8-7.0-7.2-7.4-7.6-7.8-8.0-8.2-8.4-8.6-8.8-9.0-9.2-9.4-9.6-9.8-10.0-10.2-10.4-10.6-
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1 10.3 10.5 10.7
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.4-4.6-4.8-5.0-5.2-5.4-5.6-5.8-6.0-6.2-6.4-6.6-6.8-7.0-7.2-7.4-7.6-7.8-8.0-8.2-8.4-8.6-8.8-9.0-9.2-9.4-9.6-9.8-10.0-10.2-10.4-10.6-
4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1 5.3 5.5 5.7 5.9 6.1 6.3 6.5 6.7 6.9 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.7 7.9 8.1 8.3 8.5 8.7 8.9 9.1 9.3 9.5 9.7 9.9 10.1 10.3 10.5 10.7
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 20 ---

Page 8 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Figure 2.C. Distribution of participants’ projections for PCE inflation, 2009–11 and over the longer run
Number of participants
2009 16
June projections
April projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-0.5- -0.3- -0.1- 0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
-0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2010
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-0.5- -0.3- -0.1- 0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
-0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2011
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-0.5- -0.3- -0.1- 0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
-0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
-0.5- -0.3- -0.1- 0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
-0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 21 ---

S u m m a r y o f E c o n o m i c P r o je c t i o n s o f t h e M e e t i n g o f J u n e 2 3 - 2 4 , 2 0 0 9 Page 9
Figure 2.D. Distribution of participants’ projections for core PCE inflation, 2009–11
Number of participants
2009 16
June projections
April projections 14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2010
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
Number of participants
2011
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.1- 0.3- 0.5- 0.7- 0.9- 1.1- 1.3- 1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5-
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
Percent range
NOTE: Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.

--- Page 22 ---

Page 10 F e d e r a l O p e n M a r k e t C o m m i t t e e _
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by experienced in the past and the risks around
the members of the Board of Governors and the projections are broadly balanced, the num-
the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks bers reported in table 2 would imply a proba-
inform discussions of monetary policy among bility of about 70 percent that actual GDP
policymakers and can aid public understand- would expand within a range of 2.0 to 4.0 per-
ing of the basis for policy actions. Considera- cent in the current year, 1.5 to 4.5 percent in
ble uncertainty attends these projections, the second year, and 1.4 to 4.6 percent in the
however. The economic and statistical models third year. The corresponding 70 percent con-
and relationships used to help produce eco- fidence intervals for overall inflation would be
nomic forecasts are necessarily imperfect de- 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the current year and 1.0 to
scriptions of the real world. And the future 3.0 percent in the second and third years.
path of the economy can be affected by myr- Because current conditions may differ
iad unforeseen developments and events. from those that prevailed, on average, over his-
Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, tory, participants provide judgments as to
participants consider not only what appears to whether the uncertainty attached to their pro-
be the most likely economic outcome as em- jections of each variable is greater than, smaller
bodied in their projections, but also the range than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in
their occurring, and the potential costs to the table 2. Participants also provide judgments as
economy should they occur. to whether the risks to their projections are
Table 2 summarizes the average historical weighted to the upside, are weighted to the
accuracy of a range of forecasts, including downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports participants judge whether each variable is
and those prepared by Federal Reserve Board more likely to be above or below their projec-
staff in advance of meetings of the Federal tions of the most likely outcome. These judg-
Open Market Committee. The projection ments about the uncertainty and the risks at-
error ranges shown in the table illustrate the tending each participant’s projections are dis-
considerable uncertainty associated with eco- tinct from the diversity of participants’ views
nomic forecasts. For example, suppose a par- about the most likely outcomes. Forecast un-
ticipant projects that real gross domestic certainty is concerned with the risks associated
product (GDP) and total consumer prices will with a particular projection rather than with
rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 divergences across a number of different pro-
percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- jections.
tending those projections is similar to that

# Tables

## Page_12_Table_1


| Voting for this action: Messrs. Bernanke and Dudley,   |
|--------------------------------------------------------|
| Ms. Duke, Messrs. Evans, Kohn, Lacker, Lockhart,       |
| Tarullo, and Warsh, and Ms. Yellen.                    |
| Voting against this action: None.                      |


## Page_13_Table_1


| Central tendency1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |      |      |            |      |      |      |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|------------|------|------|------|
| 2009                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | 2010 | 2011 | Longer run | 2009 | 2010 | 2011 |
| -1.5 to -1.0 2.1 to 3.3 3.8 to 4.6 2.5 to 2.7
-2.0 to -1.3 2.0 to 3.0 3.5 to 4.8 2.5 to 2.7
9.8 to 10.1 9.5 to 9.8 8.4 to 8.8 4.8 to 5.0
9.2 to 9.6 9.0 to 9.5 7.7 to 8.5 4.8 to 5.0
1.0 to 1.4 1.2 to 1.8 1.1 to 2.0 1.7 to 2.0
0.6 to 0.9 1.0 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.9 1.7 to 2.0
1.3 to 1.6 1.0 to 1.5 0.9 to 1.7
1.0 to 1.5 0.7 to 1.3 0.8 to 1.6 |      |      |            |      |      |      |