# 20190501_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:39:02*
*Pages: 13, Tables: 0*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
April 30–May 1, 2019
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, April 30, 2019, at Market Account
10:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, May 1, 2019,
at 9:00 a.m.1 Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,
Board of Governors
PRESENT:
Jerome H. Powell, Chair Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve
John C. Williams, Vice Chair Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of
Michelle W. Bowman Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division
Lael Brainard of Supervision and Regulation, Board of
James Bullard Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of
Richard H. Clarida Financial Stability, Board of Governors
Charles L. Evans
Esther L. George Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of
Randal K. Quarles Financial Stability, Board of Governors; Trevor A.
Eric Rosengren Reeve, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kashkari,
Loretta J. Mester, and Michael Strine, Alternate Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Office
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee of Board Members, Board of Governors
Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, and Mary C. Antulio N. Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Chair,
Daly, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,
respectively Brian M. Doyle,3 Wendy E. Dunn, Ellen E. Meade, and
John M. Roberts, Special Advisers to the Board,
James A. Clouse, Secretary Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Board Members, Board of Governors
Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Shaghil Ahmed and Christopher J. Erceg,4 Senior
Steven B. Kamin, Economist Associate Directors, Division of International
Thomas Laubach, Economist Finance, Board of Governors; William F. Bassett,
Stacey Tevlin, Economist Senior Associate Director, Division of Financial
Stability, Board of Governors; Joshua Gallin and
Rochelle M. Edge, Eric M. Engen, Anna Paulson, David E. Lebow, Senior Associate Directors,
Geoffrey Tootell, William Wascher, Jonathan L. Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Willis, and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Governors
Economists
1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the 3 Attended Wednesday session only.
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 4 Attended opening remarks for Tuesday session only.
2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan-
cial markets and open market operations.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Robert J. Tetlow, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Kartik B. Athreya, Michael Dotsey, Sylvain Leduc, and
Affairs, Board of Governors Ellis W. Tallman, Executive Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Philadelphia,
Marnie Gillis DeBoer, Associate Director, Division of San Francisco, and Cleveland, respectively
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; John J.
Stevens, Associate Director, Division of Research Evan F. Koenig, Antoine Martin,2 Samuel Schulhofer-
and Statistics, Board of Governors Wohl, Mark L.J. Wright, and Nathaniel Wuerffel,2
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Deputy Associate Director, Dallas, New York, Chicago, Minneapolis, and New
Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment York, respectively
Systems, Board of Governors
David C. Wheelock, Group Vice President, Federal
Eric C. Engstrom, Deputy Associate Director, Division Reserve Bank of St. Louis
of Monetary Affairs, and Adviser, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors Patricia Zobel,2 Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
of New York
Glenn Follette, Assistant Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; Laura Mary Amiti and William E. Riordan,2 Assistant Vice
Lipscomb2 and Zeynep Senyuz,2 Assistant Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York
Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of and New York, respectively
Governors
John Robertson, Research Economist and Senior
Dana L. Burnett, Michele Cavallo, and Matthew Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Malloy,2 Section Chiefs, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors Justin Meyer,2 Markets Manager, Federal Reserve Bank
of New York
Penelope A. Beattie,5 Assistant to the Secretary, Office
of the Secretary, Board of Governors Selection of Committee Officer
By unanimous vote, the Committee selected Anna
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Paulson to serve as Associate Economist, effective April
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors 30, 2019, until the selection of her successor at the first
regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2020.
Juan M. Londono, Principal Economist, Division of
Balance Sheet Normalization
International Finance, Board of Governors;
Participants resumed their discussion of issues related to
Camelia Minoiu and Bernd Schlusche, Principal
balance sheet normalization with a focus on the long-
Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board
run maturity composition of the System Open Market
of Governors
Account (SOMA) portfolio. The staff presented two il-
lustrative scenarios as a way of highlighting a range of
Brian J. Bonis,2 Lead Financial Institution and Policy
implications of different long-run target portfolio com-
Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
positions. In the first scenario, the maturity composition
Governors
of the U.S. Treasury securities in the target portfolio was
similar to that of the universe of currently outstanding
Randall A. Williams, Senior Information Manager,
U.S. Treasury securities (a “proportional” portfolio). In
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
the second, the target portfolio contained only shorter-
term securities with maturities of three years or less (a
James M. Trevino,2 Senior Technology Analyst,
“shorter maturity” portfolio). The staff provided esti-
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
mates of the capacity that the Committee would have
under each scenario to provide economic stimulus
Ron Feldman, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
through a maturity extension program (MEP). The staff
Bank of Minneapolis
5 Attended Tuesday session only.

--- Page 3 ---

____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f_ A_p_r_i_l 3_0_–_M__a_y_ 1_,_ 2_0_1_9_______________________P_a_g_e_ _3
also provided estimates of the extent to which term pre- negative economic shocks. Several participants viewed
miums embedded in longer-term Treasury yields might an MEP as a useful initial option to address a future
be affected under the two different scenarios. Based on downturn in which the Committee judged that it needed
the staff’s standard modeling framework, all else equal, a to employ balance sheet actions to provide appropriate
move to the illustrative shorter maturity portfolio would policy accommodation. Participants acknowledged the
put significant upward pressure on term premiums and staff analysis suggesting that creating space to conduct
imply that the path of the federal funds rate would need an MEP by moving to a shorter maturity portfolio com-
to be correspondingly lower to achieve the same macro- position could boost term premiums and result in a
economic outcomes as in the baseline outlook. How- lower path for the federal funds rate, reducing the capac-
ever, the staff noted the uncertainties inherent in the ity to ease financial conditions with adjustments in short-
analysis, including the difficulties in estimating the ef- term rates. A number of participants noted, however,
fects of changes in SOMA holdings on longer-term in- that the estimates of the effect of a move to a shorter-
terest rates and the economy more generally. maturity portfolio composition on the long-run neutral
federal funds rate are subject to substantial uncertainty
The staff presentation also considered illustrative grad-
and are based on a number of strong modeling assump-
ual and accelerated transition paths to each long-run tar-
tions. For example, estimates of term premium effects
get portfolio. Under the illustrative “gradual” transition,
based on experience during the crisis could overstate the
reinvestments of maturing Treasury holdings, principal
effects that would be associated with a gradual evolution
payments on agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS),
of the composition of the SOMA portfolio. In addition,
and purchases to accommodate growth in Federal Re-
a shift in the composition of the SOMA portfolio could
serve liabilities would be directed to Treasury securities
result in changes in the supply of securities that would
with maturities in the long-run target portfolio. Under
tend to offset upward pressure on term premiums.
the illustrative “accelerated” transition, the reinvestment
Nonetheless, other participants expressed concern
of principal payments on agency MBS and purchases to
about the potential that a shorter maturity portfolio
accommodate growth in Federal Reserve liabilities
composition could result in a lower long-run neutral fed-
would be directed to Treasury bills until the weighted
eral funds rate. Moreover, while a shorter maturity port-
average maturity (WAM) of the SOMA portfolio
folio would provide substantial capacity to conduct an
reached the WAM associated with the target portfolio.
MEP, some participants raised questions about the ef-
Depending on the combination of long-run target com-
fectiveness of MEPs as a policy tool relative to that of
position and the transition plan for arriving at that com-
the federal funds rate or other unconventional policy
position, the staff reported that, in the illustrative sce-
tools. These participants noted that, in a situation in
narios, it could take from 5 years to more than 15 years
which it would be appropriate to employ unconven-
for the WAM of the SOMA portfolio to reach its long-
tional policy tools, they likely would prefer to employ
run level.
forward guidance or large-scale purchases of assets
In its Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implemen- ahead of an MEP. In the view of these participants, the
tation and Balance Sheet Normalization, the Committee potential benefit of transitioning to a shorter maturity
noted that it is prepared to adjust the size and composi- SOMA composition in terms of increased ability to con-
tion of the balance sheet to achieve its macroeconomic duct an MEP might not be worth the potential costs.
objectives in a scenario in which the federal funds rate is
In their discussion of a proportional portfolio composi-
constrained by the effective lower bound. Against this
tion, participants observed that moving to this target
backdrop, participants discussed the benefits and costs
SOMA composition would not be expected to have
of alternative long-run target portfolio compositions in
much effect on current staff estimates of term premiums
supporting the use of balance sheet policies in such sce-
and thus would likely not reduce the scope for lowering
narios.
the target range for the federal funds rate target in re-
In their discussion of a shorter maturity portfolio, many sponse to adverse economic shocks. As a result, several
participants noted the advantage of increased capacity participants judged the proportional target composition
for the Federal Reserve to conduct an MEP, which could to be well aligned with the Committee’s previous state-
be helpful in providing policy accommodation in a fu- ments that changes in the target range for the federal
ture economic downturn given the secular decline in funds rate are the primary means by which the Commit-
neutral real interest rates and the associated reduced tee adjusts the stance of monetary policy. In addition,
scope for lowering the federal funds rate in response to several participants noted that while the staff analysis

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
suggested a proportional portfolio would not contain as the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy strategies, tools,
much capacity to conduct an MEP as a shorter maturity and communications practices. Some participants noted
portfolio, it still would contain meaningful capacity the importance of developing an effective communica-
along these lines. Some participants noted that a pro- tion plan to describe the Committee’s decisions regard-
portional portfolio would also help maintain the tradi- ing the long-run target composition for the SOMA port-
tional separation between the Federal Reserve’s deci- folio and the transition to that target composition.
sions regarding the composition of the SOMA portfolio
Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar-
and the maturity composition of Treasury debt held by
ket Operations
the private sector. However, a number of participants
The manager of the SOMA reviewed developments in
judged that it would be desirable to structure the SOMA
financial markets over the intermeeting period. In the
portfolio in a way that would provide more capacity to
United States, prices for equities and other risk assets re-
conduct an MEP than in the proportional portfolio. In
portedly were buoyed by perceptions of an accommoda-
addition, a couple of participants noted that a shorter
tive stance of monetary policy, incoming economic data
maturity portfolio would maintain a narrow gap between
pointing to continued solid economic expansion, and
the average maturity of the assets in the SOMA portfolio
some signs of receding downside risks to the global out-
and the short average maturity of the Federal Reserve’s
look. Treasury yields declined over the period, adding to
primary liabilities.
their substantial drop since September, and the expected
Participants also discussed the financial stability implica- path of the federal funds rate as implied by futures prices
tions that could be associated with alternative long-run shifted down as well. Market participants attributed
target portfolio compositions. A couple of participants these moves in part to FOMC communications indicat-
noted that a proportional portfolio could imply a rela- ing that the Committee would continue to be patient in
tively flat yield curve, which could result in greater in- evaluating the need for any further adjustments of the
centives for “reach for yield” behavior in the financial target range for the federal funds rate. Softer incoming
system. That said, a few participants noted that a shorter data on inflation may also have contributed to the down-
maturity portfolio could affect financial stability risks by ward revision in the expected path of policy. Nearly all
increasing the incentives for the private sector to issue respondents on the Open Market Desk’s latest surveys
short-term debt. A couple of participants judged that of primary dealers and market participants anticipated
financial market functioning might be adversely affected that the federal funds target range would be unchanged
if the holdings in the shorter maturity portfolio ac- for the remainder of the year. In reviewing global devel-
counted for too large a share of total shorter maturity opments, the manager noted that market prices appeared
Treasury securities outstanding. to reflect perceptions of improved economic prospects
in China. However, investors reportedly remained con-
In discussing the transition to the desired long-run
cerned about the economic outlook for Europe and the
SOMA portfolio composition, several participants noted
United Kingdom.
that a gradual pace of transition could help avoid un-
wanted effects on financial conditions. However, par- The manager also reported on developments related to
ticipants observed that the gradual transition paths de- open market operations. In light of the declines in inter-
scribed in the staff presentation would take many years est rates since November last year, principal payments
to complete. Against this backdrop, a few participants on the Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency MBS were
discussed the possibility of following some type of ac- projected to exceed the $20 billion redemption cap by a
celerated transition, perhaps including sales of the modest amount sometime this summer. As directed by
SOMA’s residual holdings of agency MBS. In addition, the Committee, any principal payments received on
several participants suggested that the Committee could agency MBS in excess of the cap would be reinvested in
communicate its plans about the SOMA portfolio com- agency MBS. The Desk planned to conduct any such
position in terms of a desired change over an intermedi- operations by purchasing uniform MBS rather than Fan-
ate horizon rather than a specific long-run target. nie Mae and Freddie Mac securities. Consistent with the
Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans re-
Several participants expressed the view that a decision
leased following the March meeting, reinvestments of
regarding the long-run composition of the portfolio
maturing Treasury securities beginning on May 2 would
would not need to be made for some time, and a couple
be based on a cap on monthly Treasury redemptions of
of participants highlighted the importance of making
such a decision in the context of the ongoing review of

--- Page 5 ---

____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f_ A_p_r_i_l 3_0_–_M__a_y_ 1_,_ 2_0_1_9_______________________P_a_g_e_ _5
$15 billion—down from the $30 billion monthly re- The deputy manager also discussed a staff proposal in
demption cap that had been in place since October of which the Board would implement a 5 basis point tech-
last year. nical adjustment to the Interest on Required Reserves
(IORR) and IOER rates. The proposed action would
The deputy manager reviewed developments in domes-
bring these rates to 15 basis points below the top of the
tic money markets. Reserve balances declined by
target range for the federal funds rate and 10 basis points
$150 billion over the intermeeting period and reached a
above the bottom of the range and the overnight reverse
low point of just below $1.5 trillion on April 23. The
repurchase agreement (ON RRP) offer rate. As with the
decline in reserves stemmed from a reduction in the
previous technical adjustments in June and December
SOMA’s agency MBS and Treasury holdings of $46 bil-
2018, the proposed adjustment was intended to foster
lion, reducing the SOMA portfolio to $3.92 trillion, and
trading in the federal funds market well within the target
from a shift in the composition of liabilities, predomi-
range established by the FOMC.
nantly related to the increase in the Treasury General Ac-
count (TGA). A technical adjustment would reduce the spread between
the IOER rate and the ON RRP offering rate to 10 basis
The TGA was volatile during the intermeeting period.
points, the smallest since the introduction of the ON
In early April, the Treasury reduced bill issuance and al-
RRP facility. The staff judged that the narrower spread
lowed the TGA balance to fall in anticipation of individ-
did not pose a significant risk of increased take-up at the
ual tax receipts. As tax receipts arrived after the tax date,
ON RRP facility because repo rates had been trading
the TGA rose to more than $400 billion, resulting in a
well above the ON RRP offer rate for some time. How-
sharp decline in reserves over the last two weeks of April.
ever, if it became appropriate in the future to further
Against this backdrop, the distribution of rates on traded
lower the IOER rate, the staff noted that the Committee
volumes in overnight unsecured markets shifted higher.
might wish to first consider where to set the ON RRP
The effective federal funds rate (EFFR) moved up to
offer rate relative to the target range for the federal funds
2.45 percent by the end of the intermeeting period, 5 ba-
rate to mitigate this risk.
sis points above the interest on excess reserves (IOER)
rate. The manager concluded the briefing on financial market
developments and open market operations with a review
Several factors appeared to spur this upward pressure.
of the role of standing swap lines in supporting financial
Tax-related runoffs in deposits at banks reportedly led
stability. He recommended that the Committee vote to
banks to increase short-term borrowing, particularly
renew these swap lines at this meeting following the
through Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) advances
usual annual schedule.
and in the federal funds market. Although some banks
continued to hold large quantities of reserves, other The Committee voted unanimously to renew the recip-
banks were operating with reserve balances closer to rocal currency arrangements with the Bank of Canada
their lowest comfortable levels as reported in the most and the Bank of Mexico; these arrangements are associ-
recent Senior Financial Officer Survey. This distribution ated with the Federal Reserve’s participation in the
of reserves may have contributed to somewhat more sus- North American Framework Agreement of 1994. In ad-
tained upward pressure on the federal funds rate than dition, the Committee voted unanimously to renew the
had been experienced in recent years around tax-pay- dollar and foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements
ment dates. In addition, rates on Treasury repurchase with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank
agreements (repo), were, in part, pushed higher by tax- of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss Na-
related outflows from government-only money market tional Bank. The votes to renew the Federal Reserve’s
mutual funds and a corresponding decline in repo lend- participation in these standing arrangements occur an-
ing by those funds. Elevated repo rates contributed to nually at the April or May FOMC meeting.
upward pressure on the federal funds rate, as FHLBs re-
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
portedly shifted some of their liquidity investments out
domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.
of federal funds and into the repo market. In addition,
There were no intervention operations in foreign curren-
some market participants pointed to heightened demand
cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe-
for federal funds at month end by some banks in con-
riod.
nection with their efforts to meet liquidity coverage ratio
requirements as contributing to upward pressure on the
federal funds rate.

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Staff Review of the Economic Situation Consumer expenditures slowed in the first quarter, but
The information available for the April 30–May 1 meet- monthly data suggested some improvement toward the
ing indicated that labor market conditions remained end of the quarter. Real PCE increased at a robust pace
strong and that real gross domestic product (GDP) in- in March after having been unchanged in February, per-
creased at a solid rate in the first quarter even as house- haps partly reflecting a delay in tax refunds from Febru-
hold spending and business fixed investment rose more ary into March that was due, in part, to the partial gov-
slowly in the first quarter than in the fourth quarter of ernment shutdown. Similarly, sales of light motor vehi-
last year. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the cles rose sharply in March, although the average pace of
12-month percentage change in the price index for per- sales in the first quarter was slower than in the fourth
sonal consumption expenditures (PCE), declined, on quarter. Key factors that influence consumer spend-
net, in recent months and was somewhat below 2 per- ing—including a low unemployment rate, ongoing gains
cent in March. Survey-based measures of longer-run in- in real labor compensation, and still elevated measures
flation expectations were little changed. of households’ net worth—were supportive of solid
near-term gains in consumer expenditures. In addition,
Total nonfarm payroll employment recorded a strong
consumer sentiment, as measured by the University of
gain in March, and the unemployment rate held steady
Michigan Surveys of Consumers, edged down in April
at 3.8 percent. The labor force participation rate de-
but was still upbeat. The staff reported preliminary anal-
clined a little in March after having risen, on balance, in
ysis of the levels of and trends in average household
the previous few months, and the employment-to-pop-
wealth by racial and ethnic groups as measured by the
ulation ratio edged down. The unemployment rates for
Federal Reserve Board’s Distributional Financial Ac-
African Americans, Asians, and Hispanics in March
counts initiative.
were at or below their levels at the end of the previous
economic expansion, though persistent differentials in Real residential investment declined at a slower rate in
unemployment rates across groups remained. The share the first quarter than it did over the course of 2018. Af-
of workers employed part time for economic reasons ter an appreciable uptick in January, starts of new single-
edged up in March but was still below the lows reached family homes fell in February and were little changed in
in late 2007. The rate of private-sector job openings in March. Meanwhile, starts of multifamily units rose in
February declined slightly from the elevated level that February and stayed at that level in March. Building per-
prevailed for much of the past year, while the rate of mit issuance for new single-family homes—which tends
quits was unchanged at a high level; the four-week mov- to be a good indicator of the underlying trend in con-
ing average of initial claims for unemployment insurance struction of such homes—declined a little in February
benefits through mid-April was near historically low lev- and March. Sales of both new and existing homes in-
els. Average hourly earnings for all employees rose creased, on net, over the February-and-March period.
3.2 percent over the 12 months ending in March, a
Growth in real private expenditures for business equip-
somewhat faster pace than a year earlier. The employ-
ment and intellectual property slowed in the first quarter,
ment cost index for private-sector workers increased
reflecting both a slower increase in transportation equip-
2.8 percent over the 12 months ending in March, the
ment spending after a strong fourth-quarter gain and a
same as a year earlier.
decline in spending on other types of equipment outside
Industrial production edged down in March and for the of high tech. Nominal shipments of nondefense capital
first quarter overall. Manufacturing output declined goods excluding aircraft were little changed, on net, in
moderately in the first quarter, primarily reflecting a de- February and March, but they rose for the quarter as a
crease in the output of motor vehicles and parts; outside whole. Forward-looking indicators of business equip-
of motor vehicles and parts, manufacturing production ment spending pointed to sluggish increases in the near
was little changed. Mining output declined, on net, over term. Orders for nondefense capital goods excluding
the three months ending in March. Automakers’ assem- aircraft increased noticeably in March but were only a
bly schedules suggested that the production of light mo- little above the level of shipments, and readings on busi-
tor vehicles would move up in the near term, and new ness sentiment improved a bit but were still softer than
orders indexes from national and regional manufactur- last year. Real business expenditures for nonresidential
ing surveys pointed to modest gains in overall factory structures outside of the drilling and mining sector in-
output in the coming months. However, industry news creased somewhat in the first quarter after having de-
indicated that aircraft production would slow in the sec- clined for several quarters. Investment in drilling and
ond quarter. mining structures moved down in the first quarter, and

--- Page 7 ---

____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f_ A_p_r_i_l 3_0_–_M__a_y_ 1_,_ 2_0_1_9_______________________P_a_g_e_ _7
the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in opera- a weak fourth quarter; GDP growth rebounded in the
tion—an indicator of business spending for structures in euro area and also appeared to pick up in Canada and
the drilling and mining sector—declined, on net, from the United Kingdom. Foreign inflation slowed further
mid-March through late April. early this year, partly reflecting lower retail energy prices.
Total real government purchases increased in the first Staff Review of the Financial Situation
quarter. Real purchases by the federal government were Investor sentiment continued to improve over the inter-
unchanged, as a relatively strong increase in defense pur- meeting period. Broad equity price indexes rose notably
chases was offset by a decline in nondefense purchases and corporate bond spreads narrowed amid a decline in
stemming from the effects of the partial federal govern- market volatility, and financing conditions for busi-
ment shutdown. Real purchases by state and local gov- nesses and households also eased. Market participants
ernments increased briskly; payrolls of those govern- cited more accommodative than expected monetary pol-
ments expanded solidly in the first quarter, and nominal icy communications coupled with strong U.S. and Chi-
state and local construction spending rose markedly. nese data releases and positive sentiment about trade ne-
gotiations between the United States and China as fac-
The nominal U.S. international trade deficit narrowed
tors that contributed to these developments.
significantly in January and a touch more in February.
After declining in December, the value of U.S. exports Communications following the March FOMC meeting
rose in January and February. However, the average dol- were generally viewed by investors as having a more ac-
lar value of exports in the first two months of the year commodative tone than expected. The market-implied
was only slightly above its fourth-quarter value. Imports path for the federal funds rate shifted downward mod-
fell in January before edging a touch higher in February, estly, on net, resulting in a flat to slightly downward slop-
with the average of the two months declining relative to ing expected path of the policy rate over the next few
the fourth quarter. The Bureau of Economic Analysis FOMC meetings. Market participants assigned greater
estimated that the contribution of net exports to real probability to a lower target range of the federal funds
GDP growth in the first quarter was about 1 percentage rate than to a higher one beyond the next few meetings.
point.
Yields on nominal Treasury securities declined modestly,
Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE on net, during the intermeeting period. Investors cited
price index, increased 1.5 percent over the 12 months larger-than-expected downward revisions in FOMC par-
ending in March. This increase was somewhat slower ticipants’ assessments of the future path of the policy
than a year earlier, as core PCE price inflation (which rate in the Summary of Economic Projections, recent
excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices) communications suggesting a patient approach to mon-
slowed to 1.6 percent, consumer food price inflation was etary policy, and weaker-than-expected euro-area data
a bit below core inflation, and consumer energy prices releases early in the period among factors that contrib-
were little changed. The trimmed-mean measure of uted to this decrease. These factors reportedly out-
PCE price inflation constructed by the Federal Reserve weighed stronger-than-expected economic data releases
Bank of Dallas was 2.0 percent over that 12-month pe- for the United States and China and optimism related to
riod. The consumer price index (CPI) rose 1.9 percent trade negotiations between the two countries later in the
over the 12 months ending in March, while core CPI in- period. Measures of inflation compensation based on
flation was 2.0 percent. Recent readings on survey- Treasury Inflation Protected Securities were changed lit-
based measures of longer-run inflation expectations— tle, on net, and remained below their early fall 2018 lev-
including those from the Michigan survey, the Survey of els.
Professional Forecasters, and the Desk’s Survey of Pri-
Major U.S. equity price indexes increased over the inter-
mary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants—were
meeting period, with the S&P 500 equity index returning
little changed.
to the levels it reached before its decline in the last quar-
Foreign economic growth in the first quarter was mixed. ter of 2018. Following the March FOMC meeting, bank
Among the emerging market economies (EMEs), real stock prices declined, reportedly on concerns about the
GDP contracted in South Korea and Mexico, but activ- potential effects of a flat or inverted yield curve on bank
ity in China strengthened, supported by tax cuts and the profits; bank stocks subsequently retraced this decline
easing of credit conditions. In the advanced foreign partly in response to strong first-quarter earnings at
economies, economic indicators were downbeat in Ja- some of the largest U.S. banks, ending the period a bit
pan but elsewhere pointed to some improvement from higher, on net. Option-implied volatility on the S&P

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
500—the VIX—decreased to a low level last seen in Financing conditions for the commercial real estate
September 2018. Yields on corporate bonds continued (CRE) sector remained accommodative, and issuance of
to decline and spreads over yields of comparable-ma- agency and non-agency commercial mortgage backed se-
turity Treasury securities narrowed. curities grew steadily. CRE loans on banks’ balance
sheets continued to grow in the first quarter, albeit at a
Conditions in short-term funding markets remained sta-
slower pace than in previous quarters. Banks in the April
ble during the intermeeting period. The EFFR rose to
SLOOS reported weaker demand across all major types
5 basis points above the IOER rate after the federal in-
of CRE loans. However, they also reported tightening
come tax deadline on April 15. While a similar dynamic
lending standards for these loans.
occurred around previous tax dates, the magnitude of
the change was larger than in previous years. Spreads on Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market
commercial paper and negotiable certificates of deposits also remained supportive over the intermeeting period.
changed little across the maturity spectrum. Home mortgage rates decreased about 5 basis points, to
levels comparable with 2017. Consistent with lower
Global sovereign yields declined along with U.S. Treas-
mortgage rates, home-purchase mortgage originations
ury yields following the March FOMC meeting. Foreign
increased, reversing a yearlong decline.
equity prices increased, on balance, amid optimism
around trade negotiations between the United States and Consumer credit conditions remained broadly support-
China, stronger-than-expected Chinese data, and accom- ive of growth in household spending, with all categories
modative communications from some foreign central of consumer loans recording steady growth in the first
banks. Pronounced political and policy uncertainties led quarter. According to the April SLOOS, commercial
to a significant tightening of financial conditions in Tur- banks left lending standards for auto loans and other
key, Argentina, and, to a lesser extent, Brazil, but spillo- consumer loans unchanged in the first quarter. How-
vers to other EMEs were limited, and EME credit ever, credit card interest rates rose and standards report-
spreads were generally little changed on net. edly tightened for some borrowers.
The broad dollar index increased modestly, supported The staff provided an update on its assessments of po-
by the strength of U.S. economic data relative to foreign tential risks to financial stability. The staff judged asset
data and the accommodative tone from foreign central valuation pressures in equity and corporate debt markets
banks. The British pound declined over the intermeet- to have increased significantly this year, though not quite
ing period amid protracted discussions ahead of the orig- to the elevated levels that prevailed for much of last year.
inal Brexit deadline, which was extended to October 31. The staff also reported that in the leveraged loan market
risk spreads had narrowed and nonprice terms had loos-
Financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses re-
ened further. The build-up in overall nonfinancial busi-
mained generally accommodative during the intermeet-
ness debt to levels close to historical highs relative to
ing period. Gross issuance of corporate bonds was
GDP was viewed as a factor that could amplify adverse
strong against a backdrop of narrower corporate spreads
shocks to the business sector and the economy more
and improved risk sentiment. Issuance of institutional
broadly. The staff continued to judge risks associated
leveraged loans increased, but refinancing volumes were
with household-sector debt as moderate. Both the risks
low and loans spreads remained somewhat elevated. Re-
associated with financial leverage and the vulnerabilities
spondents to the April 2019 Senior Loan Officer Opin-
related to maturity transformation were viewed as being
ion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) re-
low, as they have been for some time. The staff also
ported easing some key terms for commercial and in-
noted that the sustained growth of lending by banks to
dustrial (C&I) loans to large and middle-market firms.
nonbank financial firms represented an increase in finan-
For instance, banks reported narrowing loan rate
cial interconnectedness.
spreads, easing loan covenants, and increasing the max-
imum size and reducing the costs of credit lines to these Staff Economic Outlook
firms. C&I loans on banks’ balance sheets grew at a ro- The projection for U.S. economic activity prepared by
bust pace in the first quarter of 2019. Gross equity issu- the staff for the April–May FOMC meeting was revised
ance edged up later in the period and the volume of cor- up on net. Real GDP growth was forecast to slow in the
porate bond upgrades slightly outpaced that of down- near term from its solid first-quarter pace, as sizable con-
grades, suggesting that credit quality of nonfinancial cor- tributions from inventory investment and net exports
porations, on balance, improved. were not expected to persist. The projection for real

--- Page 9 ---

____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f_ A_p_r_i_l 3_0_–_M__a_y_ 1_,_ 2_0_1_9_______________________P_a_g_e_ _9
GDP growth over the medium term was revised up, pri- operating notably above potential for an extended pe-
marily reflecting a lower assumed path for interest rates, riod was counterbalanced by the downside risks that re-
a slightly higher trajectory for equity prices, and some- cent soft data on consumer prices could persist and that
what less appreciation of the broad real dollar. The longer-term inflation expectations may be lower than
staff’s lower path for interest rates reflected a methodo- was assumed in the staff forecast, as well as the possibil-
logical change in how the staff sets its assumptions about ity that the dollar could appreciate if foreign economic
the future path for the federal funds rate in its forecast. conditions deteriorated.
Real GDP was forecast to expand at a rate above the
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
staff’s estimate of potential output growth in 2019 and
Economic Outlook
2020 and then slow to a pace below potential output
Participants agreed that labor markets had remained
growth in 2021. The unemployment rate was projected
strong over the intermeeting period and that economic
to decline a little further below the staff’s estimate of its
activity had risen at a solid rate. Job gains had been solid,
longer-run natural rate and to bottom out in late 2020.
on average, in recent months, and the unemployment
With labor market conditions still judged to be tight, the
rate had stayed low. Participants also observed that
staff continued to assume that projected employment
growth in household spending and business fixed invest-
gains would manifest in smaller-than-usual downward
ment had slowed in the first quarter. Overall inflation
pressure on the unemployment rate and in larger-than-
and inflation for items other than food and energy, both
usual upward pressure on the labor force participation
measured on a 12-month basis, had declined and were
rate.
running below 2 percent. On balance, market-based
The staff’s forecast for inflation was revised down measures of inflation compensation had remained low
slightly, reflecting some recent softer-than-expected in recent months, and survey-based measures of longer-
readings on consumer price inflation that were not ex- term inflation expectations were little changed.
pected to persist along with the staff’s assessment that
Participants continued to view sustained expansion of
the level to which inflation would tend to move in the
economic activity, with strong labor market conditions,
absence of resource slack or supply shocks was a bit
and inflation near the Committee's symmetric 2 percent
lower in the medium term than previously assumed. As
objective as the most likely outcomes. Participants
a result, core PCE price inflation was expected to move
noted the unexpected strength in first-quarter GDP
up in the near term but nevertheless to run just below
growth, but some observed that the composition of
2 percent over the medium term. Total PCE price infla-
growth, with large contributions from inventories and
tion was forecast to run a bit below core inflation in
net exports and more modest contributions from con-
2020 and 2021, reflecting projected declines in energy
sumption and investment, suggested that GDP growth
prices.
in the near term would likely moderate from its strong
The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections pace of last year. For this year as a whole, a number of
for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- participants mentioned that they had marked up their
tion as generally similar to the average of the past projections for real GDP growth, reflecting, in part, the
20 years. The staff also saw the risks to the forecasts for strong first-quarter reading. Participants cited continu-
real GDP growth and the unemployment rate as roughly ing strength in labor market conditions, improvements
balanced. On the upside, household spending and busi- in consumer confidence and in financial conditions, or
ness investment could expand faster than the staff pro- diminished downside risks both domestically and
jected, supported by the tax cuts enacted at the end of abroad, as factors likely to support solid growth over the
2017, still strong overall labor market conditions, favor- remainder of the year. Some participants observed that,
able financial conditions, and upbeat consumer senti- in part because of the waning impetus from fiscal policy
ment. On the downside, the softening in some eco- and past removal of monetary policy accommodation,
nomic indicators since late last year could be the leading they expected real GDP growth to slow over the me-
edge of a significant slowing in the pace of economic dium term, moving back toward their estimates of trend
growth. Moreover, trade policies and foreign economic output growth.
developments could move in directions that have signif-
In their discussion of the household sector, participants
icant negative effects on U.S. economic growth. Risks
discussed recent indicators, including retail sales and
to the inflation projection also were seen as balanced.
light motor vehicle sales for March, which rose from rel-
The upside risk that inflation could increase more than
atively weak readings in some previous months. Taken
expected in an economy that was still projected to be

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
together, these developments suggested that the first- been stable at or close to 2 percent over recent months.
quarter softness in household spending was likely to Participants continued to view inflation near the Com-
prove temporary. With the strong jobs market, rising mittee’s symmetric 2 percent objective as the most likely
incomes, and upbeat consumer sentiment, growth in outcome, but, in light of recent, softer inflation readings,
PCE in coming months was expected to be solid. Sev- some viewed the downside risks to inflation as having
eral participants also noted that while the housing sector increased. Some participants also expressed concerns
had been a drag on GDP growth for some time, recent that long-term inflation expectations could be below lev-
data pointed to some signs of stabilization. With mort- els consistent with the Committee’s 2 percent target or
gage rates at their lowest levels in more than a year, a few at risk of falling below that level.
participants thought that residential construction could
Participants agreed that labor market conditions re-
begin to make positive contributions to GDP growth in
mained strong. Job gains in the March employment re-
the near term; a few others were less optimistic.
port were solid, the unemployment rate remained low,
Participants noted that growth of business fixed invest- and, while the labor force participation rate moved down
ment had moderated in the first quarter relative to the a touch, it remained high relative to estimates of its un-
average pace recorded last year and discussed whether derlying demographically driven, downward trend. Con-
this more moderate growth was likely to persist. A num- tacts in a number of Districts continued to report short-
ber of participants expressed optimism that there would ages of qualified workers, in some cases inducing busi-
be continued growth in capital expenditures this year, al- nesses to find novel ways to attract new workers. A few
beit probably at a slower pace than in 2018. Several par- participants commented that labor market conditions in
ticipants observed that financial conditions and business their Districts were putting upward pressure on compen-
sentiment had continued to improve, consistent with re- sation levels for lower-wage jobs, although there were
ports from business contacts in a number of Districts; few reports of a broad-based pickup in wage growth.
however, a few others reported less buoyant business Several participants noted that business contacts ex-
sentiment Many participants suggested that their own pressed optimism that despite tight labor markets they
concerns from earlier in the year about downside risks would be able to find workers or would find technolog-
from slowing global economic growth and the deterio- ical solutions for labor shortage problems.
ration in financial conditions or similar concerns ex-
Participants commented on risks associated with their
pressed by their business contacts had abated to some
outlook for economic activity over the medium term.
extent. However, a few participants noted that ongoing
Some participants viewed risks to the downside for real
challenges in the agricultural sector, including those as-
GDP growth as having decreased, partly because pro-
sociated with trade uncertainty and low prices, had been
spects for a sharp slowdown in global economic growth,
exacerbated by severe flooding in recent weeks.
particularly in China and Europe, had diminished. These
Participants observed that inflation pressures remained improvements notwithstanding, most participants ob-
muted and that the most recent data on overall inflation, served that downside risks to the outlook for growth re-
and inflation for items other than food and energy, had main.
come in lower than expected. At least part of the recent
In discussing developments in financial markets, a num-
softness in inflation could be attributed to idiosyncratic
ber of participants noted that financial market condi-
factors that seemed likely to have only transitory effects
tions had improved following the period of stress ob-
on inflation, including unusually sharp declines in the
served over the fourth quarter of last year and that the
prices of apparel and of portfolio management services.
volatility in prices and financial conditions had subsided.
Some research suggests that idiosyncratic factors that
These factors were thought to have helped buoy con-
largely affected acylical sectors in the economy had ac-
sumer and business confidence or to have mitigated
counted for a substantial portion of the fluctuations in
short-term downside risks to the real economy. More
inflation over the past couple of years. Consistent with
generally, the improvement in financial conditions was
the view that recent lower inflation readings could be
regarded by many participants as providing support for
temporary, a number of participants mentioned the
the outlook for economic growth and employment.
trimmed mean measure of PCE price inflation, pro-
duced by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, which re- Among those participants who commented on financial
moves the influence of unusually large changes in the stability, most highlighted recent developments related
prices of individual items in either direction; these par- to leveraged loans and corporate bonds as well as the
ticipants observed that the trimmed mean measure had

--- Page 11 ---

____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f_ A_p_r_i_l 3_0_–_M__a_y_ 1_,_ 2_0_1_9______________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
current high level of nonfinancial corporate indebted- which resource utilization appeared to be high while in-
ness. A few participants suggested that heightened lev- flation continued to run below the Committee’s sym-
erage and associated debt burdens could render the busi- metric 2 percent objective. However, a few participants
ness sector more sensitive to economic downturns than noted that if the economy evolved as they expected, the
would otherwise be the case. A couple of participants Committee would likely need to firm the stance of mon-
suggested that increases in bank capital in current cir- etary policy to sustain the economic expansion and keep
cumstances with solid economic growth and strong inflation at levels consistent with the Committee’s objec-
profits could help support financial and macroeconomic tive, or that the Committee would need to be attentive
stability over the longer run. A couple of participants to the possibility that inflation pressures could build
observed that asset valuations in some markets appeared quickly in an environment of tight resource utilization.
high, relative to fundamentals. A few participants com- In contrast, a few other participants observed that sub-
mented on the positive role that the Board’s semi-annual dued inflation coupled with real wage gains roughly in
Financial Stability Report could play in facilitating public line with productivity growth might indicate that re-
discussion of risks that could be present in some seg- source utilization was not as high as the recent low read-
ments of the financial system. ings of the unemployment rate by themselves would sug-
gest. Several participants commented that if inflation
In their discussion of monetary policy, participants
did not show signs of moving up over coming quarters,
agreed that it would be appropriate to maintain the cur-
there was a risk that inflation expectations could become
rent target range for the federal funds rate at 2¼ to
anchored at levels below those consistent with the Com-
2½ percent. Participants judged that the labor market
mittee’s symmetric 2 percent objective—a development
remained strong, and that information received over the
that could make it more difficult to achieve the 2 percent
intermeeting period showed that economic activity grew
inflation objective on a sustainable basis over the longer
at a solid rate. However, both overall inflation and in-
run. Participants emphasized that their monetary policy
flation for items other than food and energy had de-
decisions would continue to depend on their assess-
clined and were running below the Committee’s 2 per-
ments of the economic outlook and risks to the outlook,
cent objective. A number of participants observed that
as informed by a wide range of data.
some of the risks and uncertainties that had surrounded
their outlooks earlier in the year had moderated, includ- Committee Policy Action
ing those related to the global economic outlook, Brexit, In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
and trade negotiations. That said, these and other ahead, members judged that the information received
sources of uncertainty remained. In light of global eco- since the Committee met in March indicated that the la-
nomic and financial developments as well as muted in- bor market remained strong and that economic activity
flation pressures, participants generally agreed that a pa- had risen at a solid rate. Job gains had been solid, on
tient approach to determining future adjustments to the average, in recent months, and the unemployment rate
target range for the federal funds rate remained appro- had remained low. Growth of household spending and
priate. Participants noted that even if global economic business fixed investment had slowed in the first quarter.
and financial conditions continued to improve, a patient On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation for
approach would likely remain warranted, especially in an items other than food and energy had declined and were
environment of continued moderate economic growth running below 2 percent. On balance, market-based
and muted inflation pressures. measures of inflation compensation had remained low
in recent months, and survey-based measures of longer-
Participants discussed the potential policy implications
term inflation expectations were little changed.
of continued low inflation readings. Many participants
viewed the recent dip in PCE inflation as likely to be In their consideration of the economic outlook, mem-
transitory, and participants generally anticipated that a bers noted that financial conditions had improved since
patient approach to policy adjustments was likely to be the turn of the year, and many uncertainties affecting the
consistent with sustained expansion of economic activ- U.S. and global economic outlooks had receded, though
ity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near some risks remained. Despite solid economic growth
the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective. Several and a strong labor market, inflation pressures remained
participants also judged that patience in adjusting policy muted. Members continued to view sustained expansion
was consistent with the Committee’s balanced approach of economic activity, strong labor market conditions,
to achieving its objectives in current circumstances in and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
objective as the most likely outcomes for the U.S. econ- transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol-
omy. In light of global economic and financial develop- lowing domestic policy directive, to be released at
ments and muted inflation pressures, members con- 2:00 p.m.:
curred that the Committee could be patient as it deter-
“Effective May 2, 2019, the Federal Open Mar-
mined what future adjustments to the target range for
ket Committee directs the Desk to undertake
the federal funds rate may be appropriate to support
open market operations as necessary to main-
those outcomes.
tain the federal funds rate in a target range of
After assessing current conditions and the outlook for 2¼ to 2½ percent, including overnight reverse
economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, mem- repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase
bers decided to maintain the target range for the federal operations with maturities of more than one day
funds rate at 2¼ to 2½ percent. Members agreed that when necessary to accommodate weekend, hol-
in determining the timing and size of future adjustments iday, or similar trading conventions) at an offer-
to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Com- ing rate of 2.25 percent, in amounts limited only
mittee would assess realized and expected economic by the value of Treasury securities held outright
conditions relative to the Committee’s maximum-em- in the System Open Market Account that are
ployment and symmetric 2 percent inflation objectives. available for such operations and by a per-coun-
They reiterated that this assessment would take into ac- terparty limit of $30 billion per day.
count a wide range of information, including measures
Effective May 2, 2019, the Committee directs
of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pres-
the Desk to roll over at auction the amount of
sures and inflation expectations, and readings on finan-
principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s
cial and international developments. More generally,
holdings of Treasury securities maturing during
members noted that decisions regarding near-term ad-
each calendar month that exceeds $15 billion.
justments of the stance of monetary policy would appro-
The Committee directs the Desk to continue re-
priately remain dependent on the evolution of the out-
investing in agency mortgage-backed securities
look as informed by incoming data.
the amount of principal payments from the
With regard to the postmeeting statement, members Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and
agreed to remove references to a slowing in the pace of agency mortgage-backed securities received
economic growth and little-changed payroll employ- during each calendar month that exceeds
ment, consistent with stronger incoming information on $20 billion. Small deviations from these
these indicators. The description of growth in house- amounts for operational reasons are acceptable.
hold spending and business fixed investment in the first
The Committee also directs the Desk to engage
quarter was revised to recognize that incoming data had
in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
confirmed earlier information that suggested these as-
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal
pects of economic activity had slowed at that time.
Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities
Members also agreed to revise the description of infla-
transactions.”
tion to note that inflation for items other than food and
energy had declined and was now running below 2 per- The vote also encompassed approval of the statement
cent. below to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
Members observed that a patient approach to determin- “Information received since the Federal Open
ing future adjustments to the target range for the federal Market Committee met in March indicates that
funds rate would likely remain appropriate for some the labor market remains strong and that eco-
time, especially in an environment of moderate eco- nomic activity rose at a solid rate. Job gains
nomic growth and muted inflation pressures, even if have been solid, on average, in recent months,
global economic and financial conditions continued to and the unemployment rate has remained low.
improve. Growth of household spending and business
fixed investment slowed in the first quarter. On
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
a 12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
for items other than food and energy have de-
of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute
clined and are running below 2 percent. On bal-

--- Page 13 ---

____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f_ A_p_r_i_l 3_0_–_M__a_y_ 1_,_ 2_0_1_9______________________P__ag_e_ _1_3
ance, market-based measures of inflation com- lower the interest rates on required and excess reserve
pensation have remained low in recent months, balances to 2.35 percent, effective May 2, 2019. Setting
and survey-based measures of longer-term in- the interest rate paid on required and excess reserve bal-
flation expectations are little changed. ances 15 basis points below the top of the target range
for the federal funds rate was intended to foster trading
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
in the federal funds market at rates well within the
mittee seeks to foster maximum employment
FOMC’s target range. The Board of Governors also
and price stability. In support of these goals,
voted unanimously to approve establishment of the pri-
the Committee decided to maintain the target
mary credit rate at the existing level of 3.00 percent, ef-
range for the federal funds rate at 2¼ to
fective May 2, 2019.
2½ percent. The Committee continues to view
sustained expansion of economic activity, Update from Subcommittee on Communications
strong labor market conditions, and inflation Governor Clarida reported on the progress of the review
near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob- of the Federal Reserve’s strategic framework for mone-
jective as the most likely outcomes. In light of tary policy. Fed Listens events to hear stakeholders’
global economic and financial developments views on the strategy, tools, and communications that
and muted inflation pressures, the Committee would best enable the Federal Reserve to meet its statu-
will be patient as it determines what future ad- tory objectives of maximum employment and price sta-
justments to the target range for the federal bility had already taken place in two Federal Reserve Dis-
funds rate may be appropriate to support these tricts. Numerous additional events were planned, in-
outcomes. cluding a research conference scheduled for June at the
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. Following these pub-
In determining the timing and size of future ad-
lic activities, the Committee was on course to begin its
justments to the target range for the federal
deliberations about the strategic framework at meetings
funds rate, the Committee will assess realized
in the second half of 2019.
and expected economic conditions relative to its
maximum employment objective and its sym- It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as- would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, June 18–
sessment will take into account a wide range of 19, 2019. The meeting adjourned at 9:50 a.m. on
information, including measures of labor mar- May 1, 2019.
ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures
Notation Vote
and inflation expectations, and readings on fi-
By notation vote completed on April 9, 2019, the Com-
nancial and international developments.”
mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com-
Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. mittee meeting held on March 19–20, 2019.
Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, James
Bullard, Richard H. Clarida, Charles L. Evans, Esther L.
George, Randal K. Quarles, and Eric Rosengren.
Voting against this action: None. _______________________
James A. Clouse
Consistent with the Committee’s decision to maintain
Secretary
the federal funds rate in a target range of 2¼ to 2½ per-
cent, the Board of Governors voted unanimously to