# 20190918_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:39:23*
*Pages: 32, Tables: 31*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
September 17–18, 2019
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of Board of Governors
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, September 17, 2019, Eric Belsky,2 Director, Division of Consumer and
at 10:15 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, Community Affairs, Board of Governors; Matthew
September 18, 2019, at 9:00 a.m.1 J. Eichner,3 Director, Division of Reserve Bank
Operations and Payment Systems, Board of
PRESENT: Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division
Jerome H. Powell, Chair of Supervision and Regulation, Board of
John C. Williams, Vice Chair Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of
Michelle W. Bowman Financial Stability, Board of Governors
Lael Brainard
James Bullard Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of
Richard H. Clarida Research and Statistics, Board of Governors;
Charles L. Evans Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of
Esther L. George Financial Stability, Board of Governors; Trevor A.
Randal K. Quarles Reeve, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary
Eric Rosengren Affairs, Board of Governors
Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kashkari, Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Office
Loretta J. Mester, and Michael Strine, Alternate of Board Members, Board of Governors
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Joshua Gallin, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of
Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, and Mary C. Board Members, Board of Governors
Daly, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively Brian M. Doyle, Wendy E. Dunn, Joseph W. Gruber,
Ellen E. Meade, and Ivan Vidangos, Special
James A. Clouse, Secretary Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members,
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Board of Governors
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Board Members, Board of Governors
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel
Steven B. Kamin, Economist Shaghil Ahmed, Senior Associate Director, Division of
Thomas Laubach, Economist International Finance, Board of Governors
Stacey Tevlin, Economist
Antulio Bomfim, Jane E. Ihrig, and Edward Nelson,
Rochelle M. Edge, Eric M. Engen, William Wascher, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Jonathan L. Willis, and Beth Anne Wilson, Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior
Associate Economists Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Board
of Governors
Lorie K. Logan, Manager pro tem, System Open
Market Account
1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the 3 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan-
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. cial markets and open market operations.
2 Attended through the discussion of the review of the mone-
tary policy framework.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
David López-Salido, Associate Director, Division of Kenneth C. Montgomery, First Vice President, Federal
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; John J. Reserve Bank of Boston
Stevens, Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors David Altig,2 Kartik B. Athreya, Michael Dotsey,
Jeffrey Fuhrer,2 Sylvain Leduc, Simon Potter,7 and
Andrew Figura and John M. Roberts, Deputy Associate Ellis W. Tallman, Executive Vice Presidents,
Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Richmond,
Board of Governors; Christopher J. Gust, Deputy Philadelphia, Boston, San Francisco, New York,
Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, and Cleveland, respectively
Board of Governors; Matteo Iacoviello and Andrea
Raffo,2 Deputy Associate Directors, Division of David Andolfatto, Marc Giannoni, Evan F. Koenig,2
International Finance, Board of Governors; Jeffrey Paula Tkac, and Mark L.J. Wright, Senior Vice
D. Walker,3 Deputy Associate Director, Division Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis,
of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Dallas, Dallas, Atlanta, and Minneapolis,
Board of Governors respectively
Zeynep Senyuz,4 Assistant Director, Division of Jonas Fisher, Giovanni Olivei, Giorgio Topa, and
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Patricia Zobel, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of Chicago, Boston, New York, and New
Penelope A. Beattie,5 Assistant to the Secretary, Office York, respectively
of the Secretary, Board of Governors
Jonas Arias,2 Thorsten Drautzburg,2 and Leonardo
Martin Bodenstein,2 Section Chief, Division of Melosi,2 Senior Economists, Federal Reserve Banks
International Finance, Board of Governors of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, and Chicago,
respectively
David H. Small,6 Project Manager, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Fernando Duarte,2 Financial Economist, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York
Hess T. Chung,2 Group Manager, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and
Communication Practices
Jonathan E. Goldberg, Edward Herbst,2 and Benjamin Committee participants continued their discussions re-
K. Johannsen, Principal Economists, Division of lated to the ongoing review of the Federal Reserve’s
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication
practices. Staff briefings provided an assessment of the
Fabian Winkler,2 Senior Economist, Division of risk that the federal funds rate could, in some future
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors downturn, be constrained by the effective lower bound
(ELB) and discussed options for mitigating the costs as-
Randall A. Williams,2 Senior Information Manager, sociated with this constraint. The staff’s analysis sug-
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors gested that the ELB would likely bind in most future re-
cessions, which could make it more difficult for the
James Hebden,2 Senior Technology Analyst, Division FOMC to achieve its longer-run objectives of maximum
of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors employment and symmetric 2 percent inflation. The
staff discussed several options for mitigating ELB risks,
Achilles Sangster II, Information Management Analyst, including using forward guidance and balance sheet pol-
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors icies earlier and more aggressively than in the past.
4 Attended the discussion of developments in financial mar- 6 Attended the discussion of the review of the monetary policy
kets and open market operations. framework through the end of the meeting.
5 Attended Tuesday’s session only. 7 Attended opening remarks for Tuesday session only.

--- Page 3 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_1_9______________________P__ag_e_ _3
The staff also illustrated the properties of “makeup” perience with forward guidance and balance sheet poli-
strategies using model simulations. Under such strate- cies would likely allow the Committee to deploy these
gies, policymakers would promise to make up for past tools earlier and more aggressively in the event that they
inflation shortfalls with a sustained accommodative were needed. A few indicated that the uncertainty about
stance of policy that is intended to generate higher future the effectiveness of these policies was smaller than the
inflation. These strategies are designed to provide ac- uncertainty surrounding the effectiveness of a makeup
commodation at the ELB by keeping the policy rate low strategy.
for an extended period in order to support an economic
Participants generally agreed that the current framework
recovery. Because of their properties both at and away
also served the Committee well by providing a strong
from the ELB, makeup strategies may also more firmly
commitment to achieving the Committee’s maximum-
anchor inflation expectations at 2 percent than a policy
employment and symmetric inflation objectives. Such a
strategy that does not compensate for past inflation
commitment was seen as flexible enough to allow the
misses. The staff analysis emphasized, however, that the
Committee to choose policy actions that best support its
benefits of makeup strategies depend importantly on the
objectives in a wide array of economic circumstances.
private sector’s understanding of these strategies and
Because of the downside risk to inflation and employ-
their confidence that future policymakers would follow
ment associated with the ELB, most participants were
through on promises to keep policy accommodative.
open to the possibility that the dual-mandate objectives
Participants generally agreed with the staff’s analysis that of maximum employment and stable prices could be
the risk of future ELB episodes had likely increased over best served by strategies that deliver inflation rates that
time, and that future ELB episodes and the reduced ef- over time are, on average, equal to the Committee’s
fect of resource utilization on inflation could inhibit the longer-run objective of 2 percent. Promoting such out-
Committee’s ability to achieve its employment and infla- comes may require aiming for inflation somewhat above
tion objectives. The increased ELB risk was attributed 2 percent when the policy rate was away from the ELB,
in part to structural changes in the U.S. economy that recognizing that inflation would tend to be lower than
had lowered the longer-run real short-term interest rate 2 percent when the policy rate was constrained by the
and thus the neutral level of the policy rate. In this con- ELB. Participants suggested several alternatives for do-
text, a couple of participants noted that uncertainty ing so, including strategies that make up for past infla-
about the neutral rate made it especially challenging to tion shortfalls and those that respond more aggressively
determine any appropriate changes to the current frame- to below-target inflation than to above-target inflation.
work. In light of a low neutral rate and shortfalls of in- In this context, several participants suggested that the
flation below the 2 percent objective for several years, adoption of a target range for inflation could be helpful
some participants raised the concern that the policy in achieving the Committee’s objective of 2 percent in-
space to reduce the federal funds rate in response to fu- flation, on average, as it could help communicate to the
ture recessions could be compressed further if inflation public that periods in which the Committee judged in-
shortfalls continued and led to a decline in inflation ex- flation to be moderately away from its 2 percent objec-
pectations, a risk that was also discussed in the staff anal- tive were appropriate. A couple of participants sug-
ysis. These participants pointed to long, ongoing ELB gested analyzing policies in which there was a target
spells in other major foreign economies and suggested range for inflation whose midpoint was modestly higher
that, to avoid similar circumstances in the United States, than 2 percent or in which 2 percent was an inflation
it was important to be aggressive when confronted with floor; these policies might enhance policymakers’ scope
forces holding inflation below objective. A couple of to provide accommodation as appropriate when the
participants judged that the lack of monetary policy neutral real interest rate was low.
space abroad and the possibility that fiscal space in the
Although ensuring inflation outcomes averaging 2 per-
United States might be limited reinforced the case for
cent over time was seen as important, many participants
strengthening the FOMC’s monetary policy framework
noted that the illustrated makeup strategies delivered
as a matter of prudent planning.
only modest benefits in the staff’s model simulations.
With regard to the current monetary policy framework, These modest benefits in part reflected that the respon-
participants agreed that this framework served the Com- siveness of inflation to resource slack had diminished,
mittee well in the aftermath of the financial crisis. A making it more difficult to provide sufficient accommo-
number of participants noted that the Committee’s ex- dation to push inflation back to the Committee’s objec-
tive in a timely manner. Some participants suggested

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
that the modest effects were particularly pronounced us- the policy response in situations in which inflation had
ing the FRB/US model and indicated the need for more been running above 2 percent amid signs of an impend-
robustness analysis of simulation results along several di- ing economic downturn. Accordingly, these participants
mensions and for further comparison to other alterna- favored makeup strategies that only reversed past infla-
tive strategies. In addition, several participants noted tion shortfalls relative to makeup strategies that reversed
that the implementation of the makeup strategies in the both past inflation shortfalls and past overruns.
form of either average inflation targeting or price-level
Participants continued to discuss the benefits of the
targeting in the simulations was tied too rigidly to the
Committee’s review of the monetary policy framework
details of particular rules. An advantage of the current
as well as the Committee’s Statement on Longer-Run
framework over such alternative approaches is that it has
Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which articulates
provided the Committee with the flexibility to assess a
the Committee’s approach to monetary policy. As they
broad range of factors and information in choosing its
did at their meeting in July, participants mentioned sev-
policy actions, and these actions can vary depending on
eral issues that this statement might possibly address.
economic circumstances in order to best achieve the
These issues included the conduct of monetary policy in
Committee’s dual mandate. Similarly, makeup strategies
the presence of the ELB constraint, the role of inflation
could be implemented more flexibly in order to deliver
expectations in the Committee’s pursuit of its inflation
more accommodation during a future downturn and
goal, the best means of conveying the Committee’s bal-
through the subsequent recovery than what could be
anced approach to monetary policy, the symmetry of its
achieved with a mechanical makeup rule.
inflation goal, and the time frame over which the Com-
Participants also discussed a number of challenges asso- mittee aimed to achieve it. Participants expected that
ciated with makeup strategies. Many participants ex- they would continue their deliberations on these and
pressed reservations with the makeup strategies analyzed other topics pertinent to the review at upcoming meet-
by the staff. Some participants raised the concern that ings. They also generally agreed that the Committee’s
the effective use of the makeup strategies in the form of consideration of possible modifications to its policy
the average inflation targeting and price-level targeting strategy, tools, and communication practices would take
rules that the staff presented depended on future policy- some time, and that the process would be careful, delib-
makers following through on commitments to keep pol- erate, and patient.
icy accommodative for a long time. Such commitments
Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar-
might be difficult for future policymakers to follow
ket Operations
through on, especially in situations in which the labor
The manager pro tem first discussed developments in
market was strong and inflation was above target. A few
global financial markets over the intermeeting period.
participants acknowledged that credibly committing to
Global financial markets were volatile over the inter-
makeup strategies posed challenges. However, they
meeting period, with market participants reacting to in-
pointed to the commitments that central banks around
coming information about U.S.–China trade tensions
the world made to inflation targeting as examples in
and the global growth outlook. In the weeks following
which similar challenges had been overcome. A couple
the July FOMC meeting, U.S. yields declined sharply and
of participants raised the concern that keeping policy
risk asset prices fell amid a spate of largely negative news
rates low for a long time could lead to excessive risk-
about risks to the global economic outlook. These price
taking in financial markets and threaten financial stabil-
moves reversed to some degree in September as devel-
ity. However, a couple of other participants judged that
opments on trade and economic data turned more posi-
macroprudential tools could be used to help ensure that
tive. On net, Treasury yields remained substantially
any overleveraging of households and firms did not
lower, while the S&P 500 and corporate credit spreads
threaten the financial system, while monetary policy
reversed most or all of their earlier losses to end the pe-
needed to be focused on achieving maximum employ-
riod little changed.
ment and symmetric 2 percent inflation. A few partici-
pants viewed the communication challenges associated Even after the partial rebound in September, market-
with average-inflation targeting strategies, including the and survey-based indicators of policy rate expectations
difficulty of conveying the dangers of low inflation to suggested that investors viewed it as very likely that the
the public, as greater than for some other strategies that Committee would ease policy further at this meeting. All
use threshold-based forward guidance. Several partici- respondents from the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers
pants noted that makeup strategies could unduly limit and Survey of Market Participants viewed a 25 basis

--- Page 5 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_1_9______________________P__ag_e_ _5
point decrease in the target range as the most likely out- operation, rates in secured and unsecured markets de-
come at this meeting. Looking beyond September, most clined sharply. Rates in secured markets were trading
survey respondents expected another 25 basis point cut around 2.5 percent after the operation. Market partici-
by year-end. Further out, while the median of respond- pants reportedly expected that additional temporary
ents’ modal forecasts for the end of 2020 pointed to no open market operations would be necessary both over
rate cuts next year, individual forecasts were much more subsequent days and around the end of the quarter.
dispersed, with nearly half of respondents expecting at Many also reportedly expected another 5 basis point
least one additional 25 basis point cut in 2020, and about technical adjustment of the IOER rate.
one-fourth expecting two or more cuts. Market partici-
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
pants remained attentive to a range of global risk factors
domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.
that could affect the policy rate path, including trade ten-
There were no intervention operations in foreign curren-
sions between the United States and China, develop-
cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe-
ments in Europe, political tensions in Hong Kong, un-
riod.
certainties related to Brexit, and escalating geopolitical
tension in the Middle East following attacks on Saudi oil Staff Review of the Economic Situation
facilities. The information available for the September 17–18
meeting indicated that labor market conditions remained
The manager pro tem turned next to a discussion of
strong and that real gross domestic product (GDP) ap-
money market conditions. Money markets were stable
peared to be increasing at a moderate rate in the third
over most of the period, and the reduction in the interest
quarter. Consumer price inflation, as measured by the
on excess reserves (IOER) rate following the July
12-month percentage change in the price index for per-
FOMC meeting fully passed through to money market
sonal consumption expenditures (PCE), was below
rates. However, money markets became highly volatile
2 percent in July. Survey-based measures of longer-run
just before the September meeting, apparently spurred
inflation expectations were little changed.
partly by large corporate tax payments and Treasury set-
tlements, and remained so through the time of the meet- Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded at a solid
ing. In an environment of greater perceived uncertainty pace in July and August, although at a slower rate than
about potential outflows related to the corporate tax in the first half of the year. (Separately, the Bureau of
payment date, typical lenders in money markets were less Labor Statistics’ preliminary estimate of the upcoming
willing to accommodate increased dealer demand for benchmark revision to payroll employment, which will
funding. Moreover, some banks maintained reserve lev- be incorporated in the published data in February 2020,
els significantly above those reported in the Senior Fi- indicated that the revised pace of average monthly job
nancial Officer Survey about their lowest comfortable gains from April 2018 to March 2019 would be notably
level of reserves rather than lend in repo markets. slower than in the current published data.) The unem-
Money market mutual funds reportedly also held back ployment rate remained at 3.7 percent through August,
some liquidity in order to cushion against potential out- and both the labor force participation rate and the em-
flows. Rates on overnight Treasury repurchase agree- ployment-to-population ratio moved up. The unem-
ments rose to over 5 percent on September 16 and above ployment rates for African Americans and Hispanics de-
8 percent on September 17. clined over July and August, while the rates for whites
and Asians increased; the unemployment rate for each
Highly elevated repo rates passed through to rates in un-
group was below its level at the end of the previous eco-
secured markets. Federal Home Loan Banks reportedly
nomic expansion, though persistent differentials be-
scaled back their lending in the federal funds market in
tween these rates remained. The average share of work-
order to maintain some liquidity in anticipation of higher
ers employed part time for economic reasons in July and
demand for advances from their members and to shift
August continued to be below its level in late 2007. Both
more of their overnight funding into repo. In this envi-
the rate of private-sector job openings and the rate of
ronment, the effective federal funds rate (EFFR) rose to
quits moved roughly sideways in June and July and were
the top of the target range on September 16. The fol-
still at relatively high levels; the four-week moving aver-
lowing morning, in accordance with the FOMC’s di-
age of initial claims for unemployment insurance bene-
rective to the Desk to foster conditions to maintain the
fits through early September was near historically low
EFFR in the target range, the Desk conducted overnight
levels. Total labor compensation per hour in the busi-
repurchase operations for up to $75 billion. After the
ness sector increased 4.4 percent over the four quarters

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
ending in the second quarter, a faster rate than a year falling back in July. Building permit issuance for new
earlier. Average hourly earnings for all employees rose single-family homes—which tends to be a good indica-
3.2 percent over the 12 months ending in August, the tor of the underlying trend in construction of such
same pace as a year earlier. homes—was higher in July and August than its second-
quarter average. Sales of existing homes rose modestly
Total consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price
in July, while new home sales declined following an out-
index, increased 1.4 percent over the 12 months ending
sized increase in June.
in July. This increase was slower than a year earlier, as
core PCE price inflation (which excludes changes in Real nonresidential private fixed investment looked to
consumer food and energy prices) moved down to be declining further in the third quarter. Nominal ship-
1.6 percent, consumer food price inflation remained be- ments of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft de-
low core inflation, and consumer energy prices declined. creased in July, and forward-looking indicators generally
The average monthly change in core PCE prices in re- pointed to continued softness in business equipment
cent months was faster than earlier this year, suggesting spending. Orders for nondefense capital goods exclud-
that the soft inflation readings during the earlier period ing aircraft increased in June but were still below the
were transitory. The trimmed mean measure of level of shipments, most measures of business sentiment
12-month PCE price inflation constructed by the Fed- deteriorated, analysts’ expectations of firms’ longer-term
eral Reserve Bank of Dallas remained at 2 percent in profit growth declined further, and trade policy concerns
July. The consumer price index (CPI) rose 1.7 percent continued to weigh on firms’ investment decisions.
over the 12 months ending in August, while core CPI Nominal business expenditures for nonresidential struc-
inflation was 2.4 percent. Recent survey-based measures tures outside the drilling and mining sector decreased in
of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed July, and the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in
on balance. The preliminary September reading from operation—an indicator of business spending for struc-
the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers tures in the drilling and mining sector—continued to de-
dipped after edging up in August, but it remained within cline through mid-September.
its recent range; the measures of longer-run inflation ex-
Industrial production increased modestly, on net, over
pectations from the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers
July and August, but production remained notably lower
and Survey of Market Participants were little changed.
than at the beginning of the year. Automakers’ assembly
Real consumer expenditures appeared to be rising solidly schedules indicated that the production of light motor
in the third quarter after expanding strongly in the sec- vehicles would be roughly flat in the near term (although
ond quarter. Real PCE rose briskly in July, while the the labor strike at General Motors was expected to tem-
components of the nominal retail sales data used by the porarily disrupt vehicle production), while new orders
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) to estimate PCE indexes from national and regional manufacturing sur-
were flat in August and the rate of sales of light motor veys and a persistent drag from trade tariffs pointed to-
vehicles only edged up, suggesting some slowing in con- ward continued softness in factory output in coming
sumer spending growth in the third quarter from its months.
strong second-quarter pace. Key factors that influence
Total real government purchases appeared to be rising
consumer spending—including a low unemployment
at a slower pace in the third quarter than in the second
rate, further gains in real disposable income, high levels
quarter. Federal defense spending over July and August
of households’ net worth, and generally low borrowing
decelerated, and federal hiring of temporary workers for
rates—were supportive of solid real PCE growth in the
next year’s decennial census was modest in August.
near term. The preliminary September reading on the
State and local government payrolls rose moderately
Michigan survey measure of consumer sentiment picked
over July and August, and nominal spending by these
up a little after weakening notably in August, although
governments on structures in July was below its second-
the Conference Board survey measure of consumer con-
quarter average.
fidence did not show a similar decline in August.
The nominal U.S. international trade deficit remained
Real residential investment seemed to be picking up a
about unchanged in June before narrowing in July. Ex-
little in the third quarter after declining over the previous
ports, which had been soft over most of the past year,
year and a half. Starts of new single-family homes were
declined sharply in June but partially rebounded in July.
higher in July and August than the second-quarter aver-
This pattern was particularly notable in exports of non-
age, and starts of multifamily units rose in August after
aircraft capital goods and consumer goods. Imports also

--- Page 7 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_1_9______________________P__ag_e_ _7
declined sharply in June and then declined a little further Measures of expectations of the near- and medium-term
in July. Imports of oil and consumer goods fell in June, path for the federal funds rate were particularly sensitive
while imports of capital goods dropped significantly in to news about U.S.–China trade tensions, while FOMC
July. The BEA estimated that the change in net exports communications had only modest effects on market-
was a drag of about ¾ percentage point on real GDP based measures of policy rate expectations. A straight
growth in the second quarter. read of the option-implied probability distribution of the
federal funds rate suggested that the odds investors at-
Foreign economic growth remained subdued in the sec-
tached to a 25 basis point reduction in the target range
ond quarter. Growth picked up in Canada as oil produc-
of the federal funds rate at the September FOMC meet-
tion rebounded, but growth slowed sharply in Europe
ing increased from about 50 percent at the time of the
amid a downturn in manufacturing activity and persis-
July FOMC meeting to 90 percent by the end of the in-
tent policy-related uncertainty. Growth also slowed in
termeeting period. Respondents to the Desk’s Survey of
China and India. Recent indicators suggested wide-
Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants as-
spread weakness in manufacturing abroad even as ser-
signed, on average, similarly high odds to a rate decrease
vices activity appeared to be holding up relatively well.
at the September FOMC meeting. In addition, market-
Foreign inflation rose in the second quarter, pushed up
implied expectations for the federal funds rate at year-
by earlier increases in oil prices as well as by rising food
end and beyond moved down. A straight read of OIS
prices in some emerging economies. However, data on
(overnight index swap) forward rates suggested that in-
foreign core consumer prices showed little sign of un-
vestors expected the federal funds rate to decline about
derlying inflationary pressures abroad. Late in the inter-
45 basis points by year-end, to a level nearly 10 basis
meeting period, an attack on a key oil facility in Saudi
points lower than was expected at the time of the July
Arabia disrupted Saudi oil production and caused an in-
FOMC meeting, and to decrease an additional roughly
itial spike in prices on near-dated oil futures contracts.
45 basis points by the end of 2020.
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
Nominal Treasury yields decreased, on net, over the in-
Financial market developments over the intermeeting
termeeting period, with longer-term yields falling the
period were driven by an escalation in international trade
most. The spread between 10-year and 3-month Treas-
tensions, growing concerns about the global economic
ury yields became a bit more negative, while the spread
growth outlook, and the prospect of more policy accom-
between 10-year and 2-year Treasury yields turned neg-
modation by central banks. Nominal Treasury yields
ative for the first time since 2007 and fluctuated around
posted very large declines in August as investors reacted
zero until the September FOMC meeting. Measures of
to the U.S. Administration’s announcement of addi-
inflation compensation derived from Treasury Inflation-
tional tariffs on Chinese goods, along with the deprecia-
Protected Securities declined on net.
tion of the Chinese renminbi through the perceived
threshold of 7 renminbi per U.S. dollar and the associ- Broad stock price indexes decreased slightly, on net,
ated implications of these actions for the global eco- over the intermeeting period amid heightened volatility.
nomic outlook. Treasury yields partially rebounded fol- The escalation of trade tensions between China and the
lowing better-than-expected incoming economic data in United States weighed on equity prices, but investors’
the United States and abroad, a perceived reduction in expectations that major central banks would shift toward
the probability of a no-deal Brexit, and some positive more accommodative monetary policies provided some
headlines about trade policy. The market-implied path support. Equity prices were also boosted by better-than-
of the federal funds rate shifted down on net. Broad anticipated corporate earnings and retail-sector data.
equity price indexes were down as much as 6 percent in Stock prices of firms with high exposure to China un-
early August but almost fully recovered by the end of the derperformed the broader market somewhat, as did
intermeeting period. Spreads on investment-grade cor- bank stocks amid downward revisions to banks’ earnings
porate bonds widened modestly, while those on specu- forecasts. Conversely, the stock prices of utilities and
lative-grade corporate bonds were little changed on net. real estate firms increased noticeably, reportedly benefit-
Financing conditions for businesses and households ing from demand by investors reaching for less cyclical
were largely unaffected by the intermeeting turbulence and higher-yielding assets. One-month option-implied
in financial markets and remained generally supportive volatility on the S&P 500 index—the VIX—was little
of spending and economic activity. changed, on net, over the intermeeting period and re-
mained at the lower end of its historical distribution after
retracing a sharp increase in early August.

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Despite the volatility in many domestic and global finan- domestic firms in August amid increased market volatil-
cial markets over the intermeeting period, conditions in ity, but several deals were expected to be completed in
domestic short-term funding markets remained stable the coming months. On balance, the credit quality of
until the Monday before the September FOMC meeting, nonfinancial corporations weakened slightly, with the
when flows associated with a combination of corporate volume of nonfinancial corporate bond downgrades
tax payments and Treasury coupon securities settle- modestly outpacing that of upgrades in recent months.
ments led to significant tightening of conditions, partic- Credit conditions for both small businesses and munici-
ularly for overnight funding. The EFFR rose to the top palities remained accommodative on balance.
of the target range on September 16 and exceeded it by
In the commercial real estate (CRE) sector, financing
5 basis points on September 17, after which funding
conditions remained generally accommodative. Bank
pressures eased somewhat following the Desk’s open
CRE loan growth slowed moderately since the second
market operations. On net, the EFFR averaged
quarter, driven by slower growth in loans secured by
2.14 percent over the current intermeeting period, with
nonfarm nonresidential properties. The volume of
the spread to the IOER rate down a bit relative to the
agency and non-agency commercial mortgage-backed
previous intermeeting period.
securities issuance was slightly weaker in July and August
Early in the intermeeting period, bond yields in the ad- than in the same period last year, though industry ana-
vanced foreign economies (AFEs) plunged and foreign lysts reportedly anticipated that issuance would soon
equities declined notably following an increase in U.S.– pick up in response to recent declines in interest rates.
China trade tensions. Some weakness in foreign eco-
Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market
nomic data, growing concerns about global growth, and
eased over the intermeeting period. Residential mort-
the prospect of more monetary policy accommodation
gage rates declined less than long-term Treasury yields,
abroad contributed to further declines in yields. Later in
as the increase in prepayment risk and the rise in implied
the period, AFE yields partially rebounded and foreign
interest rate volatility reportedly reduced the demand for
equity prices fully recovered on some easing of U.S.–
mortgage-backed securities. Home-purchase origina-
China trade tensions, as well as perceptions of reduced
tions and refinancing originations both rose.
political uncertainty in the United Kingdom and Italy.
Financial market reactions were mixed after the Euro- Financing conditions in consumer credit markets re-
pean Central Bank (ECB) announced a package of policy mained generally supportive of growth in consumer
easing measures, including a rate cut on deposits at the spending, although supply conditions continued to be
ECB, resumption of its asset purchase program, and tight for subprime credit card borrowers. Consumer
more favorable terms for longer-term lending to banks. credit expanded at a moderate pace in the second quarter
overall, with bank credit data pointing to continued
The dollar appreciated against emerging market curren-
growth through July and August. In consumer asset-
cies but was little changed, on balance, against AFE cur-
backed securities markets, issuance was solid, and
rencies, leaving the broad dollar index slightly higher.
spreads remained at relatively low levels, though some-
Emerging market sovereign bond spreads widened no-
what above their post-crisis averages.
tably. The Argentine peso depreciated sharply and Ar-
gentine sovereign yields soared following the defeat of Staff Economic Outlook
the current pro-market president in the primary election The projection for U.S. economic activity prepared by
and the subsequent announcement of plans for debt re- the staff for the September FOMC meeting was little
structuring and the imposition of capital controls. changed in the near term; real GDP growth was still
forecast to be slower in the second half of the year than
Financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses re-
in the first half, mostly attributable to continued soft
mained accommodative. Overall issuance of corporate
business investment and a slower increase in govern-
bonds was solid in August, driven by resilient invest-
ment spending. The projection for real GDP growth
ment-grade issuance. While speculative-grade corporate
over the medium term was a bit weaker than the previ-
bond issuance was somewhat subdued in August, it was
ous forecast, primarily reflecting the effects of a higher
comparable to that seen over the same period in 2018.
projected path for the foreign exchange value of the dol-
Growth of commercial and industrial loans at banks
lar and a lower trajectory for economic growth abroad,
ticked up, driven by faster growth at large domestic
which were partially offset by a lower assumed path for
banks. There were no initial public equity offerings by
interest rates. Real GDP was forecast to expand at a rate
a little above the staff’s estimate of potential output

--- Page 9 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_1_9______________________P__ag_e_ _9
growth in 2019 and 2020 and then slow to a pace slightly over the longer run, based on their individual assess-
below potential output growth in 2021 and 2022. The ments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate.
unemployment rate was projected to be roughly flat The longer-run projections represented each partici-
through 2022 and to remain below the staff’s estimate of pant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable
its longer-run natural rate, which was revised down a lit- would be expected to converge, over time, under appro-
tle. In addition, the staff revised up its estimate of the priate monetary policy and in the absence of further
level of trend productivity in recent years after incorpo- shocks to the economy. These projections are described
rating the BEA’s recent annual revisions to the national in the Summary of Economic Projections, which is an
income and product accounts. Both of these supply-side addendum to these minutes.
adjustments led to a somewhat higher projected path for
Participants agreed that the labor market had remained
potential output, implying that estimates of current and
strong over the intermeeting period and that economic
projected resource utilization were less tight than the
activity had risen at a moderate rate. Job gains had been
staff previously assumed.
solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemploy-
The staff’s forecast of total PCE price inflation for this ment rate had remained low. Although household
year was revised down somewhat, reflecting slightly spending had risen at a strong pace, business fixed in-
lower projected paths for consumer food and energy vestment and exports had weakened. On a 12-month
prices, along with a little lower forecast for core PCE basis, overall inflation and inflation for items other than
prices. The core PCE price inflation forecast for this food and energy were running below 2 percent. Market-
year was revised down to reflect recent data as well as based measures of inflation compensation remained
downward-revised data for earlier in the year from the low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation ex-
BEA’s annual revision. Both total and core inflation pectations were little changed.
were projected to move up slightly next year, as the low
Participants generally viewed the baseline economic out-
readings early this year were expected to be transitory;
look as positive and indicated that their views of the
nevertheless, both inflation measures were forecast to
most likely outcomes for economic activity and inflation
continue to run below 2 percent through 2022.
had changed little since the July meeting. However, for
The staff continued to view the uncertainty around its most participants, that economic outlook was premised
projections for real GDP growth, the unemployment on a somewhat more accommodative path for policy
rate, and inflation as generally similar to the average of than in July. Participants generally had become more
the past 20 years. Moreover, the staff still judged that concerned about risks associated with trade tensions and
the risks to the forecast for real GDP growth were tilted adverse developments in the geopolitical and global eco-
to the downside, with a corresponding skew to the up- nomic spheres. In addition, inflation pressures contin-
side for the unemployment rate. Important factors in ued to be muted. Many participants expected that real
that assessment were that international trade tensions GDP growth would moderate to around its potential
and foreign economic developments seemed more likely rate in the second half of the year. Participants agreed
to move in directions that could have significant nega- that consumer spending was increasing at a strong pace.
tive effects on the U.S. economy than to resolve more They also expected that, in the period ahead, household
favorably than assumed. In addition, softness in busi- spending would likely remain on a firm footing, sup-
ness investment and manufacturing so far this year was ported by strong labor market conditions, rising in-
seen as pointing to the possibility of a more substantial comes, and accommodative financial conditions. Sev-
slowing in economic growth than the staff projected. eral participants indicated that the housing sector was
The risks to the inflation projection were also viewed as starting to rebound, stimulated by a significant decline in
having a downward skew, in part because of the down- mortgage rates. With regard to the contrast between ro-
side risks to the forecast for economic activity bust consumption growth and weak investment growth,
several participants mentioned that uncertainties in the
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
business outlook and sustained weak investment could
Economic Outlook
eventually lead to slower hiring, which, in turn, could
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of
damp the growth of income and consumption.
the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank pres-
idents submitted their projections of the most likely out- In their discussion of the business sector, participants
comes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, saw trade tensions and concerns about the global out-
and inflation for each year from 2019 through 2022 and

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
look as the main factors weighing on business invest- firms were also reluctant to raise wages because of their
ment, exports, and manufacturing production. Partici- limited pricing power, while others thought the wages
pants judged that trade uncertainty and global develop- they were offering were in line with the skill sets of the
ments would continue to affect firms’ investment spend- workers available to fill new positions. Participants gen-
ing, and that this uncertainty was discouraging them erally viewed overall wage growth as broadly consistent
from investing in their businesses. A couple of partici- with modest average rates of labor productivity growth
pants noted that businesses had the capacity to adjust to in recent years and as exerting little upward pressure on
ongoing uncertainty concerning trade, and some firms inflation. A couple of participants noted that, with in-
were reconfiguring supply chains and making logistical flationary pressures remaining muted and wage growth
arrangements as part of contingency planning to mitigate moderate even as employment and spending expanded
the effects of trade tensions on their businesses. further, they had again adjusted downward their esti-
mates of the longer-run normal unemployment rate.
Participants discussed developments in the manufactur-
ing and the agricultural sectors of the U.S. economy. In their discussion of inflation developments, partici-
Manufacturing production remained lower than at the pants noted that, despite a recent firming in the incom-
beginning of the year, and recent indicators suggested ing data, readings on overall and core PCE inflation had
that conditions were unlikely to improve materially over continued to run below the Committee’s symmetric
the near term. Participants saw the ongoing global slow- 2 percent objective. Furthermore, in light of weakness
down and trade uncertainty as contributing importantly in the global economy, perceptions of downside risks to
to these declines. A few participants noted ongoing growth, and subdued inflation pressures, some partici-
challenges in the agricultural sector, including those as- pants continued to view the risks to the outlook for in-
sociated with tariffs, weak export demand, and more in- flation as weighted to the downside. Some participants,
tense financial burdens arising from the increase in car- however, saw the recent inflation data as consistent with
ryover debt in preceding years. Participants commented their previous assessment that much of the weakness
on the potential disruption to global oil production aris- seen early in the year was transitory. In this connection,
ing from the attack on Saudi Arabia’s facilities. several participants noted that recent monthly readings,
notably for CPI inflation, seemed broadly consistent
Participants judged that conditions in the labor market
with the Committee’s longer-run inflation objective of
remained strong, with the unemployment rate near his-
2 percent, while the trimmed mean measure of PCE in-
torical lows and continued solid job gains, on average, in
flation, constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dal-
recent months. The labor force participation rate of
las, remained at 2 percent in July.
prime-age individuals, especially of prime-age women,
moved up in August, continuing its upward trajectory, In their discussion of the outlook for inflation, partici-
and the unemployment rate of African Americans fell to pants generally agreed that, under appropriate policy, in-
its lowest rate on record. However, a number of partic- flation would move up to the Committee’s 2 percent ob-
ipants noted that, although the labor market was clearly jective over the medium term. Participants saw inflation
in a strong position, the preliminary benchmark revision expectations as reasonably well anchored, but many par-
by the Bureau of Labor Statistics indicated that payroll ticipants observed that market-based measures of infla-
employment gains would likely show less momentum tion compensation and some survey measures of con-
coming into this year when the revisions are incorpo- sumers’ inflation expectations were at historically low
rated in published data early next year. A few partici- levels. Some of these participants further noted that
pants observed that it would be important to be vigilant longer-term inflation expectations could be somewhat
in monitoring incoming data for any sign of softening in below levels consistent with the Committee’s 2 percent
labor market conditions. That said, reports from busi- inflation objective, or that continued weakness in infla-
ness contacts in many Districts pointed to continued tion could prompt expectations to drift lower.
strong labor demand, with some firms still reporting dif-
Participants generally judged that downside risks to the
ficulties finding qualified workers and others broadening
outlook for economic activity had increased somewhat
their recruiting to include traditionally marginalized
since their July meeting, particularly those stemming
groups. In some Districts, employers were also expand-
from trade policy uncertainty and conditions abroad. In
ing training and provision of nonwage benefits, which
addition, although readings on the labor market and the
could help sustain their expansion of hiring against a
overall economy continued to be strong, a clearer picture
background of a very tight national labor market without
spurring above-trend aggregate wage growth. Some

--- Page 11 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_1_9_____________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
of protracted weakness in investment spending, manu- Participants noted that there had been little change in
facturing production, and exports had emerged. Partic- their economic outlook since the July meeting and that
ipants also noted that there continued to be a significant incoming data had continued to suggest that the pace of
probability of a no-deal Brexit, and that geopolitical ten- economic expansion was consistent with the mainte-
sions had increased in Hong Kong and the Middle East. nance of strong labor market conditions. However, a
Several participants commented that, in the wake of this couple of participants pointed out that data revisions an-
increase in downside risk, the weakness in business nounced in recent months implied that the economy had
spending, manufacturing, and exports could give rise to likely entered the year with somewhat less momentum
slower hiring, a development that would likely weigh on than previously thought. In addition, data received since
consumption and the overall economic outlook. Several July had confirmed the weakening in business fixed in-
participants noted that statistical models designed to vestment and exports. One risk that the economy faced
gauge the probability of recession, including those based was that the softness recorded of late in firms’ capital
on information from the yield curve, suggested that the formation, manufacturing, and exporting activities
likelihood of a recession occurring over the medium might spread to their hiring decisions, with adverse im-
term had increased notably in recent months. However, plications for household income and spending. Partici-
a couple of these participants stressed the difficulty of pants observed that such an eventuality was not embed-
extracting the right signal from these probability models, ded in their baseline outlook; however, a couple of them
especially in the current period of unusually low levels of indicated that this was partly because they assumed that
term premiums. an appropriate adjustment to the policy rate path would
help forestall that eventuality. Several also noted that,
With regard to developments in financial markets, par-
because monetary policy actions affected economic ac-
ticipants noted that longer-term U.S. Treasury rates had
tivity with a lag, it was appropriate to provide the requi-
been volatile over the intermeeting period but, on net,
site policy accommodation now to support economic ac-
had registered a sizable decline. Participants observed
tivity over coming quarters.
that a key source of downward pressure on Treasury
rates arose from flight-to-safety flows, driven by down- Participants favoring a modest adjustment to the stance
side risks to global growth, escalating trade tensions, and of monetary policy at this juncture cited other risks to
disappointing global data. Low interest rates abroad the economic outlook that further underscored the case
were also considered an important influence on U.S. for such a move. As their discussion of risks had high-
longer-term rates. Participants expressed a range of lighted, downside risks had become more pronounced
views about the implications of low longer-term Treas- since July: Trade uncertainty had increased, prospects
ury rates. Some participants judged that a prolonged in- for global growth had become more fragile, and various
version of the yield curve could be a matter of concern. intermeeting developments had intensified geopolitical
Participants also noted that equity prices had exhibited risks. Against this background, risk-management con-
volatility but had been largely flat, on balance, over the siderations implied that it would be prudent for the
intermeeting period. Several participants cited consider- Committee to adopt a somewhat more accommodative
ations that led them to be concerned about financial sta- stance of policy. In addition, a number of participants
bility, including low risk spreads and a buildup of corpo- suggested that a reduction at this meeting in the target
rate debt, corporate stock buybacks financed through range for the federal funds rate would likely better align
low-cost leverage, and the pace of lending in the CRE the target range with a variety of indicators of the appro-
market. However, several others pointed to signs that priate policy stance, including those based on estimates
the financial system remained resilient. of the neutral interest rate. A few participants observed
that the considerations favoring easing were reinforced
In their consideration of the monetary policy options at
by the proximity of the federal funds rate to the ELB. If
this meeting, most participants believed that a reduction
policymakers provided adequate accommodation while
of 25 basis points in the target range for the federal funds
still away from the ELB, this course of action would help
rate would be appropriate. In discussing the reasons for
forestall the possibility of a prolonged ELB episode.
such a decision, these participants pointed to considera-
tions related to the economic outlook, risk management, Many participants also cited the level of inflation or in-
and the need to center inflation and inflation expecta- flation expectations as justifying a reduction of 25 basis
tions on the Committee’s longer-run objective of 2 per- points in the federal funds rate at this meeting. Inflation
cent. had generally fallen short of the Committee’s objective

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
for several years and, notwithstanding some stronger re- move would help reduce the risk of an economic down-
cent monthly readings on inflation, the 12-month rate turn and would more appropriately recognize important
was still below 2 percent. Some estimates of trend infla- recent developments, such as slowing job gains, weaken-
tion were also below 2 percent. Several participants ad- ing investment, and continued low values of market-
ditionally stressed that survey measures of longer-term based measures of inflation compensation. In addition,
inflation expectations and market-based measures of in- these participants stressed the need for a policy stance—
flation compensation were near historical lows and that possibly one using enhanced forward guidance—that
these values pointed to the possibility that inflation ex- was sufficiently accommodative to make it unlikely that
pectations were below levels consistent with the 2 per- the United States would experience a protracted period
cent objective or could soon fall below such levels. of the kind seen abroad in which the economy became
Against this backdrop, participants suggested that a pol- mired in a combination of undesirably low inflation,
icy easing would help underline policymakers’ commit- weak economic activity, and near-zero policy rates. They
ment to the symmetric 2 percent longer-run objective. also argued that it was desirable for the Committee to
With inflation pressures muted and U.S. inflation likely seek and maintain a level of accommodation sufficient
being weighed down by global disinflationary forces, to deliver inflation at 2 percent on a sustained basis and
policymakers saw little chance of an outsized increase in that such a policy would be consistent with inflation ex-
inflation in response to additional policy accommoda- ceeding 2 percent for a time.
tion and argued that such an increase, should it occur,
With regard to monetary policy beyond this meeting,
could be addressed in a straightforward manner using
participants agreed that policy was not on a preset course
conventional monetary policy tools.
and would depend on the implications of incoming in-
Several participants favored maintaining the existing tar- formation for the evolution of the economic outlook. A
get range for the federal funds rate at this meeting. few participants judged that the expectations regarding
These participants suggested that the baseline projection the path of the federal funds rate implied by prices in
for the economy had changed very little since the Com- financial markets were currently suggesting greater pro-
mittee’s previous meeting and that the state of the econ- vision of accommodation at coming meetings than they
omy and the economic outlook did not justify a shift saw as appropriate and that it might become necessary
away from the current policy stance, which they felt was for the Committee to seek a better alignment of market
already adequately accommodative. They acknowledged expectations regarding the policy rate path with policy-
the uncertainties that currently figured importantly in makers’ own expectations for that path. Several partici-
evaluations of the economic outlook, but they con- pants suggested that the Committee’s postmeeting state-
tended that the key uncertainties were unlikely to be re- ment should provide more clarity about when the recal-
solved soon. Furthermore, as they did not believe that ibration of the level of the policy rate in response to
these uncertainties would derail the expansion, they did trade uncertainty would likely come to an end.
not see further policy accommodation as needed at this
Participants’ Discussion of Recent Money Market
time. Changes in the stance of policy, they believed,
Developments
should instead occur only when the macroeconomic
The manager pro tem provided a summary of the most
data readily justified those moves. In this connection, a
recent developments in money markets. Open market
couple of participants suggested that, if it decided to pro-
operations conducted on the previous day had helped to
vide more policy accommodation at the present junc-
ease strains in money markets, but the EFFR had none-
ture, the Committee might be taking out too much in-
theless printed 5 basis points above the top of the target
surance against possible future shocks, leaving monetary
range. With significant pressures still evident in repo
policy with less scope to boost aggregate demand in the
markets and the federal funds market, and in accordance
event that such shocks materialized. A few of the par-
with the FOMC’s directive to maintain the federal funds
ticipants favoring an unchanged target range for the fed-
rate within the target range, the Desk conducted another
eral funds rate also expressed concern that an easing of
repo operation on the morning of the second day of the
monetary policy at this meeting could exacerbate finan-
meeting. The staff presented a proposal to lower the
cial imbalances.
IOER rate and the overnight reverse repurchase agree-
A couple of participants indicated their preference for a ment rate by 5 basis points, relative to the target range
50 basis point cut in the federal funds rate at this meet- for the federal funds rate, in order to foster trading of
ing. These participants suggested that a larger policy federal funds within the target range.

--- Page 13 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_1_9_____________________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Participants agreed that developments in money markets these members observed that, because monetary policy
over recent days implied that the Committee should actions affected aggregate spending with a lag, the pre-
soon discuss the appropriate level of reserve balances sent meeting was an appropriate occasion for providing
sufficient to support efficient and effective implementa- accommodation that would support economic activity in
tion of monetary policy in the context of the ample-re- the period ahead. Two members preferred to maintain
serves regime that the Committee had chosen. A few the current target range for the federal funds rate at this
participants noted the possibility of resuming trend meeting. These members noted that economic data re-
growth of the balance sheet to help stabilize the level of ceived over the intermeeting period had been largely
reserves in the banking system. Participants agreed that positive and that they anticipated, under an unchanged
any Committee decision regarding the trend pace of bal- policy stance, continued strong labor markets and solid
ance sheet expansion necessary to maintain a level of re- growth in activity, with inflation gradually moving up to
serve balances appropriate to facilitate policy implemen- the Committee’s 2 percent objective. These members
tation should be clearly distinguished from past large- also suggested that providing further accommodation
scale asset purchase programs that were aimed at altering during a period of high economic activity and elevated
the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s asset asset prices could have adverse consequences for finan-
holdings in order to provide monetary policy accommo- cial stability. One member preferred a reduction in the
dation and ease overall financial conditions. Several par- target range of 50 basis points in the federal funds rate
ticipants suggested that such a discussion could benefit at this meeting. This member suggested that such a
from also considering the merits of introducing a stand- larger rate adjustment would be more consistent with the
ing repurchase agreement facility as part of the frame- achievement of the Committee’s objectives over time
work for implementing monetary policy. and, in particular, with helping preclude the possibility
of a protracted period in which inflation and employ-
Committee Policy Action
ment were below the Committee’s objectives.
In their discussion of monetary policy for this meeting,
members noted that information received since the July Members agreed that, in determining the timing and size
meeting indicated that the labor market remained strong of future adjustments to the target range for the federal
and that economic activity had been rising at a moderate funds rate, the Committee would assess realized and ex-
rate. Job gains had been solid, on average, in recent pected economic conditions relative to its maximum-
months, and the unemployment rate had remained low. employment objective and its symmetric 2 percent infla-
Household spending had been rising at a strong pace. tion objective. They also agreed that those assessments
However, business fixed investment and exports had would take into account a wide range of information, in-
weakened, and this outcome suggested that risks and un- cluding measures of labor market conditions, indicators
certainty associated with international trade develop- of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and
ments and with ongoing weakness in global economic readings on financial and international developments.
growth were continuing to weigh on the domestic econ-
With regard to the postmeeting statement, members
omy. On a 12-month basis, both the overall inflation
agreed to update the language of the Committee’s de-
rate and inflation for items other than food and energy
scription of incoming data to acknowledge the weaken-
were running below 2 percent. Market-based measures
ing in investment spending and in U.S. exports, as well
of inflation compensation remained low. Survey-based
as the recent strong rate of increase of household spend-
measures of longer-term inflation expectations were lit-
ing.
tle changed. In light of these developments, most mem-
bers agreed to lower the target range for the federal At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
funds rate to 1¾ to 2 percent at this meeting. voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute
With this adjustment to policy, those members who sup-
transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol-
ported the policy action sought to make the overall
lowing domestic policy directive, to be released at
stance of monetary policy most consistent with helping
2:00 p.m.:
to offset the effects on aggregate demand of weak global
growth and trade policy uncertainty, insure against fur- “Effective September 19, 2019, the Federal
ther downside risks arising from those sources and from Open Market Committee directs the Desk to
geopolitical developments, and promote a more rapid undertake open market operations as necessary
return of inflation to the Committee’s symmetric 2 per- to maintain the federal funds rate in a target
cent objective than would otherwise occur. A couple of range of 1¾ to 2 percent, including overnight

--- Page 14 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_4____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
reverse repurchase operations (and reverse re- Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
purchase operations with maturities of more mittee seeks to foster maximum employment
than one day when necessary to accommodate and price stability. In light of the implications
weekend, holiday, or similar trading conven- of global developments for the economic out-
tions) at an offering rate of 1.70 percent, in look as well as muted inflation pressures, the
amounts limited only by the value of Treasury Committee decided to lower the target range for
securities held outright in the System Open the federal funds rate to 1¾ to 2 percent. This
Market Account that are available for such op- action supports the Committee’s view that sus-
erations and by a per-counterparty limit of tained expansion of economic activity, strong
$30 billion per day. labor market conditions, and inflation near the
Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective are
The Committee directs the Desk to continue
the most likely outcomes, but uncertainties
rolling over at auction all principal payments
about this outlook remain. As the Committee
from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury
contemplates the future path of the target range
securities and to continue reinvesting all princi-
for the federal funds rate, it will continue to
pal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold-
monitor the implications of incoming infor-
ings of agency debt and agency mortgage-
mation for the economic outlook and will act as
backed securities received during each calendar
appropriate to sustain the expansion, with a
month. Principal payments from agency debt
strong labor market and inflation near its sym-
and agency mortgage-backed securities up to
metric 2 percent objective.
$20 billion per month will continue to be rein-
vested in Treasury securities to roughly match In determining the timing and size of future ad-
the maturity composition of Treasury securities justments to the target range for the federal
outstanding; principal payments in excess of funds rate, the Committee will assess realized
$20 billion per month will continue to be rein- and expected economic conditions relative to its
vested in agency mortgage-backed securities. maximum employment objective and its sym-
Small deviations from these amounts for oper- metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as-
ational reasons are acceptable. sessment will take into account a wide range of
information, including measures of labor mar-
The Committee also directs the Desk to engage
ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures
in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
and inflation expectations, and readings on fi-
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal
nancial and international developments.”
Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities
transactions.” Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C.
Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard
The vote also encompassed approval of the statement
H. Clarida, Charles L. Evans, and Randal K. Quarles.
below to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
Voting against this action: James Bullard, Esther L.
“Information received since the Federal Open
George, and Eric Rosengren.
Market Committee met in July indicates that the
labor market remains strong and that economic President Bullard dissented because he believed that
activity has been rising at a moderate rate. Job lowering the target range for the federal funds rate by
gains have been solid, on average, in recent 50 basis points at this time would provide insurance
months, and the unemployment rate has re- against further declines in expected inflation and a slow-
mained low. Although household spending has ing economy subject to elevated downside risks. In ad-
been rising at a strong pace, business fixed in- dition, a 50 basis point cut at this time would help pro-
vestment and exports have weakened. On a mote a more rapid return of inflation and inflation ex-
12-month basis, overall inflation and inflation pectations to target. President George dissented be-
for items other than food and energy are run- cause she believed that an unchanged setting of policy
ning below 2 percent. Market-based measures was appropriate based on incoming data and the outlook
of inflation compensation remain low; survey- for economic activity over the medium term. Recogniz-
based measures of longer-term inflation expec- ing the risks to the outlook from the effects of trade pol-
tations are little changed. icy and weaker global activity, President George would
be prepared to adjust policy should incoming data point

--- Page 15 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_7_–_1_8_, _2_0_1_9_____________________P__ag_e_ _1_5
to a materially weaker outlook for the economy. Presi- It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
dent Rosengren dissented because he judged that mon- would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, October 29–
etary policy was already accommodative. In his view, 30, 2019. The meeting adjourned at 10:40 a.m. on Sep-
additional accommodation was not needed for an econ- tember 18, 2019.
omy in which labor markets are already tight and could
Notation Vote
pose risks of further inflating the prices of risky assets
By notation vote completed on August 20, 2019, the
and encouraging households and firms to take on too
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
much leverage.
Committee meeting held on July 30–31, 2019.
Consistent with the Committee’s decision to lower the
target range for the federal funds rate to 1¾ to 2 percent,
the Board of Governors voted unanimously to lower the
interest rate paid on required and excess reserve balances
_______________________
to 1.80 percent and voted unanimously to approve a
James A. Clouse
¼ percentage point decrease in the primary credit rate to
Secretary
2.50 percent, effective September 19, 2019.

--- Page 16 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- 2019, some participants slightly revised down their esti-
tee (FOMC) meeting held on September 17–18, 2019, mates of the longer-run unemployment rate; the median
meeting participants submitted their projections of the estimate of the longer-run unemployment rate was un-
most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product changed. Participants’ projections for total and core in-
(GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for flation were generally little changed compared with their
each year from 2019 to 2022 and over the longer run. projections in June.
Each participant’s projections were based on infor-
As shown in figure 2, participants expected that the evo-
mation available at the time of the meeting, together with
lution of the economy, relative to their objectives of
his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy—
maximum employment and 2 percent inflation, would
including a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-
likely warrant a federal funds rate target by the end of
run value—and assumptions about other factors likely
this year at or below the target range that the Committee
to affect economic outcomes. The longer-run projec-
adopted at its July 30–31 meeting. Compared with the
tions represent each participant’s assessment of the
June SEP submissions, the median projection for the
value to which each variable would be expected to con-
federal funds rate was 50 basis points lower for the end
verge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and
of 2019 and 25 basis points lower for the end of 2020
in the absence of further shocks to the economy.1 “Ap-
and 2021. In the September SEP submissions, the me-
propriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path
dian for the federal funds rate for 2020 was equal to the
of policy that each participant deems most likely to fos-
median for 2019. The median of participants’ assess-
ter outcomes for economic activity and inflation that
ments of the appropriate level for the federal funds rate
best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the
in 2022 was slightly below the median of participants’
statutory mandate to promote maximum employment
estimates of its longer-run level. Some participants re-
and price stability.
vised lower their assessments of the longer-run federal
Participants who submitted longer-run projections ex- funds rate, but the median assessment of the longer-run
pected that, under appropriate monetary policy, growth federal funds rate was unchanged.
of real GDP in 2019 would run slightly or somewhat
Most participants regarded the uncertainties around
above their individual estimates of its longer-run rate.
their forecasts for GDP growth, total inflation, and core
Participants expected real GDP growth to edge down
inflation as broadly similar to the average over the past
over the projection horizon, with all participants project-
20 years. Just over half of the participants viewed the
ing growth in 2022 to be at or modestly below their es-
level of uncertainty around their unemployment rate
timates of its longer-run rate. Almost all participants
projections as being similar to the average of the past
who submitted longer-run projections expected that the
20 years, while the rest of the participants viewed uncer-
unemployment rate through 2022 would run below their
tainty as higher. Most participants assessed the risks to
estimates of its longer-run level. All participants contin-
their outlooks for real GDP growth as weighted to the
ued to project that total inflation, as measured by the
downside and for the unemployment rate as weighted to
four-quarter percent change in the price index for per-
the upside. Most participants judged the risks to the in-
sonal consumption expenditures (PCE), would increase
flation outlook as broadly balanced; some participants
from 2019 to 2020, and many expected another slight
viewed the risks to inflation as weighted to the downside,
increase in 2021. The vast majority of participants ex-
and no participant assessed risks to inflation as weighted
pected that inflation would be at or slightly above the
to the upside. Participants’ assessments of the uncer-
Committee’s 2 percent objective in 2021 and 2022. The
tainties and risks around their forecasts for real GDP
median of participants’ projections for core PCE price
growth and the unemployment rate were little changed
inflation increased over the projection period, rising to
overall relative to June. The uncertainties around their
2.0 percent in 2021. Table 1 and figure 1 provide sum-
projections for headline and core inflation were little
mary statistics for the projections. Compared with the
Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) from June
1 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for
real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds
rate.

--- Page 17 ---

,stnediserp
knaB
evreseR
laredeF
dna
srebmem
draoB
evreseR
laredeF
fo
snoitcejorp
cimonocE
.1
elbaT
9102
rebmetpeS
,ycilop
yratenom
etairporppa
detcejorp
fo
snoitpmussa
laudividni
rieht
rednu
tnecreP
3egnaR
2ycnedneT
lartneC
1naideM
regnoL
elbairaV
2202
1202
0202
9102
regnoL
2202
1202
0202
9102
regnoL
2202
1202
0202
9102
nur
nur
nur
1.2–7.1
1.2–6.1
1.2–7.1
3.2–7.1
4.2–1.2
0.2–8.1
0.2–7.1
0.2–8.1
1.2–8.1
3.2–1.2
9.1
8.1
9.1
0.2
2.2
PDG
laer
ni
egnahC
1.2–7.1
1.2–5.1
3.2–5.1
4.2–0.2
0.2–8.1
0.2–8.1
2.2–8.1
2.2–0.2
9.1
8.1
0.2
1.2
noitcejorp
enuJ
5.4–6.3
2.4–3.3
1.4–3.3
0.4–3.3
8.3–5.3
3.4–0.4
0.4–7.3
9.3–6.3
8.3–6.3
7.3–6.3
2.4
9.3
8.3
7.3
7.3
etar
tnemyolpmenU
5.4–6.3
2.4–3.3
0.4–3.3
8.3–5.3
4.4–0.4
0.4–6.3
9.3–5.3
7.3–6.3
2.4
8.3
7.3
6.3
noitcejorp
enuJ
0.2
2.2–8.1
3.2–8.1
1.2–7.1
7.1–4.1
0.2
2.2–0.2
0.2
0.2–8.1
6.1–5.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
9.1
5.1
noitaflni
ECP
0.2
2.2–9.1
1.2–8.1
7.1–4.1
0.2
1.2–0.2
0.2–9.1
6.1–5.1
0.2
0.2
9.1
5.1
noitcejorp
enuJ
2.2–8.1
3.2–8.1
1.2–7.1
8.1–6.1
2.2–0.2
0.2
0.2–9.1
8.1–7.1
0.2
0.2
9.1
8.1
4noitaflni
ECP
eroC
2.2–8.1
1.2–8.1
8.1–4.1
1.2–0.2
0.2–9.1
8.1–7.1
0.2
9.1
8.1
noitcejorp
enuJ
detcejorP
:omeM
htap
ycilop
etairporppa
3.3–0.2
9.2–6.1
6.2–6.1
4.2–6.1
1.2–6.1
8.2–5.2
6.2–9.1
4.2–6.1
1.2–6.1
1.2–6.1
5.2
4.2
1.2
9.1
9.1
etar
sdnuf
laredeF
3.3–4.2
1.3–9.1
1.3–9.1
6.2–9.1
0.3–5.2
6.2–9.1
4.2–9.1
4.2–9.1
5.2
4.2
1.2
4.2
noitcejorp
enuJ
htruofehtmorfsegnahctnecreperanoitaflnifoserusaemhtobrofsnoitcejorpdna)PDG(tcudorpcitsemodssorglaerniegnahcfosnoitcejorP
:etoN
,ylevitcepser,niegnahcfosetaregatnecrepehteranoitaflniECPerocdnanoitaflniECP
.detacidniraeyehtforetrauqhtruofehtotraeysuoiverpehtforetrauq
etartnemyolpmenuehtrofsnoitcejorP
.ygrenednadoofgnidulcxeECProfxedniecirpehtdna)ECP(serutidnepxenoitpmusnoclanosreprofxedniecirpeht
fotnemssessarehrosihnodesaberasnoitcejorps’tnapicitraphcaE
.detacidniraeyehtforetrauqhtruofehtnietartnemyolpmenunailivicegarevaehtrofera
egrevnocotdetcepxeebdluowelbairavhcaehcihwotetarehtfotnemssessas’tnapicitraphcaetneserpersnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.ycilopyratenometairporppa
tniopdimehtfoeulavehteraetarsdnuflaredefehtrofsnoitcejorpehT
.ymonoceehtotskcohsrehtruffoecnesbaehtnidnaycilopyratenometairporpparednu
defiicepsehtfodneehttaetarsdnuflaredefehtrofleveltegratetairporppadetcejorpehtroetarsdnuflaredefehtrofegnartegratetairporppadetcejorpehtfo ,91-81enuJnoeettimmoCtekraMnepOlaredeFehtfogniteemehthtiwnoitcnujnocniedamerewsnoitcejorpenuJehT
.nurregnolehtrevororaeyradnelac
htiwnoitcnujnocnietarsdnuflaredefehtro,etartnemyolpmenueht,PDGlaerniegnahcehtrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoltimbustondidtnapicitrapenO
.9102
.gniteem,9102,81-71rebmetpeSehthtiwnoitcnujnocnisnoitcejorphcustimbustondidtnapicitrapenodna,gniteem,9102,91-81enuJeht
,nevesisnoitcejorpforebmunehtnehW
.tsehgihottsewolmorfdegnarraerasnoitcejorpehtnehwnoitcejorpelddimehtsinaidemeht,doirephcaeroF
.1
.snoitcejorpelddimowtehtfoegarevaehtsinaidemeht
.raeyhcaenielbairavhcaerofsnoitcejorptsewoleerhtdnatsehgiheerhtehtsedulcxeycnednetlartnecehT
.2
.raeytahtnielbairavtahtrof,tsehgihottsewolmorf,snoitcejorp’stnapicitrapllasedulcniraeyneviganielbairavarofegnarehT
.3
.detcelloctoneranoitaflniECPerocrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.4
_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________

--- Page 18 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_7–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_9____________P__ag_e_ _3
Figure 1. Medians, central tendencies, and ranges of economic projections, 2019-22 and over the longer run
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections
3
Actual
2
1
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
7
6
5
4
3
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1. Thedatafortheactualvalues
ofthevariablesareannual.

--- Page 19 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure 2. FOMC participants’ assessments of appropriate monetary policy: Midpoint of target range
or target level for the federal funds rate
Percent
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
2019 2020 2021 2022 Longer run
Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual
participant’sjudgmentofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfundsrateortheappropriate
targetlevelforthefederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun. Oneparticipant
didnotsubmitlonger-runprojectionsforthefederalfundsrate.

--- Page 20 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_7–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_9____________P__ag_e_ _5
changed as well, but more participants saw the inflation core inflation for 2021 and 2022 were 2.0 percent. These
risks as broadly balanced than in June. medians were also unchanged from June for each year
included in the June SEP.
The Outlook for Real GDP Growth and Unemploy-
ment Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri-
As shown in table 1, the median of participants’ projec- butions of participants’ views about the outlook for in-
tions for the growth rate of real GDP in 2019, condi- flation. The distributions of projections for total and
tional on their individual assessments of appropriate core PCE price inflation in 2019, 2020, and 2021 were
monetary policy, was 2.2 percent, a bit above the median little changed overall relative to those in June. For 2022,
estimate of its longer-run rate of 1.9 percent. Almost all all participants projected total and core inflation between
participants continued to expect GDP growth to slow 1.8 and 2.2 percent.
over the projection period, with the median projection
Appropriate Monetary Policy
at 2.0 percent in 2020, 1.9 percent in 2021, and 1.8 per-
Figure 3.E shows distributions of participants’ judg-
cent in 2022. Relative to the June SEP, the medians of
ments regarding the appropriate target—or midpoint of
the projections for real GDP growth in 2019, 2020,
the target range—for the federal funds rate at the end of
2021, and the longer run were unchanged or revised
each year from 2019 to 2022 and over the longer run.
slightly higher.
Compared with the June projections, the range of pro-
The median of projections for the unemployment rate in jections for 2019, 2020, and 2021 shifted toward lower
the fourth quarter of 2019 was 3.7 percent, ½ percentage values and narrowed somewhat. The vast majority of
point below the median assessment of its longer-run participants viewed the appropriate levels of the federal
level of 4.2 percent. The medians of projections for funds rate at the end of 2019, 2020, and 2021 as lower
2020, 2021, and 2022 were 3.7 percent, 3.8 percent, and than those that they deemed appropriate in June. All
3.9 percent, respectively. The median projected unem- participants lowered their projections for the appropri-
ployment rate for 2019 was slightly higher than in the ate level of the federal funds rate, relative to June, at
June SEP, while the median projected unemployment some point in the projection period, and none raised
rates for 2020 and 2021 were unchanged relative to the their projections for the federal funds rate for any year.
June SEP. A vast majority of participants who submit- Compared with the projections prepared for the June
ted longer-run projections expected that the unemploy- SEP, the median federal funds rate was 50 basis points
ment rate in 2022 would be below their estimates of its lower in 2019 and 25 basis points lower in 2020 and
longer-run level, with some participants projecting a gap 2021. Muted inflation pressures, slower global growth,
of ½ percentage point or more. and weak business fixed investment were cited as rea-
sons for downward revisions to the appropriate path for
Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of partici-
the federal funds rate, as were trade tensions and risk-
pants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unem-
management considerations.
ployment rate, respectively, from 2019 to 2022 and in
the longer run. The distribution of individual projec- The median federal funds rate projection for the end of
tions for real GDP growth for 2019 shifted up some- 2019 was 1.88 percent. Seven participants assessed that
what relative to that in the June SEP. The distributions the most likely appropriate federal funds rate at the end
of individual projections of real GDP growth for 2020 of 2019 was 1.63 percent, while five assessed that the
and 2021 and for the longer run were little changed over- most likely appropriate rate at year-end was 2.13 percent.
all. The distributions of individual projections for the The median for 2020 was 1.88 percent, equal to the me-
unemployment rate for 2019 to 2021 and for the longer dian for 2019. For subsequent years, the medians of the
run were also little changed overall relative to those in projections were 2.13 percent at the end of 2021 and
June. 2.38 percent at the end of 2022. Some participants re-
vised lower their estimates of the longer-run level of the
The Outlook for Inflation
federal funds rate, while a majority of participants’ esti-
As shown in table 1, the median of projections for total
mates were unchanged. The median estimate of the
PCE price inflation was 1.5 percent in 2019, 1.9 percent
longer-run federal funds rate was 2.50 percent, un-
in 2020, and 2.0 percent in 2021; these medians were un-
changed from the median estimate in June.
changed from June. For 2022, the median projection for
total PCE was 2.0 percent. The medians of projections Uncertainty and Risks
for core PCE price inflation were 1.8 percent for 2019 In assessing the appropriate path of the federal funds
and 1.9 percent for 2020. The median projections for rate, FOMC participants take account of the range of

--- Page 21 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2019-22andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2019
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4− 1.6− 1.8− 2.0− 2.2− 2.4−
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4− 1.6− 1.8− 2.0− 2.2− 2.4−
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2021
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4− 1.6− 1.8− 2.0− 2.2− 2.4−
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2022
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4− 1.6− 1.8− 2.0− 2.2− 2.4−
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4− 1.6− 1.8− 2.0− 2.2− 2.4−
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 22 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_7–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_9____________P__ag_e_ _7
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2019-22andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2019
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.2− 3.4− 3.6− 3.8− 4.0− 4.2− 4.4− 4.6−
3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.2− 3.4− 3.6− 3.8− 4.0− 4.2− 4.4− 4.6−
3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2021
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.2− 3.4− 3.6− 3.8− 4.0− 4.2− 4.4− 4.6−
3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2022
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.2− 3.4− 3.6− 3.8− 4.0− 4.2− 4.4− 4.6−
3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.2− 3.4− 3.6− 3.8− 4.0− 4.2− 4.4− 4.6−
3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 23 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2019-22andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2019
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3− 1.5− 1.7− 1.9− 2.1− 2.3−
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3− 1.5− 1.7− 1.9− 2.1− 2.3−
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2021
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3− 1.5− 1.7− 1.9− 2.1− 2.3−
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2022
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3− 1.5− 1.7− 1.9− 2.1− 2.3−
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3− 1.5− 1.7− 1.9− 2.1− 2.3−
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 24 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_7–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_9____________P__ag_e_ _9
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2019-22
Number of participants
2019
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3− 1.5− 1.7− 1.9− 2.1− 2.3−
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3− 1.5− 1.7− 1.9− 2.1− 2.3−
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2021
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3− 1.5− 1.7− 1.9− 2.1− 2.3−
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2022
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3− 1.5− 1.7− 1.9− 2.1− 2.3−
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 25 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’judgmentsofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthe
federalfundsrateortheappropriatetargetlevelforthefederalfundsrate,2019-22andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2019
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.38− 1.63− 1.88− 2.13− 2.38− 2.63− 2.88− 3.13− 3.38−
1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.38− 1.63− 1.88− 2.13− 2.38− 2.63− 2.88− 3.13− 3.38−
1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2021
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.38− 1.63− 1.88− 2.13− 2.38− 2.63− 2.88− 3.13− 3.38−
1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62
Percent range
Number of participants
2022
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.38− 1.63− 1.88− 2.13− 2.38− 2.63− 2.88− 3.13− 3.38−
1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.38− 1.63− 1.88− 2.13− 2.38− 2.63− 2.88− 3.13− 3.38−
1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 26 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_7–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_9___________P__ag_e_ _1_1
possible economic outcomes, the likelihood of those Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
outcomes, and the potential benefits and costs should Percentage points
Variable 2019 2020 2021 2022
they occur. As a reference, table 2 provides measures of
forecast uncertainty—based on the forecast errors of
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . ±1.2 ±1.8 ±1.9 ±2.0
various private and government forecasts over the past Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . ±0.3 ±1.1 ±1.6 ±2.0
20 years—for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate,
Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.8 ±1.0 ±1.1 ±1.0
and total PCE price inflation. Those measures are rep-
Short-term interest rates3 . . . ±0.5 ±1.7 ±2.2 ±2.7
resented graphically in the “fan charts” shown in the top
panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. The fan charts dis-
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the
root mean squared error of projections for 1999 through 2018 that
play the SEP medians for the three variables surrounded were released in the fall by various private and government forecasters.
by symmetric confidence intervals derived from the As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assump-
tions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for
forecast errors reported in table 2. If the degree of un-
real GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate
certainty attending these projections is similar to the typ- will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made
ical magnitude of past forecast errors and the risks in the past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter
Tulip (2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Us-
around the projections are broadly balanced, then future
ing Historical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,”
outcomes of these variables would have about a 70 per- Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington:
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February),
cent probability of being within these confidence inter-
https://dx. doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2017.020.
vals. For all three variables, this measure of uncertainty 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
is substantial and generally increases as the forecast hori- 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
that has been most widely used in government and private economic
zon lengthens.
forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to
fourth quarter basis.
Participants’ assessments of the level of uncertainty sur-
3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds
rounding their individual economic projections are rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury
shown in the bottom-left panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and bills. Projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent,
in the fourth quarter.
4.C. Most participants continued to view the uncertain-
ties around their forecasts for GDP growth, total infla-
In discussing the uncertainty and risks surrounding their
tion, and core inflation as broadly similar to the average
economic projections, several participants mentioned
over the past 20 years. Just over half of the participants
trade developments, concerns about foreign economic
viewed the level of uncertainty around their unemploy-
growth, and weaker business fixed investment as sources
ment rate projections as being similar to the average of
of uncertainty or downside risk to the U.S. economic
the past 20 years, while the rest of the participants
growth outlook. For the inflation outlook, the possibil-
viewed uncertainty as higher.2
ity that inflation expectations could be drifting below
Because the fan charts are constructed to be symmetric
levels consistent with the FOMC’s 2 percent inflation
around the median projections, they do not reflect any
objective and the potential for weaker domestic demand
asymmetries in the balance of risks that participants may
to put downward pressure on inflation were viewed as
see in their economic projections. Participants’ assess-
downside risks. A few participants noted the possibility
ments of the balance of risks to their current economic
that higher tariffs could lead to aggregate price pressure
projections are shown in the bottom-right panels of fig-
as a source of upside risk to inflation. A number of par-
ures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. Most participants continued to
ticipants mentioned that their assessments of risks re-
view the risks to their outlooks for real GDP growth as
mained roughly balanced, in part because the downward
weighted to the downside and for the unemployment
revisions to their appropriate path for the federal funds
rate as weighted to the upside. Most participants—four
rate were offsetting factors that would otherwise con-
more than in the June SEP—judged the risks to the in-
tribute to asymmetric risks.
flation outlook as broadly balanced; some participants
Participants’ assessments of the appropriate future path
viewed the risks to inflation as weighted to the downside,
of the federal funds rate are also subject to considerable
and no participants assessed risks to inflation as
uncertainty. Because the Committee adjusts the federal
weighted to the upside.
2 At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the partici-
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty sur- pants’ projections.
rounding the economic forecasts and explains the approach

--- Page 27 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure 4.A. Uncertainty and risks in projections of GDP growth
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections
70% confidence interval
4
3
Actual 2
1
0
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth Risks to GDP growth
September projections September projections
June projections June projections
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Theblueandredlinesinthetoppanelshowactualvaluesandmedianprojectedvalues,respectively,ofthe
percent change in real gross domestic product (GDP) from the fourth quarter of the previous year to the fourth
quarteroftheyearindicated. Theconfidenceintervalaroundthemedianprojectedvaluesisassumedtobesymmetric
andisbasedonrootmeansquarederrorsofvariousprivateandgovernmentforecastsmadeovertheprevious20years;
more information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that
prevailed, onaverage, overtheprevious20years, thewidthandshapeoftheconfidenceintervalestimatedonthe
basisofthehistoricalforecasterrorsmaynotreflectFOMCparticipants’currentassessmentsoftheuncertaintyand
risks around their projections; these current assessments are summarized in the lower panels. Generally speaking,
participantswhojudgetheuncertaintyabouttheirprojectionsas“broadlysimilar”totheaveragelevelsofthepast20
yearswouldviewthewidthoftheconfidenceintervalshowninthehistoricalfanchartaslargelyconsistentwiththeir
assessmentsoftheuncertaintyabouttheirprojections. Likewise,participantswhojudgetheriskstotheirprojections
as“broadlybalanced”wouldviewtheconfidenceintervalaroundtheirprojectionsasapproximatelysymmetric. For
definitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 28 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_7–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_9___________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Figure 4.B. Uncertainty and risks in projections of the unemployment rate
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Unemployment rate
10
Median of projections
70% confidence interval 9
8
7
Actual 6
5
4
3
2
1
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate
September projections September projections
June projections June projections
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Theblueandredlinesinthetoppanelshowactualvaluesandmedianprojectedvalues,respectively,ofthe
averagecivilianunemploymentrateinthefourthquarteroftheyearindicated. Theconfidenceintervalaroundthe
medianprojectedvaluesisassumedtobesymmetricandisbasedonrootmeansquarederrorsofvariousprivateand
government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2.
Becausecurrentconditionsmaydifferfromthosethatprevailed,onaverage,overtheprevious20years,thewidth
andshapeoftheconfidenceintervalestimatedonthebasisofthehistoricalforecasterrorsmaynotreflectFOMC
participants’currentassessmentsoftheuncertaintyandrisksaroundtheirprojections;thesecurrentassessmentsare
summarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,participantswhojudgetheuncertaintyabouttheirprojectionsas
“broadlysimilar”totheaveragelevelsofthepast20yearswouldviewthewidthoftheconfidenceintervalshowninthe
historicalfanchartaslargelyconsistentwiththeirassessmentsoftheuncertaintyabouttheirprojections. Likewise,
participantswhojudgetheriskstotheirprojectionsas“broadlybalanced”wouldviewtheconfidenceintervalaround
theirprojectionsasapproximatelysymmetric. Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethe
box“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 29 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_4____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure 4.C. Uncertainty and risks in projections of PCE inflation
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
PCE inflation
Median of projections
3
70% confidence interval
2
1
Actual
0
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation Risks to PCE inflation
September projections September projections
June projections June projections
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation Risks to core PCE inflation
September projections September projections
June projections June projections
18 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively,
ofthepercentchangeinthepriceindexforpersonalconsumptionexpenditures(PCE)fromthefourthquarterof
thepreviousyeartothefourthquarteroftheyearindicated. Theconfidenceintervalaroundthemedianprojected
values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private and government
forecastsmadeovertheprevious20years;moreinformationaboutthesedataisavailableintable2. Becausecurrent
conditionsmaydifferfromthosethatprevailed,onaverage,overtheprevious20years,thewidthandshapeofthe
confidenceintervalestimatedonthebasisofthehistoricalforecasterrorsmaynotreflectFOMCparticipants’current
assessmentsoftheuncertaintyandrisksaroundtheirprojections;thesecurrentassessmentsaresummarizedinthe
lowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,participantswhojudgetheuncertaintyabouttheirprojectionsas“broadlysimilar”
totheaveragelevelsofthepast20yearswouldviewthewidthoftheconfidenceintervalshowninthehistoricalfan
chartaslargelyconsistentwiththeirassessmentsoftheuncertaintyabouttheirprojections. Likewise,participants
who judge the risks to their projections as “broadly balanced” would view the confidence interval around their
projectionsasapproximatelysymmetric. Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox
“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 30 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_7–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_9___________P__ag_e_ _1_5
funds rate in response to actual and prospective devel-
opments over time in key economic variables—such as
real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla-
tion—uncertainty surrounding the projected path for
the federal funds rate importantly reflects the uncertain-
ties about the paths for these economic variables, along
with other factors. Figure 5 provides a graphic represen-
tation of this uncertainty, plotting the SEP median for
the federal funds rate surrounded by confidence inter-
vals derived from the results presented in table 2.3 As
with the macroeconomic variables, the forecast uncer-
tainty surrounding the appropriate path of the federal
funds rate is substantial and increases for longer hori-
zons.
3 The confidence interval for the federal funds rate is assumed the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal funds rate
to be symmetric except when it is truncated at zero, which is that has been adopted in the past by the Committee.

--- Page 31 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_6____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure 5. Uncertainty and risks in projections of the federal funds rate
Percent
Federal funds rate
Midpoint of target range
Median of projections 6
70% confidence interval*
5
4
3
2
1
Actual
0
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the
Committee’stargetforthefederalfundsrateattheendoftheyearindicated. Theactualvaluesarethemidpointof
thetargetrange;themedianprojectedvaluesarebasedoneitherthemidpointofthetargetrangeorthetargetlevel.
Theconfidenceintervalaroundthemedianprojectedvaluesisbasedonrootmeansquarederrorsofvariousprivate
andgovernmentforecastsmadeovertheprevious20years. Theconfidenceintervalisnotstrictlyconsistentwiththe
projectionsforthefederalfundsrate,primarilybecausetheseprojectionsarenotforecastsofthelikeliestoutcomesfor
thefederalfundsrate,butratherprojectionsofparticipants’individualassessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy.
Still,historicalforecasterrorsprovideabroadsenseoftheuncertaintyaroundthefuturepathofthefederalfundsrate
generatedbytheuncertaintyaboutthemacroeconomicvariablesaswellasadditionaladjustmentstomonetarypolicy
thatmaybeappropriatetooffsettheeffectsofshockstotheeconomy.
Theconfidenceintervalisassumedtobesymmetricexceptwhenitistruncatedatzero-thebottomofthelowest
targetrangeforthefederalfundsratethathasbeenadoptedinthepastbytheCommittee. Thistruncationwould
notbeintendedtoindicatethelikelihoodoftheuseofnegativeinterestratestoprovideadditionalmonetarypolicy
accommodationifdoingsowasjudgedappropriate. Insuchsituations,theCommitteecouldalsoemployothertools,
includingforwardguidanceandlarge-scaleassetpurchases,toprovideadditionalaccommodation. Becausecurrent
conditionsmaydifferfromthosethatprevailed,onaverage,overtheprevious20years,thewidthandshapeofthe
confidenceintervalestimatedonthebasisofthehistoricalforecasterrorsmaynotreflectFOMCparticipants’current
assessmentsoftheuncertaintyandrisksaroundtheirprojections.
*Theconfidenceintervalisderivedfromforecastsoftheaveragelevelofshort-terminterestratesinthefourth
quarteroftheyearindicated;moreinformationaboutthesedataisavailableintable2. Theshadedareaencompasses
lessthana70percentconfidenceintervaliftheconfidenceintervalhasbeentruncatedatzero.

--- Page 32 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_7–_1_8_,_ 2_0_1_9___________P__ag_e_ _1_7
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the members of rent assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projec-
the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal tions are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those fig-
Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among ures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the
policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are
for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
projections, however. The economic and statistical models while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top
and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to par-
are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and ticipants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that
the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather
unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the than below their projections. These judgments are summa-
stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only rized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C.
what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as em- As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the
bodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable
possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the poten- uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each
tial costs to the economy should they occur. participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of mone-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a tary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real ac-
range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary tivity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve
Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropri-
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open ate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that
Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges
shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty as- for forecasts of short-term interest rates. They suggest that
sociated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a the historical confidence intervals associated with projections
participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted,
and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly con-
respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- sistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these
tending those projections is similar to that experienced in the projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly out-
past and the risks around the projections are broadly bal- comes but rather are projections of participants’ individual as-
anced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a prob- sessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-
ability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a
within a range of 1.8 to 4.2 percent in the current year, 1.2 to sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal
4.8 percent in the second year, 1.1 to 4.9 percent in the third funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeco-
year, and 1.0 to 5.0 percent in the fourth year. The corre- nomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary
sponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall infla- policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of
tion would be 1.2 to 2.8 percent in the current year, 1.0 to shocks to the economy.
3.0 percent in the second year, 0.9 to 3.1 percent in the third If at some point in the future the confidence interval
year, and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the fourth year. Figures 4.A around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it
through 4.C illustrate these confidence bounds in “fan would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart
charts” that are symmetric and centered on the medians of shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target
FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unem- range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the
ployment rate, and inflation. However, in some instances, Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of
the risks around the projections may not be symmetric. In the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention;
particular, the unemployment rate cannot be negative; fur- it would not have any implications for possible future policy
thermore, the risks around a particular projection might be decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to pro-
tilted to either the upside or the downside, in which case the vide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so
corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could
around the median projection. also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset
Because current conditions may differ from those that purchases, to provide additional accommodation.
prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on
judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1
projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller provides information on the range of views across FOMC
than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncer- participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A
tainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections
reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in across participants is much smaller than the average forecast
the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ cur- errors over the past 20 years.

# Tables

## Page_14_Table_1


| President Bullard dissented because he believed that        |
|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| lowering the target range for the federal funds rate by     |
| 50 basis points at this time would provide insurance        |
| against further declines in expected inflation and a slow-  |
| ing economy subject to elevated downside risks. In ad-      |
| dition, a 50 basis point cut at this time would help pro-   |
| mote a more rapid return of inflation and inflation ex-     |
| pectations to target. President George dissented be-        |
| cause she believed that an unchanged setting of policy      |
| was appropriate based on incoming data and the outlook      |
| for economic activity over the medium term. Recogniz-       |
| ing the risks to the outlook from the effects of trade pol- |
| icy and weaker global activity, President George would      |
| be prepared to adjust policy should incoming data point     |


## Page_15_Table_1


| to a materially weaker outlook for the economy. Presi-     |
|------------------------------------------------------------|
| dent Rosengren dissented because he judged that mon-       |
| etary policy was already accommodative. In his view,       |
| additional accommodation was not needed for an econ-       |
| omy in which labor markets are already tight and could     |
| pose risks of further inflating the prices of risky assets |
| and encouraging households and firms to take on too        |
| much leverage.                                             |


## Page_17_Table_1


|                   | 2202       | 1.2–6.1 2.4–3.3 2.2–8.1 2.2–8.1
1.2–7.1 1.2–5.1 1.4–3.3 2.4–3.3 3.2–8.1 2.2–9.1 3.2–8.1 2.2–8.1
3.2–7.1 3.2–5.1 0.4–3.3 0.4–3.3 1.2–7.1 1.2–8.1 1.2–7.1 1.2–8.1
4.2–1.2 4.2–0.2 8.3–5.3 8.3–5.3 7.1–4.1 7.1–4.1 8.1–6.1 8.1–4.1   | 9.2–6.1
6.2–6.1 1.3–9.1
4.2–6.1 1.3–9.1
1.2–6.1 6.2–9.1   |
|-------------------|------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
|                   | 1202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                           |
|                   | 0202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                           |
|                   | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                           |
| 2ycnedneT
lartneC | regnoL
nur | 0.2–8.1 0.2–8.1 3.4–0.4 4.4–0.4
0.2 0.2                                                                                                                                                                                           | 8.2–5.2 0.3–5.2                                           |
|                   | 2202       | 0.2–7.1 0.4–7.3 2.2–0.2 2.2–0.2
0.2–8.1 0.2–8.1 9.3–6.3 0.4–6.3 1.2–0.2 1.2–0.2
0.2 0.2
1.2–8.1 2.2–8.1 8.3–6.3 9.3–5.3 0.2–8.1 0.2–9.1 0.2–9.1 0.2–9.1
3.2–1.2 2.2–0.2 7.3–6.3 7.3–6.3 6.1–5.1 6.1–5.1 8.1–7.1 8.1–7.1           | 6.2–9.1
4.2–6.1 6.2–9.1
1.2–6.1 4.2–9.1
1.2–6.1 4.2–9.1   |
|                   | 1202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                           |
|                   | 0202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                           |
|                   | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                           |
| 1naideM           | regnoL
nur | 9.1 9.1 2.4 2.4 0.2 0.2                                                                                                                                                                                                           | 5.2 5.2                                                   |
|                   | 2202       | 8.1 9.3 0.2 0.2
9.1 8.1 8.3 8.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
0.2 0.2 7.3 7.3 9.1 9.1 9.1 9.1
2.2 1.2 7.3 6.3 5.1 5.1 8.1 8.1                                                                                                                   | 4.2
1.2 4.2
9.1 1.2
9.1 4.2                               |
|                   | 1202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                           |
|                   | 0202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                           |
|                   | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                           |


## Page_18_Table_1


| Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections
3
Actual
2
1
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Longer
run   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Percent
Unemployment rate
7
6
5
4
3
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Longer
run                                                                                  |
| Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Longer
run                                                                                          |
| Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Longer
run                                                                                     |


## Page_18_Table_2


| Chang   | e in r          | eal GD            | P             |         |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|---------|-----------------|-------------------|---------------|---------|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
| C       | Median
entral t | of projec
endency | tions
of proj | ections |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| R       | ange of         | project           | ions          |         |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|         | Actual          |                   |               |         |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |


## Page_18_Table_3


|    |      |       |        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | P   |    |
|----|------|-------|--------|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|-----|----|
|    | Unem | ploym | ent ra | te |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |    |


## Page_18_Table_4


|       |         |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | P   |
|-------|---------|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|-----|
| PCE i | nflatio | n  |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |


## Page_18_Table_5


|      |        |        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | P   |
|------|--------|--------|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|-----|
| Core | PCE in | flatio | n  |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |


## Page_21_Table_1


| Number of participants
2019
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4− 1.6− 1.8− 2.0− 2.2− 2.4−
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4− 1.6− 1.8− 2.0− 2.2− 2.4−
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range                                          |
| Number of participants
2021
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4− 1.6− 1.8− 2.0− 2.2− 2.4−
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range                                          |
| Number of participants
2022
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4− 1.6− 1.8− 2.0− 2.2− 2.4−
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range                                          |
| Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4− 1.6− 1.8− 2.0− 2.2− 2.4−
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range                                    |


## Page_21_Table_2


|    | 2019   |       |                |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|----|--------|-------|----------------|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
|    |        | Septe | mber projectio | ns |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|    | June p |       | rojections     |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |


## Page_22_Table_1


| Number of participants
2019
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.2− 3.4− 3.6− 3.8− 4.0− 4.2− 4.4− 4.6−
3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7
Percent range   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.2− 3.4− 3.6− 3.8− 4.0− 4.2− 4.4− 4.6−
3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7
Percent range                                          |
| Number of participants
2021
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.2− 3.4− 3.6− 3.8− 4.0− 4.2− 4.4− 4.6−
3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7
Percent range                                          |
| Number of participants
2022
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.2− 3.4− 3.6− 3.8− 4.0− 4.2− 4.4− 4.6−
3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7
Percent range                                          |
| Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.2− 3.4− 3.6− 3.8− 4.0− 4.2− 4.4− 4.6−
3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7
Percent range                                    |


## Page_22_Table_2


|    | 2019   |    |    |             |            |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|----|--------|----|----|-------------|------------|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
|    |        |    |    | September p | rojections |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|    | J      |    |    | une project | ions       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |


## Page_23_Table_1


| Number of participants
2019
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3− 1.5− 1.7− 1.9− 2.1− 2.3−
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3− 1.5− 1.7− 1.9− 2.1− 2.3−
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range                                          |
| Number of participants
2021
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3− 1.5− 1.7− 1.9− 2.1− 2.3−
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range                                          |
| Number of participants
2022
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3− 1.5− 1.7− 1.9− 2.1− 2.3−
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range                                          |
| Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3− 1.5− 1.7− 1.9− 2.1− 2.3−
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range                                    |


## Page_23_Table_2


|    | 2019   |       |                |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|----|--------|-------|----------------|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
|    |        | Septe | mber projectio |    | ns |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|    | June p |       | rojections     |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |


## Page_24_Table_1


| Number of participants
2019
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3− 1.5− 1.7− 1.9− 2.1− 2.3−
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3− 1.5− 1.7− 1.9− 2.1− 2.3−
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range                                          |
| Number of participants
2021
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3− 1.5− 1.7− 1.9− 2.1− 2.3−
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range                                          |
| Number of participants
2022
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3− 1.5− 1.7− 1.9− 2.1− 2.3−
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range                                          |


## Page_24_Table_2


|    | 2019   |                |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|----|--------|----------------|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
|    | Septe  | mber projectio | ns |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|    | June p | rojections     |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |


## Page_25_Table_1


| Number of participants
2019
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.38− 1.63− 1.88− 2.13− 2.38− 2.63− 2.88− 3.13− 3.38−
1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62
Percent range   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.38− 1.63− 1.88− 2.13− 2.38− 2.63− 2.88− 3.13− 3.38−
1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62
Percent range                                          |
| Number of participants
2021
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.38− 1.63− 1.88− 2.13− 2.38− 2.63− 2.88− 3.13− 3.38−
1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62
Percent range                                          |
| Number of participants
2022
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.38− 1.63− 1.88− 2.13− 2.38− 2.63− 2.88− 3.13− 3.38−
1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62
Percent range                                          |
| Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.38− 1.63− 1.88− 2.13− 2.38− 2.63− 2.88− 3.13− 3.38−
1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62
Percent range                                    |


## Page_25_Table_2


|    | 2019   |    |    |           |             |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|----|--------|----|----|-----------|-------------|----|-----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
|    |        |    |    | Septemb   | er projecti |    | ons |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|    |        |    |    | June proj | ections     |    |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |


## Page_27_Table_1


| Chang   |    |    | e in rea   | l GDP   |          |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|---------|----|----|------------|---------|----------|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
| M       |    |    | edian      | of proj | ections  |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|         |    | 70 | % con      | fidenc  | e interv | al |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| A       |    |    | ctual      |         |          |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |


## Page_27_Table_3


|    | Uncertain
Se   | ty about
ptember p   | GDP gr
rojections   |    | owth   |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|----|----------------|----------------------|---------------------|----|--------|----|----|----|----|----|----|
|    | Ju             | ne projec            | tions               |    |        |    |    |    |    |    |    |


## Page_27_Table_4


|    | Risks to
Se   |    | GDP gro
ptember p   |    | wth
rojections   |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|----|---------------|----|---------------------|----|------------------|----|----|----|----|----|----|
|    | Ju            |    | ne projec           |    | tions            |    |    |    |    |    |    |


## Page_28_Table_1


|    | Unemp   | loyme   | nt rate   |          |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|----|---------|---------|-----------|----------|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
|    | M       | edian   | of proj   | ections  |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|    | 70      | % con   | fidenc    | e interv | al |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|    |         | Actual  |           |          |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |


## Page_28_Table_3


|    | Uncertain
Se   | ty about
ptember p   | the une
rojections   |    | mployme   |    | nt rate   |    |    |    |    |
|----|----------------|----------------------|----------------------|----|-----------|----|-----------|----|----|----|----|
|    | Ju             | ne projec            | tions                |    |           |    |           |    |    |    |    |


## Page_28_Table_4


|    | Risks to t
Se   |    | he unem
ptember p   |    | ploymen
rojections   |    | t rate   |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|----|-----------------|----|---------------------|----|----------------------|----|----------|----|----|----|----|----|----|
|    | Ju              |    | ne projec           |    | tions                |    |          |    |    |    |    |    |    |


## Page_29_Table_1


|          |               |         |          |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | Pe   |
|----------|---------------|---------|----------|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|------|
| PCE in
M | flation
edian | of proj | ections  |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |      |
| 70       | % con         | fidenc  | e interv | al |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |      |
| A        | ctual         |         |          |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |      |


## Page_29_Table_2


| Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation
September projections
June projections
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
Lower Broadly Higher
similar   | Number of participants
Risks to PCE inflation
September projections
June projections
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
downside balanced upside   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Number of participants                                                                                                                              | Number of participants                                                                                                                                                 |
| Uncertainty about core PCE inflation
September projections
June projections
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
Lower Broadly Higher
similar                     | Risks to core PCE inflation
September projections
June projections
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
downside balanced upside                     |


## Page_29_Table_3


|    | Uncertain
Se   | ty about
ptember p   | PCE inf
rojections   |    | lation   |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|----|----------------|----------------------|----------------------|----|----------|----|----|----|----|----|----|
|    | Ju             | ne projec            | tions                |    |          |    |    |    |    |    |    |


## Page_29_Table_4


|    | Risks to
Se   |    | PCE infl
ptember p   |    | ation
rojections   |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|----|---------------|----|----------------------|----|--------------------|----|----|----|----|----|----|
|    | Ju            |    | ne projec            |    | tions              |    |    |    |    |    |    |


## Page_29_Table_5


|    | Uncertain
Se   | ty about
ptember p   | core PC
rojections   |    | E inflati   |    | on   |    |    |    |    |
|----|----------------|----------------------|----------------------|----|-------------|----|------|----|----|----|----|
|    | Ju             | ne projec            | tions                |    |             |    |      |    |    |    |    |


## Page_29_Table_6


|    | Risks to c
Se   |    | ore PCE
ptember p   |    | inflatio
rojections   |    | n   |    |    |    |    |
|----|-----------------|----|---------------------|----|-----------------------|----|-----|----|----|----|----|
|    | Ju              |    | ne projec           |    | tions                 |    |     |    |    |    |    |


## Page_31_Table_1


| Federa   | l funds        | rate           |               |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|----------|----------------|----------------|---------------|-----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
| M        | idpoint        | of targ        | et rang       | e   |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| M
70     | edian o
% conf | f proje
idence | ctions
interv | al* |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| A        | ctual          |                |               |     |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |