# 20190619_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:39:15*
*Pages: 29, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
June 18–19, 2019
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Lorie K. Logan, Manager pro tem,3 System Open
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of Market Account
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, June 18, 2019, at Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,
10:30 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, June 19, 2019, Board of Governors
at 9:00 a.m.1
Matthew J. Eichner,4 Director, Division of Reserve
PRESENT: Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of
Jerome H. Powell, Chair Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of
John C. Williams, Vice Chair Financial Stability, Board of Governors
Michelle W. Bowman
Lael Brainard Jennifer J. Burns, Deputy Director, Division of
James Bullard Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors;
Richard H. Clarida Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of
Charles L. Evans Financial Stability, Board of Governors; Trevor A.
Esther L. George Reeve, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary
Randal K. Quarles Affairs, Board of Governors
Eric Rosengren
Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair, Office
Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kashkari, of Board Members, Board of Governors
Loretta J. Mester, and Michael Strine, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Joshua Gallin, Special Adviser to the Chair, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, and Mary C.
Daly, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Brian M. Doyle, Wendy E. Dunn,2 Joseph W. Gruber,
Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively Ellen E. Meade, and John M. Roberts, Special
Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members,
James A. Clouse, Secretary Board of Governors
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Board Members, Board of Governors
Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Shaghil Ahmed, Senior Associate Director, Division of
Steven B. Kamin, Economist International Finance, Board of Governors
Thomas Laubach, Economist
Stacey Tevlin, Economist Jane E. Ihrig and Don H. Kim, Senior Advisers,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors;
Rochelle M. Edge, Eric M. Engen, Anna Paulson, Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser, Division of
Christopher J. Waller, William Wascher, and Beth Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Anne Wilson,2 Associate Economists
1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the 3 In the absence of the manager, the Committee’s Rules of
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. Organization provide that the deputy manager acts as manager
2 Attended Tuesday session only. pro tem.
4 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan-
cial markets and open market operations.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Marnie Gillis DeBoer and Min Wei, Associate Andre Anderson, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Bank of Atlanta
Governors
David Altig and Kartik B. Athreya, Executive Vice
Christopher J. Gust,4 Deputy Associate Director, Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Richmond, respectively
Matteo Iacoviello and Paul R. Wood,2 Deputy
Associate Directors, Division of International Edward S. Knotek II, Paolo A. Pesenti, Mark L.J.
Finance, Board of Governors; Jeffrey D. Walker,4 Wright, and Nathaniel Wuerffel,4 Senior Vice
Deputy Associate Director, Division of Reserve Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland,
Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of New York, Minneapolis, and New York,
Governors respectively
Burcu Duygan-Bump, Andrew Figura, Glenn Follette, Roc Armenter, Patrick Dwyer,4 George A. Kahn,
Patrick E. McCabe, and Paul A. Smith, Assistant Giovanni Olivei, Rania Perry,4 Benedict Wensley,4
Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, and Patricia Zobel, Vice Presidents, Federal
Board of Governors; Laura Lipscomb,4 Zeynep Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, New York, Kansas
Senyuz,4 and Rebecca Zarutskie, Assistant City, Boston, New York, New York, and New
Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of York, respectively
Governors; Steve Spurry,4 Assistant Director,
Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of Gara Afonso4 and Scott Sherman,4 Assistant Vice
Governors Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Matthew Malloy,4 Section Chief, Division of Monetary Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau, Senior Research Advisor,
Affairs, Board of Governors Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Penelope A. Beattie,2 Assistant to the Secretary, Office Jim Dolmas, Senior Research Economist, Federal
of the Secretary, Board of Governors Reserve Bank of Dallas
Mark A. Carlson,4 Senior Economic Project Manager, Standing Repurchase Facility
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors The staff briefed the Committee on the possible role of
a standing fixed-rate repurchase agreement (repo) facility
Sean Savage, Senior Project Manager, Division of as part of the monetary policy implementation frame-
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors work; a facility of this type would allow counterparties
to obtain temporary liquidity at a fixed rate of interest
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of through repurchase transactions with the Federal Re-
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors serve involving their holdings of select securities eligible
for open market operations. The staff presentation
Heather A. Wiggins,4 Group Manager, Division of noted how such a facility could provide a backstop
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors against unusual spikes in the federal funds rate and other
money market rates and might also provide incentives
Maria Otoo, Principal Economist, Division of Research for banks to shift the composition of their portfolios of
and Statistics, Board of Governors; Lubomir liquid assets away from reserves and toward high-quality
Petrasek, Marcelo Rezende, and Francisco securities. Key design features for such a facility, includ-
Vazquez-Grande, Principal Economists, Division ing the fixed rate offered to counterparties, the set of
of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Patrice eligible counterparties, and the range of securities eligi-
Robitaille,2 Principal Economist, Division of ble to be placed at the facility, would influence the effec-
International Finance, Board of Governors tiveness of a facility in achieving either of these objec-
tives. The staff noted a number of considerations that
Donielle A. Winford, Information Management could arise in setting these design parameters, including
Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of potential repercussions in unsecured and secured fund-
Governors

--- Page 3 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_8_–_1_9,_ 2_0_1_9_________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
ing markets, the eligibility of counterparties in weak fi- could be an important factor determining whether a fa-
nancial condition, the potential that turning to such a fa- cility would significantly reduce banks’ demand for re-
cility could become stigmatized, and issues of a level serves in normal times.
playing field across different classes of counterparties.
In their discussion of key objectives for establishing a
Participants commented on a number of issues in con- repo facility, some participants raised questions about
nection with key design parameters for a repo facility. In whether such a facility is needed in an ample-reserves
terms of the setting of the facility’s fixed rate, many par- framework, noting that the current ample-reserves re-
ticipants acknowledged a tradeoff in determining the gime has provided good interest rate control. Other par-
level of the rate relative to other money market rates. ticipants commented on the potential benefits of such a
On the one hand, establishing the rate at a narrow spread facility as a way to enhance interest rate control in the
above money market rates would likely provide better current implementation regime or as a means to operate
interest rate control and could also be helpful in avoiding in the current implementation framework but with a sig-
stigma that can be associated with the use of standing nificantly smaller quantity of reserves than at present. A
lending facilities with fixed rates set well above the level couple of participants noted that a facility could damp
of money market rates. On the other hand, setting the volatility in repo rates. Several participants noted that a
rate close to the level of money market rates could result facility could possibly aid with multiple policy objectives.
in very sizable Federal Reserve operations on a daily ba-
A number of participants noted that the policy objec-
sis that could be viewed as disintermediating the activity
tives for a fixed-rate standing repo facility would have
of private entities in money markets.
implications for the appropriate design for the facility.
In considering the eligible set of counterparties for a Several participants recognized the need to carefully
repo facility, a number of participants noted that making evaluate possible parameter settings to guard against un-
the facility available only to primary dealers would likely intended consequences, including the potential for
imply that the effects of the facility would be most direct moral hazard or a more volatile Federal Reserve balance
on repo markets, while the influence on the federal sheet. In addition, several participants highlighted the
funds market would be only indirect. A couple of par- importance of evaluating whether other tools or initia-
ticipants noted that, particularly if banks were eligible tives could better achieve the desired goals. Overall, no
counterparties, it would be important for counterparties decisions were reached at this meeting; participants
of all sizes to have access to funding through the facility stated that additional work would be necessary to clearly
on the same terms. A few participants noted that a fa- define the objectives of such a facility and to evaluate its
cility could enhance financial stability by providing a potential net benefits.
means by which nonbank counterparties can readily ob-
Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar-
tain liquidity against their high-quality assets. A couple
ket Operations
of other participants noted ways that a repo facility could
The manager pro tem discussed developments in global
have unintended effects on financial stability; for exam-
financial markets over the intermeeting period. Trade-
ple, if reserves help support overall financial stability, a
related developments reportedly led many market partic-
facility that significantly reduced the demand for re-
ipants to take a more pessimistic view of the U.S. eco-
serves might not be beneficial.
nomic outlook. Equity prices and interest rates fell no-
Many participants commented on issues associated with ticeably after the announcement of higher tariffs on Chi-
the availability of such a facility to firms in different nese imports in early May and then again after news that
states of financial condition. Several thought there tariffs might be imposed on Mexican imports. In re-
should not be a guarantee of access to such a facility re- sponse to these developments, markets appeared to be-
gardless of a firm’s financial condition, while a number come more sensitive to incoming news about the out-
of others were willing to consider how such a facility look for global growth and inflation, including data that
could be structured to work effectively in a stressed en- pointed to a continued subdued inflation environment
vironment where high-quality liquid assets were used as and to slower economic growth in the United States and
collateral. A few participants noted that the availability abroad.
of the facility to banks during periods of stress, particu-
Treasury yields fell sharply and far-forward measures of
larly when they might be in weak financial condition,
inflation compensation dropped significantly in the
United States and abroad. Against this backdrop, mar-
ket participants reportedly viewed communications by

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Federal Reserve officials as signaling a greater likelihood Staff Review of the Economic Situation
of a cut in the target range for the federal funds rate later The information available for the June 18–19 meeting
in the year. The expected path of the federal funds rate indicated that labor market conditions remained strong.
embedded in futures prices shifted down significantly Real gross domestic product (GDP) appeared to be ris-
over the period. ing at a moderate rate in the second quarter, as house-
hold spending growth picked up from the weak first
In the euro area, far-forward measures of inflation com-
quarter while business fixed investment was soft. Con-
pensation fell noticeably, and market participants report-
sumer price inflation, as measured by the 12-month per-
edly increasingly came to believe that further monetary
centage change in the price index for personal consump-
policy accommodation would be needed. Late in the in-
tion expenditures (PCE), was below 2 percent in April.
termeeting period, remarks by European Central Bank
Survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expecta-
(ECB) President Draghi were interpreted as suggesting
tions were little changed.
increased odds of further asset purchases by the ECB.
Euro-area peripheral spreads to German equivalents Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded solidly, on
moved sharply lower, and far-forward inflation compen- average, in April and May; however, job gains slowed
sation recovered modestly. sharply in May after a strong increase in April. The un-
employment rate declined to 3.6 percent in April and re-
The manager pro tem turned next to a review of money
mained there in May, its lowest level in 50 years. The
market developments and Open Market Desk opera-
labor force participation rate moved down somewhat in
tions. Money market rates generally stabilized at mod-
April and held steady in May, remaining close to its av-
estly lower levels over the intermeeting period, likely re-
erage over the previous few years; the employment-to-
flecting both the technical adjustment in the interest on
population ratio stayed flat in April and May. The un-
excess reserves (IOER) rate following the May FOMC
employment rates for African Americans, Asians, and
meeting and a sizable increase in reserve balances asso-
Hispanics decreased, on net, over April and May and
ciated with a decline in balances held by the Treasury in
were below their levels at the end of the previous eco-
its account at the Federal Reserve. Market participants
nomic expansion, though persistent differentials in un-
reported seeing slightly more pass-through from repo
employment rates across groups remained. The average
rates to the federal funds rate on days with heightened
share of workers employed part time for economic rea-
firmness in repo rates. Market participants attributed re-
sons over April and May continued to be below the lows
cent increases in repo rates on month-end and mid-
reached in late 2007. The rate of private-sector job
month Treasury auction settlement dates in part to ele-
openings moved up in March and held steady in April,
vated net dealer inventories of Treasury securities, which
while the rate of quits was unchanged at a high level; the
dealers finance in the repo market.
four-week moving average of initial claims for unem-
Regarding open market operations over the period, ployment insurance benefits through early June was near
given the substantial decline in mortgage rates over re- historically low levels. Average hourly earnings for all
cent months and an associated increase in refinancing employees rose 3.1 percent over the 12 months ending
activity, principal payments on the Federal Reserve’s in May, slightly lower than in April but somewhat faster
holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) than a year earlier. Total labor compensation per hour
had recently moved somewhat above the $20 billion in the business sector increased 1.6 percent over the four
monthly redemption cap. As a result, the Desk began in quarters ending in the first quarter, slower than a year
May to reinvest agency MBS principal payments in ex- earlier.
cess of the cap. Based on current market rates and pre-
Total consumer prices, as measured by the PCE price
payment forecasts, the Desk expected to reinvest mod-
index, increased 1.5 percent over the 12 months ending
est amounts of agency MBS over the coming months
in April. This increase was slower than a year earlier, as
and possibly again in 2020, particularly during the sum-
core PCE price inflation (which excludes changes in
mer months.
consumer food and energy prices) moved down to
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s 1.6 percent, consumer food price inflation remained well
domestic transactions over the intermeeting period. below core inflation, and consumer energy price infla-
There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- tion slowed considerably to about the same rate as core
cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- inflation. The trimmed mean measure of PCE price in-
riod. flation constructed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dal-

--- Page 5 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_8_–_1_9,_ 2_0_1_9_________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
las was 2.0 percent over that 12-month period. The con- level of shipments, readings on business sentiment dete-
sumer price index (CPI) rose 1.8 percent over the riorated further, and analysts’ expectations of firms’
12 months ending in May, while core CPI inflation was longer-term profit growth moved down sharply. Nom-
2.0 percent. The monthly change in core PCE prices in inal business expenditures for nonresidential structures
April and the staff’s estimate of the change in May— outside of the drilling and mining sector decreased in
based on the CPI data and the relevant prices from the April, and the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs
producer price index—were higher in both of these in operation—an indicator of business spending for
months than the very low readings seen in January structures in the drilling and mining sector—continued
through March. Recent survey-based measures of to decline through mid-June.
longer-run inflation expectations were little changed on
Industrial production moved down in April and picked
balance. While measures from the Desk’s Survey of Pri-
up in May, leaving output about flat over those two
mary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants were lit-
months, but production was lower than at the beginning
tle changed, the preliminary June reading from the Uni-
of the year. Manufacturing output declined, on net, over
versity of Michigan Surveys of Consumers dropped sig-
April and May, although mining output expanded. Au-
nificantly to below its range in recent years.
tomakers’ assembly schedules suggested that the pro-
Growth in real consumer expenditures appeared to pick duction of light motor vehicles would move up in the
up to a solid rate in the second quarter from its weak near term, but new orders indexes from national and re-
first-quarter pace. The components of the nominal retail gional manufacturing surveys pointed to continued soft
sales data used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis to total factory output in the coming months. Moreover,
estimate PCE increased in May, and the retail sales data industry news indicated that aircraft production would
for the previous two months were revised up notably. continue to be slow in the near term.
Sales of light motor vehicles rose sharply in May after
Total real government purchases appeared to be rising
stepping down in April. Key factors that influence con-
solidly in the second quarter. Federal government pur-
sumer spending—including a low unemployment rate,
chases were being boosted by strong increases in defense
further gains in real disposable income, and still elevated
spending through May and the return of nondefense
measures of households’ net worth—were supportive of
purchases to more typical levels after the partial federal
solid real PCE growth in the near term. In addition, the
government shutdown in the first quarter. Real pur-
Michigan survey measure of consumer sentiment edged
chases by state and local governments seemed to be ris-
down in the preliminary June reading but was still at an
ing modestly; total payrolls of these governments edged
upbeat level.
down over April and May, but nominal state and local
Real residential investment in the second quarter looked construction spending expanded notably in April.
to be continuing the decline seen earlier in the year, al-
Net exports added substantially to real GDP growth in
beit at a slower rate. Starts of new single-family homes
the first quarter, as exports increased robustly and im-
rose in April but fell back in May, while starts of multi-
ports fell. After widening in March, the nominal trade
family units increased over both months. Building per-
deficit narrowed in April; even though exports declined,
mit issuance for new single-family homes—which tends
imports declined by more. The available data suggested
to be a good indicator of the underlying trend in con-
that net exports would be a small drag on real GDP
struction of such homes—was at roughly the same level
growth in the second quarter.
in May as its first-quarter average. Sales of new homes
fell notably in April after a marked gain in March, and Growth in the foreign economies remained subdued in
existing home sales edged down in April. the first quarter, as soft growth in the Canadian economy
and weakness in several emerging market economies
Real nonresidential private fixed investment appeared
(EMEs) offset somewhat stronger growth in other ad-
soft in the second quarter. Real private expenditures for
vanced foreign economies (AFEs) and in China’s econ-
business equipment and intellectual property looked to
omy. Recent indicators suggested that the pace of eco-
be roughly flat, as nominal shipments of nondefense
nomic activity picked up in Canada in the second quarter
capital goods excluding aircraft moved sideways in April.
but slowed in some other AFEs. Economic growth also
Forward-looking indicators of business equipment
appeared to have slowed in China. Foreign inflation re-
spending pointed to possible decreases in the near term.
mained subdued but rose a bit from lows earlier in the
Orders for nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft
year, in part reflecting higher retail energy prices in many
declined notably in April and continued to be below the
economies.

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Staff Review of the Financial Situation month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index—
Investors’ concerns about downside risks to the eco- the VIX—increased over the period, and corporate
nomic outlook weighed on financial markets over the in- credit spreads widened.
termeeting period. Market participants cited negative
Conditions in short-term funding markets remained sta-
news about international trade tensions and, to a lesser
ble over the intermeeting period. Overnight interest
extent, soft U.S. and foreign economic data as factors
rates in short-term funding markets declined in response
that contributed to these developments. Nominal
to the technical adjustment that reduced the IOER rate
Treasury yields posted notable declines and the expected
5 basis points to 2.35 percent after the May FOMC
path of policy shifted down considerably over the pe-
meeting. The average of the effective federal funds rate
riod. Equity prices declined, on net, and corporate bond
over the period was about 6 basis points below the level
spreads widened. However, financing conditions for
just before the May FOMC meeting, well within the
businesses and households generally remained support-
FOMC’s target range. Rates on commercial paper and
ive of economic growth.
negotiable certificates of deposit also declined some-
FOMC communications following the May meeting had what.
little net effect on yields, though they rose modestly fol-
Escalation of trade tensions and soft economic data also
lowing the Chair’s press conference. Later in the period,
weighed on foreign financial markets. Most major global
the expected path of policy moved down, partly in re-
equity price indexes declined, on net, and EME sover-
sponse to incoming information pointing to a weaker
eign spreads widened modestly. In the AFEs, policy ex-
economic outlook. The market-implied probability for
pectations and sovereign yields declined notably, in part
a 25 basis point cut in the target range for the federal
reflecting more-accommodative monetary policy com-
funds rate by the July FOMC meeting rose to about
munications by major central banks.
85 percent. The market-implied path for the federal
funds rate for 2019 and 2020 shifted down markedly. The broad dollar index rose a bit over the intermeeting
Based on overnight index swap rates, investors expected period. The Japanese yen and Swiss franc, which are
the federal funds rate to decline about 60 basis points by viewed as safe-haven currencies, appreciated against the
the end of this year—a downward revision of 40 basis dollar. The British pound depreciated amid increased
points over the intermeeting period. uncertainty around Brexit. Increased trade tensions con-
tributed to some depreciation of the Chinese renminbi.
Longer-term Treasury yields fell considerably over the
The value of the Mexican peso against the dollar fluctu-
period, with the declines driven primarily by negative
ated in response to announcements related to potential
headlines about trade tensions between the United States
tariffs on imports from Mexico but ended the period
and two major trading partners, China and Mexico.
only slightly lower.
Softer-than-expected domestic economic news, such as
the weaker-than-expected employment data, also con- Financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses contin-
tributed to the declines. The spread between 10-year ued to be accommodative overall. Gross issuance of
and 3-month Treasury yields fell to the bottom decile of corporate bonds was strong in May following a spell of
its distribution since 1971. Measures of inflation com- seasonal weakness in April. The credit quality of nonfi-
pensation derived from Treasury Inflation-Protected Se- nancial corporations remained solid, as the volume of
curities also decreased notably over the period along nonfinancial corporate bond upgrades outpaced that of
with declines in oil prices. downgrades in May. Issuance in the institutional syndi-
cated leveraged loan market was subdued in April but
Major U.S. equity price indexes declined, on net, over
rebounded in May, reflecting strong issuance beyond
the intermeeting period. Equity prices fell notably over
that associated with refinancing of maturing leveraged
the first few weeks of the period, primarily in response
loans. Meanwhile, commercial and industrial lending
to the escalation of trade tensions with China and Mex-
slowed somewhat in April and May after a period of
ico. Firms with high China exposure and those in cycli-
stronger growth in the first quarter. Small business
cal sectors—such as energy, information technology, in-
credit market conditions were little changed, and credit
dustrials, communication services, and banks—posted
conditions in municipal bond markets stayed accommo-
particularly large losses. However, later in the period,
dative on net.
stock prices regained a significant portion of their losses
amid an easing of trade tensions with Mexico and expec- In the commercial real estate (CRE) sector, financing
tations of a more accommodative stance of policy. One- conditions continued to be generally accommodative.

--- Page 7 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_8_–_1_9,_ 2_0_1_9_________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
Commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) projected employment gains would manifest in smaller-
spreads widened slightly over the intermeeting period than-usual downward pressure on the unemployment
but remained near the low end of their post-crisis range. rate and in larger-than-usual upward pressure on the la-
Issuance of agency and non-agency CMBS was solid in bor force participation rate.
May, and CRE lending by banks expanded in April and
The staff’s forecast for inflation was little changed on
May at a slower rate than in the first quarter.
balance. The forecast for total PCE price inflation this
Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market year was revised down somewhat, reflecting a lower
also remained supportive over the intermeeting period. near-term projection for energy prices. The core infla-
Home mortgage rates decreased about 40 basis points. tion forecast for this year was unchanged at a level below
Since last November, mortgage rates had declined more 2 percent. Both total and core inflation were projected
than 1 percentage point, contributing to an increase in to move up slightly next year, as the low readings early
home-purchase mortgage originations to the solid levels this year were expected to be transitory, but nevertheless
seen in 2017. to continue to run below 2 percent.
Financing conditions in consumer credit markets were The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections
little changed in recent months and remained generally for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla-
supportive of household spending, although the supply tion as generally similar to the average of the past
of credit to consumers with subprime credit scores con- 20 years, although uncertainty was seen to have in-
tinued to be tight. Consumer credit expanded at a mod- creased since the previous forecast. Moreover, the staff
erate pace in the first quarter, with bank credit data also judged that the risks to the forecast for real GDP
pointing to a pickup in April and May. Conditions in the growth had tilted to the downside, with a skew to the
consumer asset-backed securities market remained sta- upside for the unemployment rate. The increased un-
ble over the intermeeting period, with robust issuance certainty and shift to downside risks around the projec-
and spreads that were little changed at low levels. tion reflected the staff’s assessment that international
trade tensions and foreign economic developments
Staff Economic Outlook
seemed more likely to move in directions that could have
The projection for U.S. economic activity prepared by
significant negative effects on the U.S. economy than to
the staff for the June FOMC meeting was revised down
resolve more favorably than assumed. With the risks to
somewhat on balance. Real GDP growth was forecast
the forecast for economic activity tilted to the downside,
to slow to a moderate rate in the second quarter and
the risks to the inflation projection were also viewed as
move down to a more modest pace in the second half of
having a downward skew.
the year, primarily reflecting a more downbeat near-term
outlook for business fixed investment. The projection Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
for real GDP growth over the medium term was little Economic Outlook
changed, as the effects of a higher projected path for the Participants judged that uncertainties and downside risks
broad real dollar and lower trajectory for foreign eco- surrounding the economic outlook had increased signif-
nomic growth were largely counterbalanced by a lower icantly over recent weeks. While they continued to view
projected path for interest rates. Real GDP was forecast a sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor
to expand at a rate a little above the staff’s estimate of market conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s
potential output growth in 2019 and 2020 and then slow symmetric 2 percent objective as the most likely out-
to a pace slightly below potential output growth in 2021. comes, many participants attached significant odds to
The unemployment rate was projected to be roughly flat scenarios with less favorable outcomes.5 Moreover,
through 2021 and remain below the staff’s estimate of nearly all participants in their submissions to the Sum-
its longer-run natural rate. With labor market conditions mary of Economic Projections (SEP), had revised down
judged to be tight, the staff continued to assume that their assessment of the appropriate path of the federal
5 In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of the for the federal funds rate. The longer-run projections repre-
Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank presidents sented each participant’s assessment of the rate to which each
submitted their projections of the most likely outcomes for variable would be expected to converge, over time, under ap-
real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for propriate monetary policy and in the absence of further
each year from 2019 through 2021 and over the longer run, shocks to the economy. These projections and policy assess-
based on their individual assessments of the appropriate path ments are described in the Summary of Economic Projec-
tions, which is an addendum to these minutes.

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
funds rate over the projection period that would be con- that consumer spending had rebounded from the weak
sistent with their modal economic outlook. Many par- patch earlier in the year. Several participants, however,
ticipants noted that, since the Committee’s previous noted that tariffs could eventually become a drag on
meeting, the economy appeared to have lost some mo- consumer durables spending, especially if additional tar-
mentum and pointed to a number of factors supporting iffs on consumer goods were imposed, and that they
that view including recent weak indicators for business would be monitoring incoming data for signs of this ef-
confidence, business spending and manufacturing activ- fect. A couple of participants noted that the continued
ity; trade developments; and signs of slowing global eco- softness in the housing sector was a concern, even
nomic growth. Many participants noted that they though the decline in mortgage rates since last fall was
viewed the risks to their growth and inflation projec- expected to provide stronger impetus for activity; a cou-
tions, such as those emanating from greater uncertainty ple of participants were somewhat optimistic that resi-
about trade, as shifting notably over recent weeks and dential investment would pick up.
that risks were now weighted to the downside.
In their discussion of the labor market, participants cited
Participants discussed at some length the softness in var- evidence that conditions remained strong, including the
ious indicators of business fixed investment in the sec- very low unemployment rate and the fact that job gains
ond quarter. Incoming data on shipments and orders of had been solid, on average, in recent months. That said,
new capital goods looked weak and recent readings from job gains in May were weaker than expected and, in light
some manufacturing surveys had dropped sharply. Pri- of other developments, participants judged that it would
vate sector analysts had marked down their forecasts for be important to closely monitor incoming data for any
longer-term corporate profit growth. Manufacturing signs of softening in labor market conditions. Reports
production had posted declines so far this year. In addi- from business contacts pointed to continued strong la-
tion, contacts reported that softer export sales, weaker bor demand, with many firms planning to hire more
economic activity abroad, and elevated levels of uncer- workers. Economy-wide wage growth was seen as being
tainty regarding the global outlook were weighing on broadly consistent with modest average rates of labor
business sentiment and leading firms to reassess plans productivity growth in recent years. However, a few par-
for investment spending. Several participants noted ticipants noted that there were limited signs of upward
comments from business contacts reporting that their pressure on wage inflation. A few participants cited the
base case now assumed that uncertainties about the combination of muted inflation pressures, moderate
global outlook would remain prominent over the me- wage growth, and expanding employment as a possible
dium term and would continue to act as a drag on in- indication that some slack remained in the labor market.
vestment. Several participants also noted reports from Partly reflecting that combination of developments, sev-
some business contacts in the manufacturing sector sug- eral participants had revised down their SEP estimates
gesting that they were putting capital expenditures or hir- of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment.
ing plans on hold and were reevaluating their global sup-
Participants noted that readings on overall inflation and
ply chains in light of trade uncertainties. A couple of
inflation for items other than food and energy had come
participants, however, pointed to signs that investment
in lower than expected over recent months. In light of
might pick up, including reports from some contacts
recent softer inflation readings, perceptions of downside
that their orders and shipments remained strong and that
risks to growth, and global disinflationary pressures,
some contacts planned to hire more workers. A few par-
many participants viewed the risks to the outlook for in-
ticipants also noted ongoing challenges in the agricul-
flation as weighted to the downside. Several participants
tural sector, including those associated with increased
indicated that, while headline inflation had been close to
trade uncertainty, weak export markets, wet weather, and
2 percent last year, it was noteworthy that inflation had
severe flooding. A few participants remarked on the de-
softened this year despite continued strong labor market
cline in energy prices and the associated reduction in ac-
conditions. Participants generally noted that they re-
tivity in the energy sector.
vised down their SEP projections of inflation for the
In their discussion of the household sector, participants current year in light of recent data. They still anticipated
noted that available data on consumer spending had that the overall rate of inflation would firm somewhat
been solid, supported by a strong labor market and rising and move up to the Committee’s longer-run symmetric
incomes. Several participants also noted that measures objective of 2 percent over the next few years. Con-
of consumer sentiment remained upbeat, and a couple sistent with that view, several participants commented
noted that their business contacts confirmed the view that alternative measures of inflation that removed the

--- Page 9 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_8_–_1_9,_ 2_0_1_9_________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
influence of unusually large changes in the prices of in- months. Many participants noted that the spread be-
dividual items in either direction were running around tween the 10-year and 3-month Treasury yields was now
2 percent. However, a number of participants antici- negative, and several noted that their assessment of the
pated that the return to 2 percent would take longer than risk of a slowing in the economic expansion had in-
previously projected even with an assumed path for the creased based on either the shape of the yield curve or
federal funds rate that was lower than in their previous other financial and economic indicators. A few partici-
projections. pants pointed to the growth in debt issuance by nonfi-
nancial corporations and still generally high asset valua-
In their discussion of indicators of inflation expecta-
tions as developments that warranted continued moni-
tions, participants generally observed that market-based
toring.
measures of inflation compensation had declined and
were at low levels. Some participants also noted that re- In their discussion of monetary policy decisions at this
cent readings on some survey measures of consumers’ meeting, participants noted that, under their baseline
inflation expectations had declined or stood at histori- outlook, the labor market was likely to remain strong
cally low levels. Many participants further noted that with economic activity growing at a moderate pace.
longer-term inflation expectations could be somewhat However, they judged that the risks and uncertainties
below levels consistent with the Committee’s 2 percent surrounding their outlooks, particularly those related to
inflation objective, or that the continued weakness in in- the global economic outlook, had intensified in recent
flation could prompt expectations to slip further. These weeks. Moreover, inflation continued to run below the
developments might make it more difficult to achieve Committee’s 2 percent objective; similarly, inflation for
their inflation objective on a sustained basis. However, items other than food and energy had remained below
several participants remarked that inflation expectations 2 percent as well. In addition, some readings on infla-
appeared to be at levels consistent with the Committee’s tion expectations had been low. The increase in risks
2 percent inflation objective. and uncertainties surrounding the outlook was quite re-
cent and nearly all participants agreed that it would be
Participants generally agreed that downside risks to the
appropriate to maintain the current target range for the
outlook for economic activity had risen materially since
federal funds rate at 2¼ to 2½ percent at this meeting.
their May meeting, particularly those associated with on-
However, they noted that it would be important to mon-
going trade negotiations and slowing economic growth
itor the implications of incoming information and global
abroad. Other downside risks cited by several partici-
economic developments for the U.S. economic outlook.
pants included the possibility that federal budget negoti-
A couple of participants favored a cut in the target range
ations could result in a sharp reduction in government
at this meeting, judging that a prolonged period with in-
spending or that negotiations to raise the federal debt
flation running below 2 percent warranted a more ac-
limit could be prolonged. A couple of participants ob-
commodative policy response to firmly center inflation
served that an economic deterioration in the United
and inflation expectations around the Committee’s sym-
States, if it occurred, might be amplified by significant
metric 2 percent objective.
debt burdens for many firms. A few participants re-
marked that an upside risk to the outlook for economic With regard to the outlook for monetary policy beyond
activity and inflation included a scenario in which trade this meeting, nearly all participants had revised down
negotiations were resolved favorably and business senti- their assessment of the appropriate path for the federal
ment rebounded sharply. funds rate over the projection period in their SEP sub-
missions, and some had marked down their estimates of
In their discussion of financial developments, partici-
the longer-run normal level of the funds rate as well.
pants observed that the increase in uncertainty sur-
Many participants indicated that the case for somewhat
rounding the global outlook had affected risk sentiment
more accommodative policy had strengthened. Partici-
in financial markets. While overall financial conditions
pants widely noted that the global developments that led
remained supportive of growth, those conditions ap-
to the heightened uncertainties about the economic out-
peared to be premised importantly on expectations that
look were quite recent. Many judged additional mone-
the Federal Reserve would ease policy in the near term
tary policy accommodation would be warranted in the
to help offset the drag on economic growth stemming
near term should these recent developments prove to be
from uncertainties about the global outlook and other
sustained and continue to weigh on the economic out-
downside risks. Participants also discussed the decline
look. Several others noted that additional monetary pol-
in yields on longer-term Treasury securities in recent

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
icy accommodation could well be appropriate if incom- continued to support the outlook for consumer spend-
ing information showed further deterioration in the out- ing, uncertainties and risks regarding the global outlook
look. Participants stated a variety of reasons that would appeared to be contributing to a deterioration in risk
call for a lower path of the federal funds rate. Several sentiment in financial markets and a decline in business
participants noted that a near-term cut in the target range confidence that pointed to a weaker outlook for business
for the federal funds rate could help cushion the effects investment in the United States. Inflation pressures re-
of possible future adverse shocks to the economy and, mained muted and some readings on inflation expecta-
hence, was appropriate policy from a risk-management tions were at low levels. Although nearly all members
perspective. Some participants also noted that the con- agreed to maintain the target range for the federal funds
tinued shortfall in inflation risked a softening of inflation rate at 2¼ to 2½ percent at this meeting, they generally
expectations that could slow the sustained return of in- agreed that risks and uncertainties surrounding the eco-
flation to the Committee’s 2 percent objective. Several nomic outlook had intensified and many judged that ad-
participants pointed out that they had revised down their ditional policy accommodation would be warranted if
estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemploy- they continued to weigh on the economic outlook. One
ment and, as a result, saw a smaller upward contribution member preferred to lower the target range for the fed-
to inflation pressures from tight resource utilization than eral funds rate by 25 basis points at this meeting, stating
they had earlier. A few participants were concerned that that the Committee should ease policy at this meeting to
inflation expectations had already moved below levels re-center inflation and inflation expectations at the
consistent with the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective.
objective and that it was important to provide additional
Members agreed that in determining the timing and size
accommodation in the near term to bolster inflation ex-
of future adjustments to the target range for the federal
pectations. A few participants judged that allowing in-
funds rate, the Committee would assess realized and ex-
flation to run above 2 percent for some time could help
pected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s
strengthen the credibility of the Committee’s commit-
maximum-employment and symmetric 2 percent infla-
ment to its symmetric 2 percent inflation objective.
tion objectives. They reiterated that this assessment
Some participants suggested that although they now would take into account a wide range of information, in-
judged that the appropriate path of the federal funds rate cluding measures of labor market conditions, indicators
would follow a flatter trajectory than they had previously of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and
assumed, there was not yet a strong case for a rate cut readings on financial and international developments.
from current levels. They preferred to gather more in- More generally, members noted that decisions regarding
formation on the trajectory of the economy before con- near-term adjustments of the stance of monetary policy
cluding that a change in policy stance is warranted. A would appropriately remain dependent on the implica-
few participants expressed the view that with the econ- tions of incoming information for the economic out-
omy still in a favorable position in terms of the dual look.
mandate, an easing of policy in an attempt to increase
With regard to the postmeeting statement, members
inflation a few tenths of a percentage point risked over-
agreed to several adjustments in the description of the
heating the labor markets and fueling financial imbal-
economic situation, including a revision in the descrip-
ances. Several participants observed that the trimmed
tion of market-based measures of inflation compensa-
mean measure of PCE price inflation constructed by the
tion to recognize the recent fall in inflation compensa-
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas had stayed near 2 per-
tion. The Committee retained the characterization of
cent recently, underscoring the view that the recent low
the most likely outcomes as “sustained expansion of
readings on inflation will prove transitory.
economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and
Committee Policy Action inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob-
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period jective” but added a clause to emphasize that uncertain-
ahead, members noted the significant increase in risks ties about this outlook had increased. In describing the
and uncertainties attending the economic outlook. monetary policy outlook, members agreed to remove the
There were signs of weakness in U.S. business spending, “patient” language and to emphasize instead that, in light
and foreign economic data were generally disappointing, of these uncertainties and muted inflation pressures, the
raising concerns about the strength of global economic Committee would closely monitor the implications of in-
growth. While strong labor markets and rising incomes coming information for the economic outlook and
would act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with

--- Page 11 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_8_–_1_9,_ 2_0_1_9________________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
a strong labor market and inflation near its symmetric spending appears to have picked up from earlier
2 percent objective. in the year, indicators of business fixed invest-
ment have been soft. On a 12-month basis,
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
overall inflation and inflation for items other
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
than food and energy are running below 2 per-
of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute
cent. Market-based measures of inflation com-
transactions in the System Open Market Account in ac-
pensation have declined; survey-based measures
cordance with the following domestic policy directive, to
of longer-term inflation expectations are little
be released at 2:00 p.m.:
changed.
“Effective June 20, 2019, the Federal Open
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
Market Committee directs the Desk to under-
mittee seeks to foster maximum employment
take open market operations as necessary to
and price stability. In support of these goals,
maintain the federal funds rate in a target range
the Committee decided to maintain the target
of 2¼ to 2½ percent, including overnight re-
range for the federal funds rate at 2¼ to
verse repurchase operations (and reverse repur-
2½ percent. The Committee continues to view
chase operations with maturities of more than
sustained expansion of economic activity,
one day when necessary to accommodate week-
strong labor market conditions, and inflation
end, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at
near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob-
an offering rate of 2.25 percent, in amounts lim-
jective as the most likely outcomes, but uncer-
ited only by the value of Treasury securities held
tainties about this outlook have increased. In
outright in the System Open Market Account
light of these uncertainties and muted inflation
that are available for such operations and by a
pressures, the Committee will closely monitor
per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day.
the implications of incoming information for
The Committee directs the Desk to continue the economic outlook and will act as appropri-
rolling over at auction the amount of principal ate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor
payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings market and inflation near its symmetric 2 per-
of Treasury securities maturing during each cal- cent objective.
endar month that exceeds $15 billion, and to
In determining the timing and size of future ad-
continue reinvesting in agency mortgage-
justments to the target range for the federal
backed securities the amount of principal pay-
funds rate, the Committee will assess realized
ments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of
and expected economic conditions relative to its
agency debt and agency mortgage-backed secu-
maximum employment objective and its sym-
rities received during each calendar month that
metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as-
exceeds $20 billion. Small deviations from
sessment will take into account a wide range of
these amounts for operational reasons are ac-
information, including measures of labor mar-
ceptable.
ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures
The Committee also directs the Desk to engage and inflation expectations, and readings on fi-
in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as nancial and international developments.”
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal
Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C.
Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities
Williams, Michelle W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard
transactions.”
H. Clarida, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, Randal
The vote also encompassed approval of the statement
K. Quarles, and Eric Rosengren.
below to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
Voting against this action: James Bullard.
“Information received since the Federal Open
Market Committee met in May indicates that Mr. Bullard dissented because he believed that the cur-
the labor market remains strong and that eco- rent stance of monetary policy could be better posi-
nomic activity is rising at a moderate rate. Job tioned to foster progress toward the Committee’s statu-
gains have been solid, on average, in recent tory objectives of maximum employment and stable
months, and the unemployment rate has re- prices. Particularly in light of persistent low readings on
mained low. Although growth of household inflation and from indicators of inflation expectations

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
along with the risks to the U.S. outlook associated with tegic review of monetary policy strategy, tools, and com-
global economic developments, he noted that a policy munications. Additional Fed Listens events were
rate reduction at the current meeting would help re-cen- planned over the remainder of the year. The Committee
ter inflation and inflation expectations at levels con- was likely to begin internal deliberations on aspects of
sistent with the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent infla- the strategic review over coming FOMC meetings.
tion objective and simultaneously provide some insur-
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
ance against unexpected developments that could slow
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, July 30–31,
U.S. economic growth.
2019. The meeting adjourned at 10:05 a.m. on June 19,
Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the 2019.
target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the
Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in- Notation Vote
terest rates on required and excess reserve balances un- By notation vote completed on May 21, 2019, the Com-
changed at 2.35 percent and voted unanimously to ap- mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com-
prove establishment of the primary credit rate at the ex- mittee meeting held on April 30–May 1, 2019.
isting level of 3.00 percent, effective June 20, 2019.
Update from Subcommittee on Communications
Governor Clarida provided a brief update on the work
of the subcommittee on communications. The Fed Lis- _______________________
tens conferences conducted to date were viewed as suc- James A. Clouse
cessful in identifying many important issues for the stra- Secretary

--- Page 13 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- slightly above the Committee’s 2 percent objective in
tee (FOMC) meeting held on June 18–19, 2019, meeting 2021. Core PCE price inflation was also expected to in-
participants submitted their projections of the most crease over the projection period, rising to 2.0 percent in
likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) 2021. Table 1 and figure 1 provide summary statistics
growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each for the projections.
year from 2019 to 2021 and over the longer run. Each
As shown in figure 2, just over half of the participants
participant’s projections were based on information
expected that the evolution of the economy, relative to
available at the time of the meeting, together with his or
their objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent
her assessment of appropriate monetary policy—includ-
inflation, would likely warrant keeping the federal funds
ing a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-run
rate at or slightly above its current level through the end
value—and assumptions about other factors likely to af-
of 2019; almost half projected that a lower level for the
fect economic outcomes. The longer-run projections
federal funds rate would be appropriate by year-end.
represent each participant’s assessment of the value to
The median of participants’ assessments of the appro-
which each variable would be expected to converge, over
priate level of the federal funds rate at the end of the
time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the ab-
projection period was close to the median of their as-
sence of further shocks to the economy.1 “Appropriate
sessments of the longer-run federal funds rate level.
monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy
Nearly all participants lowered their projections for the
that each participant deems most likely to foster out-
appropriate level of the federal funds rate, relative to
comes for economic activity and inflation that best sat-
March, at some point in the forecast period. The medi-
isfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory
ans for the federal funds rate for 2020 and 2021 were
mandate to promote maximum employment and price
50 basis points and 25 basis points lower than in March,
stability.
respectively. The median of projections for the long-run
Participants who submitted longer-run projections gen- normal level of the federal funds rate was 25 basis points
erally expected that, under appropriate monetary policy, lower than in the March projections.
growth of real GDP in 2019 would run at or somewhat
Most participants regarded the uncertainties around
above their individual estimates of its longer-run rate.
their forecasts for GDP growth, total inflation, and core
Thereafter, almost all participants expected real GDP
inflation as broadly similar to the average of the past
growth to edge down, with the vast majority of partici-
20 years. About half of the participants viewed the level
pants projecting growth in 2021 to be at or below their
of uncertainty around their unemployment rate projec-
estimates of its longer-run rate. All participants who
tions as being similar to the average of the past 20 years,
submitted longer-run projections continued to expect
and about the same number viewed uncertainty as
that the unemployment rate would run at or below their
higher. Participants’ assessments of risks to their out-
estimates of its longer-run level through 2021. Com-
looks for output growth and the unemployment rate
pared with the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP)
shifted notably relative to their assessments in March.
from March 2019, most participants revised down
As a result, most participants viewed the risks for GDP
slightly their projections for the unemployment rate
growth as weighted to the downside and for the unem-
from 2019 through 2021. All participants marked down
ployment rate as weighted to the upside. About half of
somewhat their projections for 2019 for total inflation,
participants viewed the risks to inflation as being broadly
as measured by the four-quarter percent change in the
balanced, with a similar number viewing inflation risks
price index for personal consumption expenditures
as being weighted to the downside.
(PCE), and almost all did so for their projections for
core inflation. All participants projected that inflation
would increase in 2020, from 2019, and a majority ex-
pected another slight increase in 2021. The vast majority
of participants expected that inflation would be at or
1 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for
real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds
rate.

--- Page 14 ---

,stnediserp
knaB
evreseR
laredeF
dna
srebmem
draoB
evreseR
laredeF
fo
snoitcejorp
cimonocE
.1
elbaT
9102
enuJ
,ycilop
yratenom
etairporppa
detcejorp
fo
stnemssessa
laudividni
rieht
rednu
tnecreP
3egnaR
2ycnednetlartneC
1naideM
regnoL
1202
0202
9102
regnoL
1202
0202
9102
regnoL
1202
0202
9102
elbairaV
nur
nur
nur
1.2–7.1
1.2–5.1
3.2–5.1
4.2–0.2
0.2–8.1
0.2–8.1
2.2–8.1
2.2–0.2
9.1
8.1
0.2
1.2
PDGlaerniegnahC
2.2–7.1
2.2–5.1
2.2–7.1
4.2–6.1
0.2–8.1
0.2–7.1
0.2–8.1
2.2–9.1
9.1
8.1
9.1
1.2
noitcejorphcraM
5.4–6.3
2.4–3.3
0.4–3.3
8.3–5.3
4.4–0.4
0.4–6.3
9.3–5.3
7.3–6.3
2.4
8.3
7.3
6.3
etartnemyolpmenU
6.4–0.4
2.4–4.3
1.4–4.3
0.4–5.3
5.4–1.4
1.4–7.3
9.3–6.3
8.3–6.3
3.4
9.3
8.3
7.3
noitcejorphcraM
0.2
2.2–9.1
1.2–8.1
7.1–4.1
0.2
1.2–0.2
0.2–9.1
6.1–5.1
0.2
0.2
9.1
5.1
noitaflniECP
0.2
2.2–0.2
2.2–9.1
1.2–6.1
0.2
1.2–0.2
1.2–0.2
9.1–8.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
8.1
noitcejorphcraM
2.2–8.1
1.2–8.1
8.1–4.1
1.2–0.2
0.2–9.1
8.1–7.1
0.2
9.1
8.1
4noitaflniECPeroC
2.2–9.1
2.2–8.1
2.2–8.1
1.2–0.2
1.2–0.2
0.2–9.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
noitcejorphcraM
detcejorP:omeM
htapycilopetairporppa
3.3–4.2
1.3–9.1
1.3–9.1
6.2–9.1
0.3–5.2
6.2–9.1
4.2–9.1
4.2–9.1
5.2
4.2
1.2
4.2
etarsdnuflaredeF
5.3–5.2
6.3–4.2
4.3–4.2
9.2–4.2
0.3–5.2
9.2–4.2
9.2–4.2
6.2–4.2
8.2
6.2
6.2
4.2
noitcejorphcraM
eht
morf
segnahc
tnecrep
era
noitaflni
fo
serusaem
htob
rof
snoitcejorp
dna
)PDG(
tcudorp
citsemod
ssorg
laer
ni
egnahc
fo
snoitcejorP
:etoN
egnahcfosetaregatnecrepehteranoitaflniECPerocdnanoitaflniECP
.detacidniraeyehtforetrauqhtruofehtotraeysuoiverpehtforetrauqhtruof
rofsnoitcejorP
.ygrenednadoofgnidulcxeECProfxedniecirpehtdna)ECP(serutidnepxenoitpmusnoclanosreprofxedniecirpeht,ylevitcepser,ni
era
snoitcejorp
s’tnapicitrap
hcaE
.detacidni
raey
eht
fo
retrauq
htruof
eht
ni
etar
tnemyolpmenu
nailivic
egareva
eht
rof
era
etar
tnemyolpmenu
eht
hcaehcihwotetarehtfotnemssessas’tnapicitraphcaetneserpersnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.ycilopyratenometairporppafotnemssessarehrosihnodesab
ehtrofsnoitcejorpehT
.ymonoceehtotskcohsrehtruffoecnesbaehtnidnaycilopyratenometairporpparednuegrevnocotdetcepxeebdluowelbairav
tegratetairporppadetcejorpehtroetarsdnuflaredefehtrofegnartegratetairporppadetcejorpehtfotniopdimehtfoeulavehteraetarsdnuflaredef htiwnoitcnujnocniedamerewsnoitcejorphcraMehT
.nurregnolehtrevororaeyradnelacdefiicepsehtfodneehttaetarsdnuflaredefehtroflevel
laerniegnahcehtrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoltimbustondidtnapicitrapenO
.9102,02–91hcraMnoeettimmoCtekraMnepOlaredeFehtfogniteemeht
hcustimbustondidtnapicitrapenodna,gniteem
,9102
,02–91hcraMehthtiwnoitcnujnocnietarsdnuflaredefehtro
,etartnemyolpmenueht,PDG
.gniteem,9102,91–81enuJehthtiwnoitcnujnocnisnoitcejorp
snoitcejorpforebmunehtnehW
.tsehgihottsewolmorfdegnarraerasnoitcejorpehtnehwnoitcejorpelddimehtsinaidemeht,doirephcaeroF
.1
.snoitcejorpelddimowtehtfoegarevaehtsinaidemeht,nevesi
.raeyhcaenielbairavhcaerofsnoitcejorptsewoleerhtdnatsehgiheerhtehtsedulcxeycnednetlartnecehT
.2
.raeytahtnielbairavtahtrof,tsehgihottsewolmorf,snoitcejorp’stnapicitrapllasedulcniraeyneviganielbairavarofegnarehT
.3
.detcelloctoneranoitaflniECPerocrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.4
_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________

--- Page 15 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_8_–_1_9_, _2_0_1_9______________P_a_g_e_ _3
Figure1. Medians,centraltendencies,andrangesofeconomicprojections,2019–21andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections
3
Actual
2
1
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
7
6
5
4
3
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesof
thevariablesareannual.

--- Page 16 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure2. FOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy: Midpointoftargetrangeortargetlevelfor
thefederalfundsrate
Percent
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
2019 2020 2021 Longer run
Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual par-
ticipant’sjudgmentofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfundsrateortheappropriatetarget
levelforthefederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun. Oneparticipantdidnot
submitlonger-runprojectionsforthefederalfundsrate.

--- Page 17 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_8_–_1_9_, _2_0_1_9______________P_a_g_e_ _5
The Outlook for Real GDP Growth and Unemploy- Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri-
ment butions of participants’ views about the outlook for in-
As shown in table 1, the median of participants’ projec- flation. The distributions of projections for total PCE
tions for the growth rate of real GDP in 2019, condi- price inflation and core PCE price inflation in 2019
tional on their individual assessments of appropriate shifted down notably from the March SEP, while those
monetary policy, was 2.1 percent, a bit above the median for 2020 and 2021 changed more modestly. Beyond the
estimate of its longer-run rate of 1.9 percent. Almost all current year, for which projections also reflect data in
participants continued to expect GDP growth to slow hand, almost all participants expected total and core
over the projection period, with the median projection PCE price inflation to be between 1.9 and 2.2 percent.
at 2.0 percent in 2020 and at 1.8 percent in 2021. Rela-
Appropriate Monetary Policy
tive to the March SEP, the medians of the projections
Figure 3.E shows distributions of participants’ judg-
for real GDP growth in 2019, 2020, 2021, and the longer
ments regarding the appropriate target—or midpoint of
run were little changed.
the target range—for the federal funds rate at the end of
The median of projections for the unemployment rate in each year from 2019 to 2021 and over the longer run.
the fourth quarter of 2019 was 3.6 percent, about ½ per- On the whole, the distributions for 2019 through 2021
centage point below the median assessment of its longer- shifted toward lower values. Almost all participants
run level of 4.2 percent. The medians of projections for viewed the appropriate levels of the federal funds rate at
2020 and 2021 were 3.7 percent and 3.8 percent, respec- the end of 2019, 2020, and 2021 as lower than those that
tively. These median unemployment rates, along with they deemed appropriate in March. Nearly all partici-
the median for the unemployment rate in the longer run, pants lowered their projections for the appropriate level
were a little lower than those from the March SEP. As of the federal funds rate, relative to March, at some point
was the case in March, almost all participants who sub- in the projection period, and none raised their projec-
mitted longer-run projections expected that the unem- tions for the federal funds rate for any year. Compared
ployment rate in 2021 would be below their estimates of with the projections prepared for the March SEP, the
its longer-run level. median federal funds rate was 50 basis points lower in
2020, 25 basis points lower in 2021, and 25 basis points
Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of partici-
lower in the longer-run. While the median of federal
pants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unem-
funds rate projections at the end of 2019 remained at
ployment rate from 2019 to 2021 and in the longer run.
2.38 percent, almost half of participants projected an ap-
The distribution of individual projections for real GDP
propriate level of the target range for the federal funds
growth for 2019 through 2021 all shifted up modestly
rate at the end of 2019 that was 25 basis points or 50 ba-
relative to that in the March SEP. The distribution for
sis points lower than at present. In subsequent years, the
the longer-run growth rate was little changed. The dis-
medians of the projections were 2.13 percent at the end
tributions of individual projections for the unemploy-
of 2020 and 2.38 percent at the end of 2021, slightly
ment rate in 2019 and 2020 moved lower relative to
lower than the median of the longer-run projections of
those in March, and the distribution in 2021 edged down
the federal funds rate of 2.50 percent. Muted inflation
as well. Meanwhile, the distribution for the longer-run
pressures and concerns about declining inflation expec-
unemployment rate shifted down a touch.
tations, trade developments, and foreign economic
The Outlook for Inflation growth, as well as weaker business fixed investment,
As shown in table 1, the median of projections for total were cited as factors contributing to the downward revi-
PCE price inflation was 1.5 percent in 2019, notably sions in participants’ assessments of the appropriate
lower than in the March SEP, while the median for 2020, path for the policy rate.
at 1.9 percent, was a touch lower than in March. The
Uncertainty and Risks
median for total inflation for 2021 was unchanged from
In assessing the appropriate path of the federal funds
March at 2.0 percent. The medians of projections for
rate, FOMC participants take account of the range of
core PCE price inflation for 2019 and 2020 were 1.8 per-
possible economic outcomes, the likelihood of those
cent and 1.9 percent, respectively, both a little lower rel-
outcomes, and the potential benefits and costs should
ative to the March SEP. The median for 2021 was
they occur. As a reference, table 2 provides measures of
2.0 percent, unchanged from the March SEP.
forecast uncertainty—based on the forecast errors of
various private and government forecasts over the past
20 years—for real GDP growth, the unemployment

--- Page 18 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2019–21andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2019
June projections 18
March projections
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 4 1. 6 1. 8 2. 0 2.2 2.4
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 4 1. 6 1. 8 2. 0 2.2 2.4
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2021
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 4 1. 6 1. 8 2. 0 2.2 2.4
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 4 1. 6 1. 8 2. 0 2.2 2.4
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 19 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_8_–_1_9_, _2_0_1_9______________P_a_g_e_ _7
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2019–21andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2019
June projections 18
March projections
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3. 0 3. 2 3. 4 3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2 4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0
3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3. 0 3. 2 3. 4 3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2 4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0
3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2021
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3. 0 3. 2 3. 4 3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2 4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0
3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3. 0 3. 2 3. 4 3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2 4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0
3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2019–21andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2019
June projections 18
March projections
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2021
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_8_–_1_9_, _2_0_1_9______________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2019–21
Number of participants
2019
June projections
March projections 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2021
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 22 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’judgmentsofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfunds
rateortheappropriatetargetlevelforthefederalfundsrate,2019–21andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2019
June projections 18
March projections
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8 4.6 3 4.8 8
2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62 4.87 5.12
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8 4.6 3 4.8 8
2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62 4.87 5.12
Percent range
Number of participants
2021
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8 4.6 3 4.8 8
2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62 4.87 5.12
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8 4.6 3 4.8 8
2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62 4.87 5.12
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 23 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_8_–_1_9_, _2_0_1_9_____________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges rate projections were roughly evenly distributed between
Percentage points those who saw similar levels of uncertainty relative to the
Variable 2019 2020 2021
historical average and those who saw higher uncer-
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . ±1.3 ±1.8 ±2.0
tainty.2
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . ±0.4 ±1.2 ±1.8
Because the fan charts are constructed to be symmetric
Total consumer prices2 . . . . . ±0.7 ±1.0 ±1.0 around the median projections, they do not reflect any
Short-term interest rates3 . . . . ±0.7 ±1.9 ±2.2 asymmetries in the balance of risks that participants may
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root see in their economic projections. Participants’ assess-
mean squared error of projections for 1999 through 2018 that were re- ments of the balance of risks to their current economic
leased in the summer by various private and government forecasters. As
projections are shown in the bottom-right panels of fig-
described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions,
there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real ures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. The balance of risks to the pro-
GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will jection for real GDP growth shifted lower, with 14 par-
be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the
ticipants assessing the risks as weighted to the downside,
past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip
(2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using His- 3 assessing them to be broadly balanced, and no partici-
torical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance
pant seeing them as weighted to the upside. Similarly,
and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), https://dx. the balance of risks to the projection for the unemploy-
doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2017.020. ment rate moved higher, with 12 participants judging the
1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
risks to the unemployment rate as weighted to the upside
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
that has been most widely used in government and private economic and 5 participants viewing the risks as broadly balanced.
forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth In addition, the balance of risks to the inflation projec-
quarter basis.
tions shifted down relative to March. Six more partici-
3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds
rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. pants than in March saw the risks to the inflation projec-
Projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent, in the
tions as weighted to the downside, and no participant
fourth quarter.
judged the risks as weighted to the upside.
rate, and total PCE price inflation. Those measures are In discussing the uncertainty and risks surrounding their
represented graphically in the “fan charts” shown in the economic projections, trade developments, concerns
top panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. The fan charts about global economic growth, and weaker business
display the SEP medians for the three variables sur- fixed investment were mentioned by participants as
rounded by symmetric confidence intervals derived sources of uncertainty or downside risk to the U.S. eco-
from the forecast errors reported in table 2. If the de- nomic growth outlook. For the inflation outlook, the
gree of uncertainty attending these projections is similar effect of trade developments was cited as a source of up-
to the typical magnitude of past forecast errors and the side risk, while the possibility that inflation expectations
risks around the projections are broadly balanced, then could be drifting below levels consistent with the
future outcomes of these variables would have about a FOMC’s 2 percent inflation objective or the potential
70 percent probability of being within these confidence for a stronger dollar or weaker domestic demand to put
intervals. For all three variables, this measure of uncer- downward pressure on inflation were viewed as down-
tainty is substantial and generally increases as the fore- side risks. A number of participants mentioned that
cast horizon lengthens. their assessments of risks remained roughly balanced in
part because the downward revisions to their appropri-
Participants’ assessments of the level of uncertainty sur-
ate path for the federal funds rate were offsetting factors
rounding their individual economic projections are
that would otherwise contribute to asymmetric risks.
shown in the bottom-left panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and
4.C. The vast majority of participants continued to view Participants’ assessments of the appropriate future path
the uncertainty around their projections for inflation as of the federal funds rate are also subject to considerable
broadly similar to the average of the past 20 years; most uncertainty. Because the Committee adjusts the federal
also viewed uncertainty around their projections for funds rate in response to actual and prospective devel-
GDP growth as similar to the average of the past opments over time in key economic variables such as
20 years. Views on uncertainty around unemployment real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation,
2 At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the partici-
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty sur- pants’ projections.
rounding the economic forecasts and explains the approach

--- Page 24 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4.A.UncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsofGDPgrowth
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections
70% confidence interval
4
3
Actual 2
1
0
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth Risks to GDP growth
June projections June projections
March projections 18 March projections 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Theblueandredlinesinthetoppanelshowactualvaluesandmedianprojectedvalues,respectively,ofthe
percentchangeinrealgrossdomesticproduct(GDP)fromthefourthquarterofthepreviousyeartothefourthquarter
of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is
basedonrootmeansquarederrorsofvariousprivateandgovernmentforecastsmadeovertheprevious20years;more
information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed,
on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the
historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around
theirprojections;thesecurrentassessmentsaresummarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,participantswho
judgetheuncertaintyabouttheirprojectionsas“broadlysimilar”totheaveragelevelsofthepast20yearswouldview
the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of
the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as“broadly
balanced”would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of
uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 25 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_8_–_1_9_, _2_0_1_9_____________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Figure4.B.Uncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsoftheunemploymentrate
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Unemployment rate
Median of projections 10
70% confidence interval
9
8
7
6
Actual 5
4
3
2
1
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate
June projections June projections
March projections 18 March projections 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of
the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around
the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private
and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2.
Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width
and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC
participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are
summarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,participantswhojudgetheuncertaintyabouttheirprojectionsas
“broadlysimilar”totheaveragelevelsofthepast20yearswouldviewthewidthoftheconfidenceintervalshowninthe
historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise,
participants who judge the risks to their projections as“broadly balanced”would view the confidence interval around
theirprojectionsasapproximatelysymmetric. Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethe
box“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 26 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_4____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4.C.UncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsofPCEinflation
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
PCE inflation
Median of projections
70% confidence interval
3
2
1
Actual
0
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation Risks to PCE inflation
June projections June projections
March projections 18 March projections 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation Risks to core PCE inflation
June projections June projections
March projections 18 March projections 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Theblueandredlinesinthetoppanelshowactualvaluesandmedianprojectedvalues,respectively,ofthe
percentchangeinthepriceindexforpersonalconsumptionexpenditures(PCE)fromthefourthquarteroftheprevious
yeartothefourthquarteroftheyearindicated. Theconfidenceintervalaroundthemedianprojectedvaluesisassumed
to be symmetricand is based on root mean squarederrorsof variousprivateand governmentforecastsmade over the
previous20years;moreinformationaboutthesedataisavailableintable2. Becausecurrentconditionsmaydifferfrom
those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated
onthebasisofthehistoricalforecasterrorsmaynotreflectFOMCparticipants’currentassessmentsoftheuncertainty
andrisksaroundtheirprojections;thesecurrentassessmentsaresummarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,
participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as“broadly similar”to the average levels of the past
20yearswouldviewthewidthoftheconfidenceintervalshowninthehistoricalfanchartaslargelyconsistentwiththeir
assessments of the uncertaintyabout their projections. Likewise, participantswho judgethe risks to their projections
as“broadly balanced”would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For
definitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 27 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_8_–_1_9_, _2_0_1_9_____________P__ag_e_ _1_5
uncertainty surrounding the projected path for the fed-
eral funds rate importantly reflects the uncertainties
about the paths for these economic variables along with
other factors. Figure 5 provides a graphical representa-
tion of this uncertainty, plotting the SEP median for the
federal funds rate surrounded by confidence intervals
derived from the results presented in table 2. As with
the macroeconomic variables, the forecast uncertainty
surrounding the appropriate path of the federal funds
rate is substantial and increases for longer horizons.

--- Page 28 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_6____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure5. Uncertaintyinprojectionsofthefederalfundsrate
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Federal funds rate
Midpoint of target range
Median of projections 6
70% confidence interval*
5
4
3
2
1
Actual
0
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Com-
mittee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the
target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level.
The confidence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private
and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The confidence interval is not strictly consistent with the
projectionsforthefederalfundsrate,primarilybecausetheseprojectionsarenotforecastsofthelikeliestoutcomesfor
the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy.
Still,historicalforecasterrorsprovideabroadsenseoftheuncertaintyaroundthefuturepathofthefederalfundsrate
generatedbytheuncertaintyaboutthemacroeconomicvariablesaswellasadditionaladjustmentstomonetarypolicy
thatmaybeappropriatetooffsettheeffectsofshockstotheeconomy.
Theconfidenceintervalisassumedtobesymmetricexceptwhenitistruncatedatzero—thebottomofthelowest
target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would
not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy
accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools,
including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current
conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the
confidenceintervalestimatedonthebasisofthehistoricalforecasterrorsmaynotreflectFOMCparticipants’current
assessmentsoftheuncertaintyandrisksaroundtheirprojections.
* The confidence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth
quarteroftheyearindicated;moreinformationaboutthesedataisavailableintable2. Theshadedareaencompasses
lessthana70percentconfidenceintervaliftheconfidenceintervalhasbeentruncatedatzero.

--- Page 29 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_8_–_1_9_, _2_0_1_9_____________P__ag_e_ _1_7
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the members of tions are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those fig-
the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal ures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the
Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are
policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top
projections, however. The economic and statistical models panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to par-
and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts ticipants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that
are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather
the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad than below their projections. These judgments are summa-
unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the rized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C.
stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the
what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as em- future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable
bodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each
possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the poten- participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of mone-
tial costs to the economy should they occur. tary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real ac-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a tivity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve
range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropri-
Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve ate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges
Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges for forecasts of short-term interest rates. They suggest that
shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty as- the historical confidence intervals associated with projections
sociated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted,
participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly con-
and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, sistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these
respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly out-
tending those projections is similar to that experienced in the comes but rather are projections of participants’ individual as-
past and the risks around the projections are broadly bal- sessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-
anced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a prob- of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a
ability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal
within a range of 1.7 to 4.3 percent in the current year, 1.2 to funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeco-
4.8 percent in the second year, and 1.0 to 5.0 percent in the nomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary
third year. The corresponding 70 percent confidence inter- policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of
vals for overall inflation would be 1.3 to 2.7 percent in the shocks to the economy.
current year and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second and third If at some point in the future the confidence interval
years. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these confidence around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it
bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and centered on would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart
the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for GDP shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target
growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation. However, in range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the
some instances, the risks around the projections may not be Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of
symmetric. In particular, the unemployment rate cannot be the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention;
negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular projec- it would not have any implications for possible future policy
tion might be tilted to either the upside or the downside, in decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to pro-
which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmet- vide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so
rically positioned around the median projection. were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could
Because current conditions may differ from those that also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset
prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide purchases, to provide additional accommodation.
judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on
projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1
than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncer- provides information on the range of views across FOMC
tainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A
reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections
the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ cur- across participants is much smaller than the average forecast
rent assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projec- errors over the past 20 years.

# Tables

## Page_14_Table_1


|                  | 1202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|------------------|------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
|                  | 0202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
| 2ycnednetlartneC | regnoL
nur | 0.2–8.1 0.2–8.1 4.4–0.4 5.4–1.4
0.2 0.2
0.2–8.1 0.2–7.1 0.4–6.3 1.4–7.3 1.2–0.2 1.2–0.2 1.2–0.2 1.2–0.2
2.2–8.1 0.2–8.1 9.3–5.3 9.3–6.3 0.2–9.1 1.2–0.2 0.2–9.1 1.2–0.2
2.2–0.2 2.2–9.1 7.3–6.3 8.3–6.3 6.1–5.1 9.1–8.1 8.1–7.1 0.2–9.1 | 0.3–5.2 0.3–5.2
6.2–9.1 9.2–4.2
4.2–9.1 9.2–4.2
4.2–9.1 6.2–4.2 |
|                  | 1202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 0202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
| 1naideM          | regnoL
nur | 9.1 9.1 2.4 3.4 0.2 0.2
8.1 8.1 8.3 9.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
0.2 9.1 7.3 8.3 9.1 0.2 9.1 0.2
1.2 1.2 6.3 7.3 5.1 8.1 8.1 0.2                                                                                                                 | 5.2 8.2
4.2 6.2
1.2 6.2
4.2 4.2                                 |
|                  | 1202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 0202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |