# 20100810_tealbook.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:40:06*
*Pages: 49, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that
material was received on a confidential basis. Redacted material is indicated by
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content. All redacted
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of
Information Act.
Content last modified 01/29/2016.

--- Page 2 ---

Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR)
Report to the FOMC
on Economic Conditions
and Monetary Policy
Book B
Monetary Policy:
Strategies and Alternatives
August 5, 2010
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
by the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

--- Page 3 ---

(This page is intentionally blank.)

--- Page 4 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
Monetary Policy Strategies
s
e
The exhibit “Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate” displays estimates of short- g i
e
t
run r*, defined as the real federal funds rate that, if maintained over time, would return a
r
t
S
output to its potential in twelve quarters. The Tealbook-consistent measures of short-run
r* for the third quarter are lower than the estimates for that quarter as they stood at the
time of the last projection and the estimates for the second quarter that were reported in
the June Tealbook.1 The lower values for these Tealbook-consistent measures reflect the
downward revision of output relative to potential through the second quarter as well as
the staff's weaker projection of aggregate demand going forward. The EDO model
generates a larger decline in the Tealbook-consistent estimate of short-run r* than the
FRB/US model, reflecting the EDO model’s lower sensitivity of aggregate demand to
movements in short-term interest rates. In contrast, the EDO and FRB/US model-based
estimates of short-run r*, which are generated using each model’s own projections rather
than the staff outlook, have declined slightly since the previous Tealbook. For EDO, this
shift reflects a more modest revision to economic slack than that incorporated into the
staff projection. For FRB/US, the revision to the output gap was on par with the change
in the staff’s estimate, but the effect of this revision on r* was partly offset by an upward
revision to projected economic growth in response to incoming data.2 The short-run r*
estimate from the small structural model has declined sharply, reflecting an increase in
the measure of the equity premium used in that model.3 The estimate from the single-
equation model, which depends solely on the level of the output gap and the lagged real
funds rate, has also declined by a substantial amount.
The exhibit “Constrained vs. Unconstrained Monetary Policy” displays the policy
prescriptions produced by optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model based on the
extended staff baseline projection that incorporates the Federal Reserve’s large-scale
asset purchases. In these simulations, policymakers are assumed to place equal weight on
keeping core PCE inflation close to a 2 percent inflation goal, on keeping unemployment
1 The effect on r* of the staff’s interpretation of the weaker incoming data more than offsets the
increases in short-run r* arising from the one-quarter shift in the time window used to calculate r*.
2 Because EDO and FRB/US have not yet been reestimated using the revised NIPA data, their
estimates of r* have not yet fully responded to the new historical estimates of output, income, and prices.
3 The small structural model uses a measure of the equity premium constructed from the ratio of
NIPA dividends to stock market wealth, potential growth, and the real yield on 10-year Treasury bonds.
The recent evolution of this measure has differed somewhat from that of the equity premium measure
considered in Tealbook A.
Page 1 of 46

--- Page 5 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
s
e
i
g
e Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
t Percent
a
r 8 8
t
S
6 6
4 4
2 2
0 0
-2 -2
-4 -4
The actual real funds rate based on lagged core inflation
-6 -6
Range of four model-based estimates
70 Percent confidence interval
-8 90 Percent confidence interval -8
Tealbook-consistent measure (FRB/US)
-10 -10
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Current Current Quarter Estimate Previous
Tealbook as of Previous Tealbook Tealbook
Short-Run Measures
Single-equation model -2.7 -1.4 -1.4
Small structural model -3.1 -1.1 -0.9
EDO model (1.1 (1.2 (1.2
FRB/US model -2.5 -2.5 -2.6
Confidence intervals for four model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval -3.9 to 0.9
90 percent confidence interval -4.9 to 2.3
Tealbook-consistent measures
EDO model -5.4 -3.2 -4.3
FRB/US model -2.3 -1.5 -1.8
Medium-Run Measures
Single-equation model (1.0 (1.2 (1.2
Small structural model (1.3 (1.5 (1.6
Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval (0.2 to 2.1
90 percent confidence interval -0.5 to 2.6
TIPS-based factor model (2.0 2.0
Memo
Actual real federal funds rate -1.4 -1.0
Note: Explanatory Note A provides background information regarding the construction of these measures and confidence
intervals. The actual real federal funds rate shown is based on lagged core inflation as a proxy for inflation expectation.
For information regarding alternative measures, see Explanatory Note A. Estimates of r* may change at the beginning of a
quarter even when there is no shift in the staff outlook because the twelve quarter horizon covered by the calculation
has rolled forward one quarter. Therefore, whenever the Tealbook is published early in the quarter, this table includes
a third column labeled "Current Quarter Estimate as of Previous Tealbook."
Page 2 of 46

--- Page 6 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
Constrained vs. Unconstrained Monetary Policy
(2 Percent Inflation Goal)
s
e
Nominal Federal Funds Rate Real Federal Funds Rate g i
e
Percent Percent t
8 8 4 4 r
a
Current Tealbook: Constrained S t
Current Tealbook: Unconstrained
Previous Tealbook: Unconstrained
6 6
2 2
4 4
0 0
2 2
-2 -2
0 0
-4 -4
-2 -2
-6 -6
-4 -4
-6 -6 -8 -8
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Civilian Unemployment Rate Core PCE Inflation
Percent Four-quarter average Percent
1 1 11 3.0 3.0
10 10
2.5 2.5
9 9
2.0 2.0
8 8
7 7 1.5 1.5
6 6
1.0 1.0
5 5
0.5 0.5
4 4
3 3 0.0 0.0
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Page 3 of 46

--- Page 7 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
close to the effective NAIRU, and on minimizing changes in the federal funds rate. As
has been true for some time, these simulations indicate that the optimal path of policy is
s severely constrained by the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. With the lower-
e
i
g
e bound constraint imposed, the federal funds rate does not begin to rise appreciably until
t
a
r 2014 (one quarter later than in the previous Tealbook), the unemployment rate remains
t
S
above the staff estimate of the NAIRU (5¼ percent) until late 2013, and inflation stays
persistently below its target rate (black solid lines). But if the nominal funds rate could
fall below zero, optimal policy would call for the nominal funds rate to decline to around
minus 4¾ percent in the third quarter of 2011 before turning positive in the second half of
2013 (blue dashed line). As a result, the unemployment rate would decline to the NAIRU
about a year earlier and inflation would be close to 2 percent by 2014. Relative to the
June Tealbook, the near-term policy prescriptions of the unconstrained optimal control
simulations are little changed apart from a one-quarter outward shift that reflects the
rolling forward of the jump-off point for these calculations.4
As shown in the exhibit, “The Policy Outlook in an Uncertain Environment,” the
staff’s estimated outcome-based policy rule prescribes keeping the federal funds rate at
its effective lower bound through the fourth quarter of 2012, two quarters later than
prescribed in the June Tealbook, largely reflecting the downward revisions to the staff’s
projection of output relative to potential. Over the intermeeting period, the expected
federal funds rate path implied by financial market data has shifted down, consistent with
the weaker-than-expected incoming data. The upper bounds of the confidence intervals
have also moved down, suggesting that financial market participants have reduced the
odds they place on outcomes with relatively high funds rates. The lower panel of the
exhibit provides near-term prescriptions from simple policy rules. As shown in the left-
hand columns, all of the prescriptions remain at the effective lower bound. The right-
hand columns show the prescriptions that would be implied by these rules in the absence
of the lower bound; all are negative. Most of the unconstrained prescriptions have shifted
downward since June due to the wider output gap, but that of the Taylor (1993) rule is
roughly unchanged due to the offsetting effects of somewhat higher near-term inflation.
4 The current funds rate trajectory under the unconstrained monetary policy is slightly lower than a
path of the funds rate generated by an optimal-control simulation based on the data used for the June
Tealbook and jumping off from the third quarter. This difference reflects the staff’s revisions to the paths
of the unemployment rate and of output relative to potential.
Page 4 of 46

--- Page 8 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
The Policy Outlook in an Uncertain Environment
s
FRB/US Model Simulations of Information from Financial Markets e
i
Estimated Outcome-Based Rule g
e
Percent Percent t
9 9 9 9 r
a
Current Tealbook Current Tealbook t
S
Previous Tealbook Previous Tealbook
8 8 8 8
Staff assumption
7 7 7 7
6 6 6 6
5 5 5 5
4 4 4 4
3 3 3 3
2 2 2 2
1 1 1 1
0 0 0 0
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Note: In both panels, the dark and light shading represent the 70 and 90 percent confidence intervals respectively.
Financial market quotes are as of August 4.
Near-Term Prescriptions of Simple Policy Rules
Constrained Policy Unconstrained Policy
2010Q3 2010Q4 2010Q3 2010Q4
Taylor (1993) rule 0.13 0.13 -0.81 -1.23
Previous Tealbook 0.13 0.13 -0.80 -1.07
Taylor (1999) rule 0.13 0.13 -4.64 -5.04
Previous Tealbook 0.13 0.13 -4.16 -4.32
Estimated outcome-based rule 0.13 0.13 -0.60 -1.62
Previous Tealbook 0.13 0.13 -0.47 -1.28
Estimated forecast-based rule 0.13 0.13 -0.70 -1.72
Previous Tealbook 0.13 0.13 -0.46 -1.18
First-difference rule 0.13 0.13 -0.17 -0.38
Previous Tealbook 0.13 0.13 -0.02 -0.13
Memo
2010Q3 2010Q4
Staff assumption 0.13 0.13
Fed funds futures 0.16 0.14
Median expectation of primary dealers 0.13 0.13
Blue Chip forecast (August 1, 2010) 0.20 0.20
Note: In calculating the near-term prescriptions of these simple policy rules, policymakers’ long-run inflation objective is
assumed to be 2 percent. Explanatory Note B provides further background information.
Page 5 of 46

--- Page 9 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
s
e
i
g
e
t
a
r
S
t (This page is intentionally blank.)
Page 6 of 46

--- Page 10 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
Monetary Policy Alternatives
This Tealbook presents four policy alternatives—labeled A, B1, B2, and C—for
the Committee’s consideration. The incoming data have, on balance, been disappointing.
Whether the data reflect a temporary “soft patch” or a more persistent slowing in the pace
of economic recovery is uncertain. Accordingly, this Tealbook presents two versions of
Alternative B: B1 contains a more downbeat view of the incoming data than B2;
moreover, B1 incorporates a policy response while B2 does not. As usual, the
alternatives offer a range of policy choices and forward guidance. The Committee could
mix components from the various alternatives to construct its desired statement.
s
Under Alternative A, the statement would indicate that information received e
v
i
t
during recent months has increasingly suggested that the recovery is proceeding at an a
n
r
unsatisfactory pace, that the near-term outlook has weakened, and that inflation is likely e
t
l
A
to remain, for some time, below levels the Committee considers most consistent with its
dual mandate. Accordingly, Alternative A would lower the target range for the federal
funds rate to 0 to ⅛ percent and replace the “extended period” language with a more
explicit statement that the Committee anticipates keeping the funds rate near zero “until
resource utilization and underlying inflation have moved appreciably closer to levels
consistent with its longer-term objectives.” Consistent with the change in the target
range, the Board would cut the remuneration rates on required and excess reserve
balances to [10 basis points]. In addition, Alternative A would keep the total face value
of the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury instruments, agency debt, and agency
mortgage-backed securities (MBS) at its current level, but shift the composition of the
portfolio by reinvesting principal payments from agency debt and MBS into Treasuries
while continuing to roll over maturing Treasury debt.
Under Alternative B1, the statement would note that the pace of recovery has
slowed and is likely to be modest in the near term. In addition, the “extended period”
language would say that the Committee anticipates exceptionally low levels of the federal
funds rate “at least until resource utilization and underlying inflation are clearly moving
toward levels consistent with the Committee’s longer-term objectives.” The Committee
would not alter the target range for the funds rate but—as in Alternative A—would
reinvest principal payments from agency debt and MBS into Treasury securities and
continue to roll over maturing Treasury debt.
Page 7 of 46

--- Page 11 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
Apart from minor updating of the summary of incoming data, the statement under
Alternative B2 would be unchanged from the one released after the June meeting. There
would be no change in the stance of policy. The Committee would again indicate that it
anticipates a moderate recovery.
Under Alternative C, the Committee would maintain the 0 to ¼ percent target
range for the federal funds rate but would indicate that a sustainable recovery is under
way and that economic conditions are likely to warrant a “low” target range for the
federal funds rate “for some time.” The Committee also would allow all securities held
in the SOMA to roll off as they mature.
A table summarizing the key elements of the alternatives appears on the next
s page. Complete draft statements are on subsequent pages, followed by the arguments for
e
v
i
t each alternative.
a
n
r
e
t
A
l
Page 8 of 46

--- Page 12 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
Table 1: Overview of Alternatives for the August 10 FOMC Statement
June August Alternatives
Statement A B1 B2 C
Economic Activity
Recent recovery is recovery is proceeding pace of recovery has
recovery is proceeding
Developments proceeding at an unsatisfactory pace slowed
recovery is proceeding
is improving pace of recovery has is improving only
at an unsatisfactory
gradually; high slowed; high slowly; high
pace; high
Labor unemployment; unemployment; unemployment; is improving
unemployment;
Market employers remain employers remain employers remain gradually
employers remain
reluctant to add to reluctant to add to reluctant to add to
reluctant to add to
payrolls payrolls payrolls
payrolls
pace of recovery a sustainable
pace of recovery likely pace of recovery
likely to be near-term outlook has economic
Outlook to be modest in the near likely to be
moderate weakened recovery is under
term moderate for a time
for a time way
Financial Conditions e s
v
less supportive of somewhat less t i
a
economic growth; supportive of economic somewhat more n
r
Recent bank lending has growth in recent supportive of e
bank lending has continued to contract t
Developments continued to months; bank lending economic growth l
A
contract in recent has continued to in recent weeks
months contract
Inflation
substantial slack
restraining cost substantial slack restraining cost pressures; and… n.a.
Recent
pressures; stable
Developments
inflation
stable inflation expectations
expectations
gradual return to
likely to remain, for higher levels of
likely to be subdued some time, below levels resource
Outlook likely to be subdued for some time
for some time most consistent with utilization in a
dual mandate context of price
stability
Federal Funds Rate Target and Interest Rates Paid on Reserves (IOR)
Intermeeting 0 to ⅛ percent;
0 to ¼ percent 0 to ¼ percent
Period cut IOR to 10 bps
exceptionally low levels
maintain this range until likely to be warranted economic
economic conditions economic
Forward resource utilization and for an extended conditions are
are likely to warrant conditions are
Guidance for underlying inflation period—at least until likely to warrant
exceptionally low likely to warrant
Federal Funds have moved appreciably resource utilization and exceptionally low
levels for an low levels for
Rate closer to longer-term underlying inflation are levels for an
extended period some time
objectives clearly moving toward extended period
longer-term objectives
Reinvestment of SOMA Assets
Interim strategy: Interim strategy:
allow Treasuries
allow agency debt reinvest principal payments from agency debt allow agency debt
as well as agency
Approach and MBS to roll off and MBS into longer-term Treasury securities; and MBS to roll off
debt and MBS to
but reinvest continue to roll over maturing Treasury debt but reinvest
roll off
Treasuries Treasuries
Page 9 of 46

--- Page 13 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
JUNE FOMC STATEMENT
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April suggests
that the economic recovery is proceeding and that the labor market is improving
gradually. Household spending is increasing but remains constrained by high
unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit.
Business spending on equipment and software has risen significantly; however,
investment in nonresidential structures continues to be weak and employers remain
reluctant to add to payrolls. Housing starts remain at a depressed level. Financial
conditions have become less supportive of economic growth on balance, largely
reflecting developments abroad. Bank lending has continued to contract in recent
months. Nonetheless, the Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of
resource utilization in a context of price stability, although the pace of economic
recovery is likely to be moderate for a time.
s 2. Prices of energy and other commodities have declined somewhat in recent months,
e
v and underlying inflation has trended lower. With substantial resource slack
i
t
a
n continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer-term inflation expectations stable,
r
e inflation is likely to be subdued for some time.
t
l
A
3. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of
resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended
period.
4. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial
developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to promote economic
recovery and price stability.
Page 10 of 46

--- Page 14 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
AUGUST FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April over
recent months has increasingly suggested suggests that the economic recovery in
economic activity and the labor market is proceeding at an unsatisfactory pace and
that the labor market is improving gradually. Household spending is increasing only
gradually but and remains constrained by high unemployment, modest income
growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit. Business spending on equipment and
software has risen significantly is rising less rapidly than earlier in the year, and
the contribution of inventory investment to growth is likely to wane. ; however,
Investment in nonresidential structures continues to be weak, and employers remain
reluctant to add to payrolls. Housing starts remain at a depressed level. Financial
conditions have become somewhat less supportive of economic growth in recent
months, on balance, largely reflecting developments abroad. and bank lending has
continued to contract in recent months. Nonetheless,Although the Committee still
anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of s
e
price stability, although the pace of economic recovery is likely to be moderate for a v
i
t
time the near-term outlook for economic activity has weakened. a
n
r
e
2. Prices of energy and other commodities have declined somewhat in recent months, t
l
A
and Measures of underlying inflation has have trended lower in recent quarters.
With substantial resource slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer-term
inflation expectations stable, inflation is likely to be subdued remain, for some time,
below levels that the Committee considers most consistent with its mandate to
promote maximum employment and stable prices.
3. To support the economic recovery, the Committee will maintain decided to reduce
the target range for the federal funds rate at to 0 to ¼ ⅛ percent and continues to
anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization,
subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant
exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. Consistent
with this reduction, the Board of Governors cut the remuneration rates on
required and excess reserve balances to 10 basis points effective with the reserve
maintenance period beginning August 12. The Committee anticipates
maintaining this range for the federal funds rate until resource utilization and
underlying inflation have moved appreciably closer to levels consistent with its
longer-term objectives.
4. To provide additional support for the economic recovery, the Committee will
maintain the Federal Reserve’s holdings of longer-term securities at their
current level by reinvesting principal payments from agency debt and agency
mortgage-backed securities in Treasury securities. The Committee will continue
to roll over the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities as they mature.
5. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial
developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to promote economic
recovery and price stability.
Page 11 of 46

--- Page 15 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
AUGUST FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE B1
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April June
suggests indicates that the economic pace of recovery in output and employment
has slowed is proceeding and that the labor market is improving gradually.
Household spending is increasing gradually, but remains constrained by high
unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit.
Business spending on equipment and software has risen significantly is rising;
however, investment in nonresidential structures continues to be weak and employers
remain reluctant to add to payrolls. Housing starts remain at a depressed level.
Financial conditions have become less supportive of economic growth on balance,
largely reflecting developments abroad. Bank lending has continued to contract in
recent months. Nonetheless, the Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher
levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability, although the pace of
economic recovery is likely to be moderate for a time modest in the near term.
s
e
v 2. Prices of energy and other commodities have declined somewhat in recent months,
i
t
a
n and Measures of underlying inflation has have trended lower in recent quarters.
r
e and, with substantial resource slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer-
t
l
A term inflation expectations stable, inflation is likely to be subdued for some time.
3. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and continues to anticipates that, with inflation expectations stable,
economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation
trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels
of the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted for an extended period—at least
until resource utilization and underlying inflation are clearly moving toward
levels consistent with the Committee’s longer-term objectives.
4. To help support a more timely return to those objectives, the Committee will
maintain the Federal Reserve’s holdings of longer-term securities at their
current level by reinvesting principal payments from agency debt and agency
mortgage-backed securities in Treasury securities. The Committee will continue
to roll over the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities as they mature.
5. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial
developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to promote economic
recovery and price stability.
Page 12 of 46

--- Page 16 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
AUGUST FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE B2
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April June
suggests that the economic recovery is proceeding and but that the labor market is
improving gradually only slowly. Household spending is increasing gradually, but
remains constrained by high unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing
wealth, and tight credit. Business spending on equipment and software has risen
significantly; however, investment in nonresidential structures continues to be weak
and employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls. Housing starts remain at a
depressed level. Financial conditions have become less supportive of economic
growth on balance, largely reflecting developments abroad. Bank lending has
continued to contract in recent months, though less rapidly of late. The Committee
anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of
price stability, although the pace of economic recovery is likely to be moderate for a
time.
s
e
2. Prices of energy and other commodities have declined somewhat in recent months, v
i
t
and Measures of underlying inflation has have trended lower in recent quarters. a
n
r
and, with substantial resource slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer- e
t
term inflation expectations stable, inflation is likely to be subdued for some time. A l
3. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of
resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended
period.
4. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial
developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to promote economic
recovery and price stability.
Page 13 of 46

--- Page 17 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
AUGUST FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in April June
suggests that the economic recovery is proceeding and that the labor market is
improving gradually. Household spending is increasing and but remains constrained
by high unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight
credit. business spending on equipment and software has risen significantly continues
to advance however, investment in nonresidential structures continues to be weak
and employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls. Financial conditions have become
less somewhat more supportive of economic growth on balance in recent weeks,
largely reflecting developments abroad. Bank lending has continued to contract in
recent months. Though underlying inflation has trended lower, longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable. The Committee believes that a sustainable
economic recovery is under way and Nonetheless, anticipates a gradual return to
higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability, although the pace
s of economic recovery is likely to be moderate for a time.
e
v
t i 2. Prices of energy and other commodities have declined somewhat in recent months,
a
n
and underlying inflation has trended lower. With substantial resource slack
r
e
t continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer-term inflation expectations stable,
l
A
inflation is likely to be subdued for some time.
2. The Committee will decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at
0 to ¼ percent and continues to anticipates that economic conditions, including low
rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation
expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate
for an extended period some time. The Committee will continue its approach of
not reinvesting payments of principal on mortgage-backed securities and
maturing agency debt held by the System Open Market Account. As a further
step toward reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and the
level of reserves in the banking system, on [September 1] the Committee will
stop reinvesting the proceeds of maturing Treasury securities. The Committee
will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial developments and will
employ its policy tools as necessary to promote economic recovery and price
stability.
Page 14 of 46

--- Page 18 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B2
The Committee may see the information on economic activity and employment
received during the intermeeting period as indicating a temporary “soft patch” rather than
a more persistent slowing in the growth of aggregate demand that would call for
additional policy stimulus. Members may continue to anticipate that the current policy
stance will promote a gradual return to full employment with underlying inflation rising,
in future years, toward the level they see as most consistent with the dual mandate.
Moreover, they may judge the anticipated trajectory for the economy as the best that can
be achieved under current circumstances, absent policy actions that they see as likely to
prove too costly. If so, members might decide to maintain the existing target range for
the federal funds rate, reiterate that economic conditions are likely to warrant
exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period, and continue e s
v
i
current practices with respect to reinvestment of principal from securities in the System t
a
n
Open Market Account (SOMA), as in Alternative B2.1 e r
t
l
A
The staff and many private-sector forecasters have read the recent data as
warranting some downward revision to projections of near-term growth in output and
employment but continue to forecast a pickup in the pace of recovery next year. If
Committee participants agree with this view, they may consider it appropriate to make no
change to either the target range or forward guidance for the funds rate. FOMC
statements have, since last November, indicated that economic conditions—particularly
rates of resource utilization, inflation trends, and inflation expectations—will play a key
role in determining how long the Committee will target exceptionally low levels of the
federal funds rate. Policymakers may read the sizable drop in money market futures rates
during the past two intermeeting periods as indicating that market participants recognize
that the period of near-zero rates is likely to be longer than previously anticipated; if so,
the Committee may see no need to adjust the extended period language. Given the drop
in longer-term rates since the June meeting, members might judge that the additional
macroeconomic benefits from pushing short-term rates even closer to zero are unlikely to
be large enough to warrant taking the risk of disrupting the functioning of short-term
funding markets. Moreover, participants may want to continue the current practice of
1 Current practice is to reinvest principal from maturing Treasury securities into new Treasury issues,
but to not reinvest principal from agency debt and MBS, thus generating a gradual reduction in the size of
the SOMA portfolio and a gradual increase in the share of the portfolio that is held in Treasury securities.
Page 15 of 46

--- Page 19 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
allowing agency debt and MBS to roll off in order to make progress in normalizing the
size and composition of the balance sheet and reducing the supply of reserve balances.
Although the staff and many outside forecasters have made modest downward
revisions to their projections of near-term growth, other interpretations are plausible. On
the one hand, the “Virtuous Circle” alternative simulation in the Risks and Uncertainty
section of Tealbook A is consistent with another reading of the data: Noise in the recent
indicators may be masking the emergence of a strong economic recovery that, supported
by accommodative monetary policy and improving financial conditions, eventually will
display a mutually reinforcing cycle of higher consumer spending and business
investment, greater employment, improved confidence, and increased credit availability.
On the other hand, some statistical models take a larger signal from the weak incoming
s
e data and predict sluggish growth in output and employment through much of 2011, as in
v
i
t
a the “Weaker Recovery” alternative simulation. If members see uncertainty about the
n
r
e outlook as being appreciably greater than usual, they may prefer to wait for additional
t
l
A
information before adjusting either the current stance of policy or the forward guidance.
The statement proposed under Alternative B2 likely would be somewhat
disappointing to market participants. To be sure, the Desk’s latest survey of primary
dealers—conducted on Friday, July 30—suggested that market participants saw a high
probability that the August statement would be quite similar to the one released in June,
with only minor revisions to the characterization of economic conditions. The dealers
placed low odds on any immediate changes in the Committee’s asset-management
strategy. Nonetheless, survey respondents saw non-negligible probabilities that
policymakers will decide to reinvest principal from MBS, change their forward guidance,
or cut the remuneration rate on reserve balances. A statement along the lines of
Alternative B2 would lower those probabilities, at least temporarily, and thus likely result
in some backup in interest rates, perhaps accompanied by a drop in equity prices and
some appreciation in the foreign exchange value of the dollar.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B1
If policymakers, like the staff, have marked down their near-term forecasts, they
may see unemployment and inflation moving toward values consistent with the dual
mandate even more gradually than seemed likely at the time of the June meeting.
Committee participants also may see greater downside risks to that outlook. Even if they
see the deterioration in the outlook and increase in downside risks as limited to the near
Page 16 of 46

--- Page 20 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
term, policymakers may judge that the changes are large enough to warrant some policy
response to help keep the recovery on track. If so, the Committee might wish to indicate
that the period of near-zero interest rates now appears likely to be longer than members
previously anticipated and longer than investors currently seem to expect by stating, as in
Alternative B1, that “exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate are likely to be
warranted for an extended period—at least until resource utilization and underlying
inflation are clearly moving toward levels consistent with the Committee’s longer-term
objectives.” Members also might decide to keep the Federal Reserve’s total holdings of
Treasury securities, agency debt, and agency MBS at its current level rather than
allowing it to shrink over time. Under this alternative, the Committee would direct the
Desk to reinvest all payments of principal on such instruments in longer-term Treasuries.
s
The steps included in Alternative B1 likely would generate a reduction in e
v
i
t
intermediate- and longer-term interest rates as market participants revised down their a
n
r
expectations for the path of the federal funds rate over the course of the next year or so e
t
l
A
and revised up their expectations of the amount of longer-term assets that the Federal
Reserve will hold. The changes in statement language and reinvestment policy under this
alternative likely would reinforce investors’ sense that policymakers have become less
focused on preparing to exit from the period of exceptionally accommodative monetary
policy and are now more concerned about spurring growth and preventing further
disinflation. The Desk’s latest survey of primary dealers showed that the dealers saw the
first increase in the federal funds rate target as most likely to come in the third quarter of
2011. However, dealers also saw sizable probabilities that the first increase would occur
in either of the previous two quarters or in either of the subsequent two quarters. An
estimate of market participants’ beliefs derived from interest rate derivatives yields
similar results. If Committee members see little chance that it will be appropriate to raise
the funds rate target before the fall of 2011, then they might wish to bring investors’
projections for the funds rate into closer alignment with their own expectations by
modifying the forward guidance along the lines suggested in Alternative B1.2
The dealer survey indicates that the language of Alternative B1 would come as
something of a surprise to market participants and thus could persuade them that the odds
on an early increase in the federal funds rate are smaller than they had thought. The
2 The changes in statement language offered in Alternatives A and B1 are among those discussed in
“Potential Enhancements to FOMC Communication,” by Gauti Eggerston, Krishna Guha, Andrew Levin,
Steve Meyer, and Simon Potter, August 4, 2010
Page 17 of 46

--- Page 21 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
addition of “clearly moving toward” would signal that the Committee would want to see
sustained progress toward its long-run objectives before raising rates. Investors likely
would notice the words “at least until” and understand that the Committee had retained
the option of holding the funds rate quite low even after the data clearly show
unemployment and inflation moving in the right direction. The resulting reduction in the
perceived probability of an increase in the funds rate during the first half of 2011, even if
not accompanied by a change in market participants’ modal forecast of the timing of the
first increase, likely would generate some decline in medium- and longer-term yields.
That decline could, however, be modest if investors thought that a longer period of
exceptionally low federal funds rates would be offset by a more rapid increase in the
target rate thereafter.
s
e Alternative B1 would also reduce longer-term rates by preventing the gradual
v
i
t
a decline in the amount of longer-term securities held in the SOMA that will occur if the
n
r
e Committee continues its current policy of not reinvesting principal payments received on
t
l
A
agency debt and MBS. The statement for Alternative B1 would say that “the Committee
will maintain the Federal Reserve’s holdings of longer-term securities at their current
level by reinvesting principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed
securities in Treasury securities” and would note that the Committee will continue to roll
over its holdings of Treasury securities as they mature. The staff projects that, with no
change in reinvestment policy, repayments of principal from MBS and agency debt
would reduce SOMA holdings of such securities by approximately $500 billion by the
end of 2012.3 If, instead, the Committee were to announce that principal from MBS and
agency debt would be reinvested in longer-term Treasury coupon securities to maintain
the SOMA’s holdings of longer-term assets at their current level, and if market
participants expected that policy to be in place through 2012 and understood its
implications for the portfolio, the staff estimates that longer-term rates could fall about
20 basis points. This estimate is quite uncertain and may be overstated, in part because
it is based on market reactions to FOMC announcements about asset purchases that were
made when financial market functioning was impaired and investors’ concerns about the
3 The staff’s current baseline balance sheet projection, which—like previous projections—takes as an
input the baseline interest rate assumptions in the Tealbook forecast for the economy, shows a $150 billion
larger drop in MBS holdings by the end of 2012 than did the baseline projection in the June Tealbook. The
revision reflects the decline in mortgage rates since the last FOMC meeting, which has raised the actual and
expected number of refinancings. For a discussion of issues related to reinvesting principal payments from
MBS, see “Assessment of the Effects of MBS Paydowns and Reinvestment Options,” by Joshua Frost, Jane
Ihrig, Jaime Marquez, Jeffrey Moore, and Julie Remache, August 4, 2010.
Page 18 of 46

--- Page 22 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
economic and financial outlook were particularly large. Though the magnitude of the
effect is uncertain, the direction is clear: Longer-term interest rates would be expected to
decline. Equity prices likely would rise somewhat, and the foreign exchange value of the
dollar probably would decline.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A
Committee members may see the information that became available during the
intermeeting period not only as pointing toward somewhat slower growth this year than
they previously had anticipated but also as indicating a significantly higher likelihood of
a sharper or more persistent deceleration in economic activity. Alternatively, they may
view the incoming data as confirming earlier concerns that the recovery would proceed
too slowly. In addition, policymakers may see a growing risk that underlying inflation s
e
v
will remain on a downward trend and that inflation expectations will drift down as well, i
t
a
n
as in the “Greater Disinflation” alternative simulation in the Tealbook. For any of these r
e
t
reasons, members might find it appropriate to take further action now and to send a A l
strong signal about their future intentions.
Under Alternative A, the Committee would explicitly state its view that the
recovery is proceeding at an unsatisfactory pace and that inflation is likely to remain, for
some time, below levels the Committee considers consistent with the dual mandate. This
language would emphasize that Federal Reserve policymakers are aiming for a pickup in
growth and inflation in the medium term. Against that backdrop, the Committee would
not only begin reinvesting all principal payments on securities held in the SOMA to
prevent a further reduction in the size of the portfolio, it also would lower the target range
for the federal funds rate to 0 to ⅛ percent. Moreover, the Committee would state that it
anticipates maintaining this new target range “until resource utilization and underlying
inflation have moved appreciably closer to levels consistent with its longer-term
objectives,” thus signaling that it does not expect to raise its target for the federal funds
rate quickly once growth strengthens or inflation edges up. To encourage a drop in the
effective funds rate consistent with the change in the target range, the Board would cut
the interest rates paid on required and excess reserve balances to 10 basis points.4
4 For a discussion of issues associated with reducing the remuneration rate on excess reserves, see
“Reducing the IOER Rate: An Analysis of Options,” by Chris Burke, Spence Hilton, Ruth Judson, Kurt
Lewis, and David Skeie, August 4, 2010.
Page 19 of 46

--- Page 23 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
Even if they do not think that the recent data suggest a significant risk that growth
will slow further or that inflation and inflation expectations will drift down, policymakers
might judge that further policy stimulus would be desirable to help support a stronger
recovery. Moreover, they might conclude that, in light of investors’ concerns about fiscal
sustainability, there is little scope for increased fiscal stimulus in the United States and
that a shift to less expansionary fiscal policy is the more likely outcome; consequently,
they may see additional monetary stimulus as warranted.
The staff anticipates that the cuts in the target range and the remuneration rates on
reserve balances specified under Alternative A would leave the effective federal funds
rate trading in a range of 5 to 10 basis points—about 10 basis points below its recent
trading range—with similar reductions in general collateral repo rates and Libor.
s
e Reducing money market rates to this range would not, in the staff’s view, pose
v
i
t
a insurmountable problems for the functioning of these markets or for financial institutions.
n
r
e
t
l
A While a 10 basis point drop in short-term interest rates would not, by itself,
provide significant macroeconomic stimulus, the combination of rate cuts and language
changes in Alternative A could do so. Indeed, by stating that it anticipates keeping the
funds rate near zero until both resource utilization and inflation have moved appreciably
closer to levels consistent with its longer-run objectives, the Committee could help
prevent a downward drift in expected inflation that would raise short-term real interest
rates.
The Desk’s recent survey of primary dealers indicates that market participants
attach a low probability to an outcome such as that in Alternative A. Investors would be
surprised not only by the forceful language but also by the Committee’s decision to cut
rates. In combination, the components of Alternative A seem likely to generate a
meaningful reduction in medium- and longer-term nominal interest rates by reducing
investors’ expectations of future short-term rates. The drop in longer-term rates would be
reinforced by the reduction in term premiums that would result from reinvesting principal
payments received on MBS and agency debt (in addition to principal on maturing
Treasury securities) held in the SOMA. As noted in the discussion of Alternative B1,
the staff estimates that reinvesting the roughly $500 billion of agency debt and MBS
principal that is projected to be repaid by the end of 2012 could reduce longer-term yields
by about 20 basis points. The decline in longer-term nominal yields might be offset to
some extent by an increase in inflation compensation, if investors concluded that
Page 20 of 46

--- Page 24 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
sustained monetary stimulus was likely to complicate the eventual exit from the period of
exceptionally accommodative monetary policy and so lead to higher inflation. If
investors thought that the Committee’s adoption of Alternative A would lead to a
stronger recovery, equity prices probably would rise. The foreign exchange value of the
dollar likely would likely decline.
As noted earlier, the effect on market rates that would result from the change in
reinvestment policy under Alternatives A and B2 might well be smaller than the staff
estimates. Thus, if members considered it appropriate to respond to evolving economic
conditions by providing further monetary stimulus, the Committee could decide to
resume large-scale purchases of longer-term assets to expand the SOMA portfolio or take
other steps that would remove duration from the market and thus reduce term premiums.5
s
However, such steps would increase the Federal Reserve’s exposure to the risk of capital e
v
i
t
losses if market rates were to rise sooner or more sharply than expected and could a
n
r
complicate the eventual exit from highly accommodative monetary policy. e
t
l
A
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE C
If policymakers are concerned that prolonging the period of near-zero interest
rates could contribute to macroeconomic or financial imbalances, they might wish to
indicate that the time for an increase in interest rates is drawing near. Such a step might
be particularly appropriate if members see the recent data as most likely indicative of a
“soft patch” in the recovery and if they are confident that solidly anchored inflation
expectations will prevent a prolonged disinflation and facilitate the return of inflation
toward levels seen as most consistent with the dual mandate. In line with such views, the
statement under Alternative C would note the Committee’s belief that a sustainable
economic recovery is under way and signal an approaching increase in rates by changing
the Committee’s forward guidance to state that the funds rate is likely to remain at
low levels for some time. Such a change in the statement language would likely be read
as indicating that the Committee’s conditional commitment to the current target range no
longer extends to future meetings.
Committee participants may have a more positive assessment of the outlook than
does the staff, perhaps on the view that the recent weakness in the economic data is
largely noise or simply indicates a temporary deceleration. Moreover, members might
5 The Committee could, for example, sell the shorter-term debt in the SOMA portfolio and buy longer-
term Treasury notes and bonds.
Page 21 of 46

--- Page 25 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
think that a large part of the reduction in output and employment during the recession
reflects a persistent adverse supply shock rather than a shortfall in demand, as in the
“Lower Potential” alternative simulation, and hence judge that there is less resource slack
than shown in the staff forecast. If so, policymakers might conclude that there is no need
to maintain an exceptionally accommodative stance of monetary policy, particularly if
they expect actual inflation to move up toward longer-term expected inflation and see
little likelihood of continuing disinflation. Accordingly, policymakers might see a policy
of allowing maturing Treasury securities to roll off as important for putting reserve
balances on a steeper downward path that will support increased money market interest
rates in the not-too-distant future.6 Thus, the statement for Alternative C would announce
such a change in the Committee’s portfolio management policy.
s
e An announcement along the lines of the statement under Alternative C would
v
i
t
a greatly surprise investors. The Desk’s most recent survey of primary dealers found that
n
r
e dealers place near-zero odds on the Committee dropping the “extended period” language
t
l
A
or adopting a policy of no longer reinvesting maturing Treasury securities at the current
meeting. The changes to the statement envisioned under Alternative C would lead
market participants to conclude that the Committee was likely to increase its target for the
federal funds rate much sooner than had been anticipated and thus would shift the
expected funds rate path up. Moreover, the staff estimates that announcing a policy of
no longer rolling over maturing Treasury securities could directly increase longer-term
interest rates about 10 to 15 basis points.7 Consequently, interest rates would likely rise
across the yield curve, though forward measures of inflation compensation might move
down, lessening the rise in longer-term nominal rates, if the statement led investors to
further reduce their assessment of the longer-term inflation outlook. Participants might
view an upward shift in the yield curve as helpful in reducing the risk of new financial
imbalances. Equity prices likely would fall and the dollar probably would appreciate.
6 The staff estimates that a policy of allowing all maturing Treasury securities held in the SOMA to roll
off would reduce the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury bills, notes, and bonds—and the supply of
reserve balances—by about $110 billion by the end of 2011 and an additional $160 billion by the end of
2012. For a discussion of issues related to allowing maturing Treasury securities to roll off, see “SOMA
Treasury Redemption and Reinvestment Policy,” by Michelle Ezer, Joshua Frost, Frank M. Keane, Julie A.
Remache, and Brian P. Sack, June 16, 2010.
7 This estimate, like that of the effect of reinvesting principal from MBS, is uncertain and reflects
market reactions to FOMC announcements about asset purchases that were made when financial market
functioning was impaired.
Page 22 of 46

--- Page 26 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
LONG-RUN PROJECTIONS OF THE BALANCE SHEET AND MONETARY BASE
The staff have prepared three scenarios for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet
that correspond to the policy alternatives presented above: a baseline scenario that
corresponds to Alternative B2, a second scenario that corresponds to Alternatives A
and B1, and a third scenario that corresponds to Alternative C. Projections under each
scenario are based on assumptions about each component of the balance sheet. Details
of these assumptions are described in Explanatory Note C.
Under all three scenarios, the balance sheet declines from its May 2010 peak of
$2.34 trillion in May 2010 and continues to contract for a number of years as securities
mature, prepay, or are sold, or as credit extensions are repaid; however, the rate of
contraction differs depending on whether the principal payments from assets are s
e
v
reinvested. After reserve balances hit the assumed $25 billion floor and the U.S. i
t
a
n
Treasury’s supplementary financing account has been drained, the balance sheet begins r
e
t
l
A
to expand as purchases of Treasury securities match the growth of Federal Reserve
capital and notes in circulation. In all three scenarios, the balance sheet reaches a size
of about $1.8 trillion by the end of 2020.8
In the scenario that corresponds to Alternative B2, the FOMC continues to allow
agency MBS and agency debt securities to roll off as they mature or are prepaid. In this
baseline scenario, we assume that the FOMC begins asset sales in the second quarter of
8 The composition of Federal Reserve assets in these projections differs notably at times from historical
patterns. Prior to August 2007, U.S. Treasury securities were about 90 percent of assets, and the Federal
Reserve did not hold any agency debt or MBS. By contrast, under the baseline scenario, Treasury
securities are projected to account for only around 35 percent of total assets at the end of 2010. However,
by the end of 2020, Treasury securities in the SOMA portfolio account for 96 percent of total assets.
Page 23 of 46

--- Page 27 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
2013, six months after the assumed rise in the target federal funds rate.9 Specifically,
beginning at that time, holdings of agency MBS and agency debt securities are reduced
over five years and reach zero in the first quarter of 2018.10 All Treasury securities are
rolled over as they mature, continuing current practice.
Under the scenario that corresponds to Alternatives A and B1, the Desk reinvests
the principal payments from Treasury coupon instruments, agency MBS, and agency debt
securities in Treasury coupon securities to prevent a decline in the System’s total
holdings of longer-term instruments until the target federal funds rate increases in the
fourth quarter of 2012.11 Despite this reinvestment, total assets decline some over this
period as credit extensions are repaid. After the target federal funds rate increases,
agency MBS and agency debt holdings are allowed to mature or prepay without
s
e reinvestment. As in the baseline scenario, all Treasury securities are rolled over as they
v
i
t
a mature, and sales of agency MBS and agency debt securities commence in the second
n
r
e quarter of 2013. Also as in the baseline, holdings of agency MBS and agency debt
t
l
A
securities are reduced for five years until they fall to zero.
In the scenario that corresponds to Alternative C, agency MBS and agency debt
securities are treated as in the baseline scenario. Treasury securities, however, are
allowed to run off as they mature beginning in September of 2010.
Under the baseline, total assets are projected to be substantially lower over the
next few years than in the baseline projection that was presented in June . This revision
is mainly driven by higher forecasted prepayments of agency MBS that, in turn, reflect
the lower level of current and projected mortgage rates relative to the previous Tealbook.
However, that downward shift is partly offset by the effects of postponing the initiation
of asset sales by one quarter due to the change in the staff’s assumed path for the federal
funds rate. The path of total assets is also projected to be slightly lower later in the
decade due to a modest downward revision in the projected path of Federal Reserve notes
9 The Tealbook projection assumes that the federal funds rate lifts off in the fourth quarter of 2012.
The baseline balance sheet projection assumes that the tools to drain reserve balances (reverse repurchase
agreements and the term deposit facility) are not used.
10 Given the maturity schedule for agency debt securities, the amount of sales necessary to reduce
holdings of these securities to zero over the five year period is minimal.
11 The reinvestment of proceeds from agency MBS and agency debt may have an impact on the timing
of the lift off in the federal funds rate; however, for simplicity, this exercise does not incorporate this
potential feedback effect on the path of the federal funds rate.
Page 24 of 46

--- Page 28 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
in circulation and a corresponding shift in the projection of the Federal Reserve’s
holdings of Treasury securities.12
On the liability side of the balance sheet, under the baseline, reserve balances are
lower initially than in the previous projection because of the downward revision to the
agency MBS forecast path. This downward revision is offset somewhat over the medium
term by an increased level of holdings of agency MBS, as implied by the one-quarter
delay in the sales of these securities. As a result, the U.S. Treasury’s supplementary
financing account falls to zero in early 2015—the same timing as in the June Tealbook.
Under the baseline scenario, the monetary base is projected to contract, on net,
through 2014; this path largely mirrors that of reserve balances. In particular, Federal
Reserve notes in circulation are projected to follow a fairly steady upward trajectory, and s
e
v
hence the monetary base contracts as reserve balances fall. Once reserve balances reach t i
a
n
$25 billion and stabilize at that level, the monetary base starts rising roughly in parallel r
e
t
l
with the amount of Federal Reserve notes in circulation. A
12 Federal Reserve notes in circulation grow in line with the staff forecast for money stock currency
over the near term. In the longer term, Federal Reserve notes in circulation grow at the same rate as
nominal GDP. The current path for Federal Reserve notes in circulation is lower relative to the previous
projection in large part because the staff’s forecast for money stock currency for 2012 was incorporated for
the first time this round.
Page 25 of 46

--- Page 29 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Baseline Scenario
End-of-Year
Jun 30, 2010 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
$ Billions
Total assets 2,334 2,177 1,678 1,348 1,485 1,648 1,841
Selected assets:
Liquidity programs for financial firms 2 0 0 0 0 0 0
Primary, seconda ry, and seasonal credit 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
Lending though other credit fac ilities 42 4 1 1 2 2 0 0 0
Term Asset-Backed Securitie s Loan Facility (TALF) 42 4 1 1 2 2 0 0 0
Support for specific institutions 118 102 31 13 5 0 0
Credit extended to AIG 50 4 9 0 0 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, …
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC 67 5 3 3 1 1 3 5 0 0
Securities held outright 2,060 1,929 1,544 1,252 1,406 1,577 1,773
s
e U.S. Treasury securities 777 775 775 775 1,221 1,577 1,773
v
i Agency debt securities 165 147 77 39 16 0 0
t
a Agency mortgage-backed securities 1,118 1,007 692 438 169 0 0
n
r Special drawing rights certificate account 5 5 7 7 7 7 7
e
t Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1 1 1 1 0 0 0
l
A Total other assets 112 103 89 78 72 69 66
Total liabilities 2,278 2,118 1,600 1,245 1,349 1,468 1,603
Selected liabilities:
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 904 919 981 1,119 1,241 1,360 1,495
Reverse repurchase agreements with foreign official
and international accounts 67 67 59 59 59 59 59
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,263 1,113 546 53 35 35 35
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 972 831 336 25 25 25 25
U.S. Treasury, general account 88 80 5 5 5 5 5
U.S. Treasury, supplementary financing account 200 200 200 18 0 0 0
Total capital 56 59 78 103 136 180 239
Source. Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
Page 26 of 46

--- Page 30 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
Growth Rates for the Monetary Base
Alternative A
Date Baseline Alternative C
and B1
Percent, annual rate
Monthly
Jan-10 -17.8 -17.8 -17.8
Feb-10 72.2 72.2 72.2
Mar-10 -19.7 -19.7 -19.7
Apr-10 -37.6 -37.6 -37.6 s
e
v
May-10 -2.0 -2.0 -2.0 i
t
a
Jun-10 -5.8 -5.8 -5.8 n
r
e
Jul-10 27.1 29.7 27.3 l t
A
Aug-10 10.4 19.0 10.6
Sep-10 -33.8 -20.6 -40.3
Oct-10 -19.8 -3.9 -27.6
Nov-10 -9.2 7.0 -12.0
Dec-10 -29.4 -14.3 -33.3
Quarterly
Q1 2010 14.0 14.0 14.0
Q2 2010 -10.4 -10.4 -10.4
Q3 2010 6.0 10.3 5.4
Q4 2010 -18.1 -3.9 -23.0
Annual - Q4 to Q4
2009 41.5 41.5 41.5
2010 -2.3 2.4 -3.7
2011 -13.3 -0.1 -17.1
2012 -13.2 -4.3 -23.2
2013 -11.8 -8.8 -2.8
Note. Not seasonally adjusted.
Page 27 of 46

--- Page 31 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
DEBT, BANK CREDIT, AND MONEY FORECASTS
Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to expand on average at an annual
rate of about 4¾ percent during the second half of this year, with private-sector debt
rising only slightly and government debt growing rapidly, and is expected to grow
5 percent in 2011. In spite of historically low mortgage rates, sluggish housing demand
is projected to weigh heavily on the growth of residential mortgage debt through the first
half of 2011. After declining a bit further in the current quarter, consumer credit is
expected to pick up late this year and expand at a moderate pace in 2011, supported by a
gradual increase in spending on consumer durables. Although standards and terms for
bank loans appear to be easing somewhat, lending conditions nonetheless remain tight,
and the relatively low projected level of capital spending and firms’ very high holdings of
s
e liquid assets suggest continued weak demand for funding. Consequently, borrowing by
v
i
a t nonfinancial businesses is expected to be tepid, with debt in this sector increasing about
n
r
e 2 percent over the second half of 2010 and at a slightly faster pace next year. Federal
t
l
A
government debt is projected to grow at a double-digit rate over the remainder of this
year and in 2011.
Commercial bank credit is expected to be about flat in the current quarter, as
continued declines in loans are offset by robust growth in securities holdings. After
running off for 2010 as a whole, however, bank credit is projected to increase about
3¼ percent in 2011 as modest loan growth resumes and securities continue to expand.
Commercial and industrial loans are expected to stop falling next quarter, but growth
remains subdued throughout the forecast period. Consumer loans at banks are projected
to be about flat in the second half of 2010 and then increase modestly in 2011. By
contrast, real estate loans are expected to continue contracting through the first quarter of
next year before recovering slowly over the remainder of the forecast period. Poor
fundamentals for nonresidential structures, along with elevated charge-offs of troubled
loans, should result in continued declines in banks’ commercial real estate loan
portfolios. Banks’ securities holdings are projected to expand at a moderate pace over
the forecast period as banks continue to favor safe and liquid investments amid weak loan
demand.
M2 is expected to continue to expand at a slower pace than nominal GDP over the
forecast period as financial strains and the associated safe-haven demands for M2 assets
unwind. Small time deposits and retail money market funds are projected to run off
Page 28 of 46

--- Page 32 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
Growth Rates for M2
(Percent, seasonally adjusted annual rate)
Monthly Growth Rates Tealbook Forecast*
Jan-10 -7.9
Feb-10 8.7
Mar-10 -3.4
s
e
Apr-10 -3.9 v
i
t
May-10 11.6 a
n
Jun-10 4.4 e r
t
Jul-10 -0.8 A l
Aug-10 1.5
Sep-10 1.6
Oct-10 1.5
Nov-10 1.7
Dec-10 1.7
Quarterly Growth Rates
2010 Q1 0.0
2010 Q2 2.0
2010 Q3 2.5
2010 Q4 1.6
Annual Growth Rates
2009 5.1
2010 1.5
2011 2.5
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Tealbook
forecast. Actual data through July 2010; projections thereafter.
Page 29 of 46

--- Page 33 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
through 2011, though with a moderating pace of decline. Growth of liquid deposits is
expected to slow somewhat further from its robust 2009 pace but remain solid over the
forecast period. Currency growth is projected to stay subdued as precautionary demand
for U.S. dollars wanes.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
Page 30 of 46

--- Page 34 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
DIRECTIVE
The June directive appears below. Drafts for an August directive corresponding
to each of the four policy alternatives appear on subsequent pages. The directive for
Alternatives A and B1 would instruct the Desk to maintain the SOMA’s total holdings of
longer-term securities at roughly its current level by reinvesting repayments of principal
from agency debt and MBS, and from Treasury coupon securities, in Treasury coupon
issues, effective September 1. The directive for Alternative C would instruct the Desk to
stop reinvesting the proceeds of maturing Treasury securities, effective September 1.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
June 2010 FOMC Directive e
t
l
A
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of
the Federal Reserve's agency MBS transactions. The System Open Market Account
Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments
regarding the System's balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the
Committee's objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
Page 31 of 46

--- Page 35 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
August 2010 FOMC Directive — Alternative A
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ ⅛ percent. The Committee directs the
Desk to purchase longer-term Treasury securities during the intermeeting period to
maintain the total face value of the System Open Market Account’s holdings of
Treasury securities, agency debt, and agency mortgage-backed securities at
approximately $2 trillion. The Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and
coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s
agency MBS transactions. The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary
will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s
s
e
v balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of
i
t
a
n maximum employment and price stability.
r
e
t
l
A
Page 32 of 46

--- Page 36 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
August 2010 FOMC Directive — Alternative B1
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk
to purchase longer-term Treasury securities during the intermeeting period to
maintain the total face value of the System Open Market Account’s holdings of
Treasury securities, agency debt, and agency mortgage-backed securities at
approximately $2 trillion. The Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and
coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s
agency MBS transactions. The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary
will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s
s
e
balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of v
i
t
a
maximum employment and price stability. n
r
e
t
l
A
Page 33 of 46

--- Page 37 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
August 2010 FOMC Directive — Alternative B2
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of
the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions. The System Open Market Account
Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments
regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the
Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
Page 34 of 46

--- Page 38 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
June 2010 FOMC Directive — Alternative C
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of
the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions. To gradually reduce the size of the
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over time, the Committee directs the Desk to not
reinvest the proceeds of maturing Treasury securities held by the System Open
Market Account, effective September 1, 2010, and to maintain its practice of not
reinvesting the proceeds of maturing agency debt and payments on agency
mortgage-backed securities held by the System Open Market Account. The System
s
e
Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee informed of v
i
t
a
ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect the n
r
e
attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and price l t
A
stability.
Page 35 of 46

--- Page 39 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
(This page is intentionally blank.)
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
Page 36 of 46

--- Page 40 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
Explanatory Notes
A. Measures of the Equilibrium Real Rate
The equilibrium real rate is the real federal funds rate that, if maintained, would be
projected to return output to its potential level over time. The short-run equilibrium rate is
defined as the rate that would close the output gap in twelve quarters given the corresponding
model’s projection of the economy. The medium-run concept is the value of the real federal
funds rate projected to keep output at potential in seven years, under the assumption that
monetary policy acts to bring actual and potential output into line in the short run and then keeps
them equal thereafter. The TIPS-based factor model measure provides an estimate of market
expectations for the real federal funds rate seven years ahead.
Measure Description
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is
Single-equation based on an estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current
Model value of the output gap and its lagged values as well as the lagged values of
the real federal funds rate.
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for six
Small
variables: the output gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus,
Structural
the trend growth rate of output, the real bond yield, and the real federal
Model
funds rate.
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using EDO—an estimated dynamic-
s
stochastic-general-equilibrium (DSGE) model of the U.S. economy— e
t
o
EDO Model depend on data for major spending categories, price and wages, and the N
federal funds rate as well as the model’s structure and estimate of the output y
r
gap. o
t
a
n
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale a
l
p
econometric model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of x
FRB/US Model E
economic factors, some of which take the form of projected values of the
model’s exogenous variables.
Two measures are presented—based on the FRB/US and the EDO models.
Tealbook- Both models are matched to the extended Tealbook forecast. Model
consistent simulations determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the
output gap conditional on the extended baseline.
Page 37 of 46

--- Page 41 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
Measure Description
Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) reflect investors’
expectations of the future path of real interest rates. The TIPS-based
measure of the equilibrium real rate is constructed using the seven-year-
TIPS-based ahead instantaneous real forward rate derived from TIPS yields as of the
Factor Model Tealbook publication date. This forward rate is adjusted to remove
estimates of the term and liquidity premiums based on a three-factor
arbitrage-free term-structure model applied to TIPS yields, nominal yields,
and inflation.
The actual real federal funds rate is constructed as the difference between the nominal
rate and realized inflation, where the nominal rate is measured as the quarterly average of the
observed federal funds rate, and realized inflation is given by the log difference between the core
PCE price index and its lagged value four quarters earlier. If the upcoming FOMC meeting falls
early in the quarter, the lagged inflation measure ends in the last quarter. For the current quarter,
the nominal rate is specified as the target federal funds rate on the Tealbook publication date.
Estimates of the real federal funds rate depend on the proxies for expected inflation used.
The table below shows estimated real federal funds rates based on lagged core PCE inflation, the
definition used in the Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate chart; lagged four-quarter headline
PCE inflation; and projected four-quarter headline PCE inflation beginning with the next quarter.
For each estimate of the real rate, the table also provides the Tealbook-consistent FRB/US-based
measure of the short-run equilibrium real rate and the projected average real federal funds rate
over the next twelve quarters.
s
e
t
o
N Tealbook-consistent Tealbook
y Actual real federal FRB/US-based projected
r Proxy used for
o funds rate measure of the real funds rate
a t expected inflation
n (current value) equilibrium real funds (avg. over next
a
p l rate (current value) twelve quarters)
x
E Lagged core inflation -1.4 -2.3 -0.7
Lagged headline
-1.8 -2.5 -0.9
inflation
Projected headline
-1.1 -2.4 -0.8
inflation
Page 38 of 46

--- Page 42 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
B. Analysis of Policy Paths and Confidence Intervals
RULE SPECIFICATIONS
For the following rules, ݅ denotes the federal funds rate for quarter t, while the
௧
explanatory variables include the staff’s projection of trailing four-quarter core PCE inflation
(ߨ ), inflation two and three quarters ahead (ߨ and ߨ ), the output gap in the current period
௧ ௧ାଶ|௧ ௧ାଷ|௧
and one quarter ahead ( ݕ െ ݕכ and ݕ െ ݕכ ), and the three-quarter-ahead forecast of
௧ ௧ ௧ାଵ|௧ ௧ାଵ|௧
annual average GDP growth relative to potential (Δସݕ െ Δସݕכ ), and denotes an assumed
௧ାଷ|௧ ௧ାଷ|௧
value of policymakers’ long-run inflation objective. The outcome-based and forecast-based rules
were estimated using real-time data over the sample 1988:1-2006:4; each specification was
chosen using the Bayesian information criterion. Each rule incorporates a 75 basis point shift in
the intercept, specified as a sequence of 25 basis point increments during the first three quarters
of 1998. The first two simple rules were proposed by Taylor (1993, 1999). The prescriptions of
the first-difference rule do not depend on assumptions regarding r* or the level of the output gap;
see Orphanides (2003).
݅ ൌ 1.20݅ െ 0.39݅ ൅ 0.19ሾ1.17 ൅ 1.73ߨ
௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ିଶ ௧
Outcome-based rule
൅ 3.66ሺݕ െ ݕכ ሻ െ 2.72 ሺݕ െݕ כ ሻሿ
௧ ௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ିଵ
݅ ൌ 1.18݅ െ 0.38݅ ൅ 0.20ሾ0.98 ൅ 1.72ߨ
௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ିଶ ௧ାଶ|௧
Forecast-based rule
൅2.29൫ݕ െ ݕכ ൯െ 1.37 ሺݕ െݕ כ ሻሿ
௧ାଵ|௧ ௧ାଵ|௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ିଵ
Taylor (1993) rule ݅ ൌ 2 ൅ߨ ൅ 0.5 ሺߨ െ ߨ כ ሻ ൅ 0.5 ሺݕ െ ݕכ ሻ
௧ ௧ ௧ ௧ ௧
s
Taylor (1999) rule ݅ ௧ ൌ 2 ൅ߨ ௧ ൅ 0.5 ሺߨ ௧ െ ߨ כ ሻ ൅ ሺݕ ௧ െ ݕ ௧ כ ሻ o t e
N
First-difference rule ݅ ൌ ݅ ൅ 0.5൫ߨ െߨ כ ൯൅0 .5ሺ ߂ସݕ െ ߂ସݕכ ሻ y
௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ାଷ|௧ ௧ାଷ|௧ ௧ାଷ|௧ r
o
a
t
n
FRB/US MODEL SIMULATIONS a
l
p
x
E
Prescriptions from the two empirical rules are computed using dynamic simulations of
the FRB/US model, implemented as though the rule were followed starting at this FOMC
meeting. The dotted line labeled “Previous Tealbook” is based on the current specification of the
policy rule, applied to the previous Tealbook projection. Confidence intervals are based on
stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model with shocks drawn from the estimated residuals over
1969-2008.
INFORMATION FROM FINANCIAL MARKETS
The expected funds rate path is based on Eurodollar quotes and implied three-month
forward rates from swaps, and the confidence intervals for this path are constructed using prices
of interest rate caps.
Page 39 of 46

--- Page 43 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
NEAR-TERM PRESCRIPTIONS OF SIMPLE POLICY RULES
These prescriptions are calculated using Tealbook projections for inflation and the output
gap. Because the first-difference rule involves the lagged funds rate, the value labeled “Previous
Tealbook” for the current quarter is computed using the actual value of the lagged funds rate, and
the one-quarter-ahead prescriptions are based on this rule’s prescription for the current quarter.
REFERENCES
Taylor, John B. (1993). “Discretion versus policy rules in practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195-214.
————— (1999). “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B.
Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules. The University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-341.
Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor
Rule,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (July), pp. 983-1022.
s
e
t
o
N
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
Page 40 of 46

--- Page 44 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
C. Long-run Projections of the Balance Sheet and Monetary Base
This explanatory note presents the assumptions underlying the projections provided in the
section entitled “Long-Run Projections of the Balance Sheet and Monetary Base.”
GENERAL ASSUMPTIONS
The balance sheet projections are constructed on a monthly frequency from July 2010 to
December 2020. The few balance sheet items that are not discussed below are assumed to be
constant over the projection period at the level observed on June 30, 2010. The projections for all
major asset and liability categories under the baseline scenario are summarized in the table that
follows the bullet points.
The Tealbook projection assumes that the federal funds rate begins to increase in the
fourth quarter of 2012. The balance sheet projections assume that no use of short-term draining
tools is necessary to achieve the projected path for the federal funds rate.
ASSETS
Treasury securities, agency MBS, and agency debt
 The baseline scenario, which corresponds to Alternative B2.
o Prepayments of MBS and maturing agency debt are not reinvested.1
o The Federal Reserve will begin to sell agency MBS and agency debt securities
six months after the FOMC begins to increase the federal funds rate.
s
e
Commencing in the second quarter of 2013, the holdings of these securities are t
o
N
reduced over five years and reach zero in the second quarter of 2018.
y
r
o
o Due to expected settlement lags and prepayments, agency MBS holdings peak at t
a
n
$1.1 trillion in June 2010, a somewhat lower level than the amount purchased.
a
l
For agency MBS, the rate of prepayment is based on estimates from one of the p
x
E
program’s investment managers. Such estimates are sensitive to the assumptions
on which they are predicated.
o Holdings of agency debt securities peaked at $169 billion in March 2010 and
decline slowly thereafter as holdings continue to mature or are sold.
o Treasury securities held in the SOMA portfolio are reinvested as they mature.
The current weighted average maturity of Treasury securities is about seven
years.
1 Prepayments include regular payments of principal and repayments of mortgages.
Page 41 of 46

--- Page 45 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
 Under Alternatives A and B1, in addition to reinvesting Treasury securities as they
mature, the Committee reinvests the proceeds received from maturing agency debt and
maturing and prepaying agency MBS in Treasury coupon securities to prevent a drop in
the System’s total holdings of longer-term instruments. Once the target federal funds rate
increases in the fourth quarter of 2012, agency MBS and agency debt holdings continue
to decline as these assets mature or prepay; however, the proceeds are no longer invested
in any instrument. As in the baseline scenario, sales of agency MBS and agency debt
securities commence in the second quarter of 2013, and these securities are reduced over
five years until the holdings fall to zero.
 Under Alternative C, the Committee allows Treasury securities, agency MBS, and agency
debt securities to prepay or to redeem as they mature. As in the baseline scenario, sales
of agency MBS and agency debt securities commence in the second quarter of 2013, and
these securities are reduced over five years until the holdings fall to zero.
 In all scenarios, a minimum level of $25 billion is set for reserve balances. In all
scenarios, to ensure that reserve balances do not fall below this minimum level, first the
U.S. Treasury’s supplementary financing account (SFA) is reduced. After the SFA
declines to zero, Treasury bills are purchased. Purchases of bills continue until these
securities comprise one-third of the Federal Reserve’s total Treasury holdings. Once this
threshold it met, the Federal Reserve buys notes and bonds in addition to bills in order to
keep bills at one-third of total Treasury holdings.
Liquidity Programs and Credit Facilities
 Loans through the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) peaked at $48
billion in December 2009. Credit extended through this facility declines to zero in the
s
e
t fourth quarter of 2015, reflecting loan maturities and prepayments.
o
N
y  The assets held by TALF LLC increase to $1 billion by the end of 2011 and remain at
r
o
t that level through December 2014, before declining to zero thereafter. Assets held by
a
n TALF LLC consist of investments of commitment fees collected by the LLC and the U.S.
a
l
p Treasury’s initial funding. In this projection, the LLC does not purchase any asset-
x
E
backed securities received by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in connection with
a decision of a borrower not to repay a TALF loan.
 Central bank liquidity swap lines are projected to hold steady at $1 billion until dropping
to zero in November 2010.
 Credit extended to AIG, the sum of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s extension
of revolving credit and its preferred interests in AIA Aurora LLC and ALICO Holdings
LLC, increases slightly to $54 billion in November 2010 and then declines to zero by the
end of 2012.
 The assets held by Maiden Lane LLC, Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC
are sold over time and reach either zero or a nominal level by the end of 2016.
Page 42 of 46

--- Page 46 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
LIABILITIES AND CAPITAL
 Federal Reserve notes in circulation grow in line with the staff forecast for money stock
currency through the end of 2012. From 2013 to the end of the projection period, Federal
Reserve notes in circulation grow at the same rate as nominal GDP, as projected in the
extended Tealbook forecast.
 The U.S. Treasury’s general account (TGA) follows the staff forecast for end-of-month
U.S. Treasury operating cash balances through the first quarter of 2011.2 At that point,
the TGA drops back to its historical target level of $5 billion as it is assumed that the
Treasury will have implemented a new cash management system that allows it to invest
funds in excess of $5 billion. The TGA remains constant at $5 billion over the remainder
of the forecast period.
 Balances in the SFA remain at their current level until the SFA is reduced to ensure
reserve balance levels do not fall below $25 billion.
 Federal Reserve capital grows 15 percent per year, in line with the average rate of the
past ten years.
 In general, increases in the level of assets of the Federal Reserve generate higher levels of
reserve balances. Increases in the levels of other liability items, such as Federal Reserve
notes in circulation or the Treasury’s general account, like increases in the level of
Reserve Bank capital, drain reserve balances. When increases in these liability or capital
items would otherwise cause reserve balances to fall below $25 billion, purchases of
Treasury securities are assumed in order to maintain that level of reserve balances.
s
e
t
o
N
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
2 The staff forecast for end-of-month U.S. Treasury operating cash balances includes forecasts of both
the TGA and balances associated with the U.S. Treasury’s Tax and Loan program. Because balances
associated with the Tax and Loan program are $2 billion, for the time being, this forecast is a good proxy
for the level of TGA balances.
Page 43 of 46

--- Page 47 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Baseline Scenario
End-of-Year
Jun 30, 2010 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
$ Billions
Total assets 2,334 2,177 1,678 1,348 1,485 1,648 1,841
Selected assets:
Liquidity programs for financial firms 2 0 0 0 0 0 0
Primary, seconda ry, and seasonal credit 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
Lending though other credit fac ilities 42 4 1 1 2 2 0 0 0
Term Asset-Backed Securitie s Loan Facility (TALF) 42 4 1 1 2 2 0 0 0
Support for specific institutions 118 102 31 13 5 0 0
Credit extended to AIG 50 4 9 0 0 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC, …
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC 67 5 3 3 1 1 3 5 0 0
Securities held outright 2,060 1,929 1,544 1,252 1,406 1,577 1,773
U.S. Treasury securities 777 775 775 775 1,221 1,577 1,773
Agency debt securities 165 147 77 39 16 0 0
Agency mortgage-backed securities 1,118 1,007 692 438 169 0 0
Special drawing rights certificate account 5 5 7 7 7 7 7
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1 1 1 1 0 0 0
Total other assets 112 103 89 78 72 69 66
Total liabilities 2,278 2,118 1,600 1,245 1,349 1,468 1,603
Selected liabilities:
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 904 919 981 1,119 1,241 1,360 1,495
Reverse repurchase agreements with foreign official
and international accounts 67 67 59 59 59 59 59
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,263 1,113 546 53 35 35 35
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 972 831 336 25 25 25 25
U.S. Treasury, general account 88 80 5 5 5 5 5
U.S. Treasury, supplementary financing account 200 200 200 18 0 0 0
Total capital 56 59 78 103 136 180 239
s Source. Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
e
t
o
N
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
Page 44 of 46

--- Page 48 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
Abbreviations
ABS asset-backed securities
AFE advanced foreign economy
ARRA American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
BEA Bureau of Economic Analysis
CDS credit default swap
C&I commercial and industrial
CMBS commercial mortgage-backed securities
CPI consumer price index
CRE commercial real estate
DSGE dynamic stochastic general equilibrium
EC European Commission
ECB European Central Bank
ECI Employment Cost Index
EDO
Model Estimated Dynamic Optimization-Based Model
EEB extended and emergency unemployment benefits
EME emerging market economy
EONIA Euro Overnight Index Average
E&S equipment and software
EU European Union
EUC emergency unemployment compensation
FHFA Federal Housing Finance Agency
FI fiscal impetus
FOMC Federal Open Market Committee; also, the Committee
Page 45 of 46

--- Page 49 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) August 5, 2010
FRB Federal Reserve Board
GDP gross domestic product
GSE government-sponsored enterprise
HARP Home Affordable Refinance Plan
HELOC home equity line of credit
IMF International Monetary Fund
IP industrial production
Libor London interbank offered rate
LTV loan to value
MBS mortgage-backed securities
NAIRU non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment
NIPA national income and product accounts
NRS nonresidential structures
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OIS overnight index swaps
PCE personal consumption expenditures
SCAP Supervisory Capital Assessment Program
SEC Securities and Exchange Commission
SLOOS Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices
SOMA System Open Market Account
TALF Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility
TIPS Treasury inflation-protected securities
VAR vector autoregression
VAT value-added tax
WTI West Texas Intermediate
Page 46 of 46

# Tables

## Page_12_Table_1


| Economic Activity                       |                                                                     |                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                            |                                                                                         |
|-----------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Recent
Developments                     |                                                                     | recovery is
proceeding                                                                      | recovery is proceeding
at an unsatisfactory pace                                                                                        | pace of recovery has
slowed                                                                                                                                                          | recovery is proceeding                                                                     |                                                                                         |
| Labor
Market                            |                                                                     | is improving
gradually; high
unemployment;
employers remain
reluctant to add to
payrolls    | recovery is proceeding
at an unsatisfactory
pace; high
unemployment;
employers remain
reluctant to add to
payrolls                      | pace of recovery has
slowed; high
unemployment;
employers remain
reluctant to add to
payrolls                                                                                        | is improving only
slowly; high
unemployment;
employers remain
reluctant to add to
payrolls | is improving
gradually                                                                  |
| Outlook                                 |                                                                     | pace of recovery
likely to be
moderate
for a time                                           | near-term outlook has
weakened                                                                                                          | pace of recovery likely
to be modest in the near
term                                                                                                                                | pace of recovery
likely to be
moderate for a time                                          | a sustainable
economic
recovery is under
way                                            |
| Financial Conditions                    |                                                                     |                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                            |                                                                                         |
| Recent
Developments                     |                                                                     | less supportive of
economic growth;
bank lending has
continued to
contract in recent
months | somewhat less
supportive of economic
growth in recent
months; bank lending
has continued to
contract                                    | bank lending has continued to contract                                                                                                                                               |                                                                                            | somewhat more
supportive of
economic growth
in recent weeks                             |
| Inflation                               |                                                                     |                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                            |                                                                                         |
| Recent
Developments                     |                                                                     | substantial slack
restraining cost
pressures; stable
inflation
expectations                 | substantial slack restraining cost pressures; and…                                                                                      |                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                            | n.a.                                                                                    |
|                                         |                                                                     |                                                                                             | stable inflation expectations                                                                                                           |                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                            |                                                                                         |
| Outlook                                 |                                                                     | likely to be subdued
for some time                                                          | likely to remain, for
some time, below levels
most consistent with
dual mandate                                                         | likely to be subdued for some time                                                                                                                                                   |                                                                                            | gradual return to
higher levels of
resource
utilization in a
context of price
stability |
|                                         | Federal Funds Rate Target and Interest Rates Paid on Reserves (IOR) |                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                            |                                                                                         |
| Intermeeting
Period                     |                                                                     | 0 to ¼ percent                                                                              | 0 to ⅛ percent;
cut IOR to 10 bps                                                                                                       | 0 to ¼ percent                                                                                                                                                                       |                                                                                            |                                                                                         |
| Forward
Guidance for
Federal Funds
Rate |                                                                     | economic conditions
are likely to warrant
exceptionally low
levels for an
extended period   | maintain this range until
resource utilization and
underlying inflation
have moved appreciably
closer to longer-term
objectives         | exceptionally low levels
likely to be warranted
for an extended
period—at least until
resource utilization and
underlying inflation are
clearly moving toward
longer-term objectives | economic
conditions are
likely to warrant
exceptionally low
levels for an
extended period  | economic
conditions are
likely to warrant
low levels for
some time                      |
| Reinvestment of SOMA Assets             |                                                                     |                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                            |                                                                                         |
| Approach                                |                                                                     | Interim strategy:
allow agency debt
and MBS to roll off
but reinvest
Treasuries             | reinvest principal payments from agency debt
and MBS into longer-term Treasury securities;
continue to roll over maturing Treasury debt |                                                                                                                                                                                      | Interim strategy:
allow agency debt
and MBS to roll off
but reinvest
Treasuries            | allow Treasuries
as well as agency
debt and MBS to
roll off                             |