# 20100921_tealbook.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:40:02*
*Pages: 49, Tables: 6*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Prefatory Note
The attached document represents the most complete and accurate version available
based on original files from the FOMC Secretariat at the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.
Please note that some material may have been redacted from this document if that
material was received on a confidential basis. Redacted material is indicated by
occasional gaps in the text or by gray boxes around non-text content. All redacted
passages are exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom of
Information Act.
Content last modified 01/29/2016.

--- Page 2 ---

Class I FOMC – Restricted Controlled (FR)
Report to the FOMC
on Economic Conditions
and Monetary Policy
Book B
Monetary Policy:
Strategies and Alternatives
September 16, 2010
Prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee
by the staff of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

--- Page 3 ---

(This page is intentionally blank.)

--- Page 4 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
Monetary Policy Strategies
s
e
The exhibit “Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate” displays estimates of short- g i
e
t
run r*, defined as the real federal funds rate that, if maintained over time, would return a
r
t
S
output to its potential in twelve quarters. The Tealbook-consistent estimate of short-run
r* generated by the FRB/US model has declined 10 basis points, to minus 2.4 percent, as
the effect of the reduction in GDP growth in the staff projection exceeded that of the
downward revision to potential GDP, implying somewhat lower resource utilization over
the medium run.1 The EDO model’s Tealbook-consistent r* estimate is now minus 3.7
percent, up substantially from the August Tealbook. However, the rise in this estimate
reflects the re-estimation of the EDO model and a methodological change in how
expectations of future monetary policy are treated in the EDO-based calculation.2 By
itself, the modest revision to the staff forecast for resource utilization would have reduced
the EDO model’s Tealbook-consistent r* by 30 basis points. The estimate of short-run r*
generated by the EDO model using its own projections has declined about 60 basis
points, while the corresponding estimate from the FRB/US model has declined about 75
basis points. In the case of FRB/US, the decline reflects the model’s interpretation of
weaker incoming data on real activity as signaling a persistently slower pace of economic
growth over the medium term. The short-run r* estimates from the small structural
model and the single-equation model have both increased about 30 basis points from the
last round but remain at very low levels; the upward revisions primarily reflect the
change to the staff’s estimate of potential GDP, which implies that the r* estimates are
conditioned on a reduced estimate of the current degree of resource slack.
The exhibit “Constrained vs. Unconstrained Monetary Policy” displays the policy
prescriptions produced by optimal control simulations of the FRB/US model based on the
1 The revisions to the staff’s estimates of the NAIRU are discussed in the box in the nonfinancial
outlook section of Tealbook Part A, “Structural Unemployment.”
2 The changes in monetary policy underlying the calculation of the Tealbook-consistent EDO estimate
of r* were previously modeled as unanticipated shocks to the short-term interest rate rule. As these shocks
were perceived by agents in the model to be temporary, their effect on longer-term interest rate
expectations was muted, implying a low sensitivity of activity to the changes in interest rates incorporated
into the r* calculation. The new procedure for generating r* assumes that private agents understand the
policy strategy embedded in the r* calculation—that is, to close the output gap at a horizon of twelve
quarters—and so anticipate the future policy actions that will be taken to achieve this outcome. As a result,
the policy adjustments required to close the output gap are smaller.
Page 1 of 46

--- Page 5 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate
s
e
i
g
e Short-Run Estimates with Confidence Intervals
t Percent
a
r 8 8
t
S
6 6
4 4
2 2
0 0
-2 -2
-4 -4
The actual real funds rate based on lagged core inflation
-6 -6
Range of four model-based estimates
70 Percent confidence interval
-8 90 Percent confidence interval -8
Tealbook-consistent measure (FRB/US)
-10 -10
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Short-Run and Medium-Run Measures
Current Tealbook Previous Tealbook
Short-Run Measures
Single-equation model -2.4 -2.7
Small structural model -2.8 -3.1
EDO model (0.6 (1.1
FRB/US model -3.3 -2.5
Confidence intervals for four model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval -4.0 to 0.4
90 percent confidence interval -5.0 to 1.8
Tealbook-consistent measures
EDO model -3.7 -5.4
FRB/US model -2.4 -2.3
Medium-Run Measures
Single-equation model (1.1 (1.0
Small structural model (1.2 (1.3
Confidence intervals for two model-based estimates
70 percent confidence interval (0.2 to 2.0
90 percent confidence interval -0.4 to 2.6
TIPS-based factor model (2.0 2.0
Memo
Actual real federal funds rate -1.2 -1.4
Note: Explanatory Note A provides background information regarding the construction of these measures and confidence
intervals. The actual real federal funds rate shown is based on lagged core inflation as a proxy for inflation expectations.
For information regarding alternative measures, see Explanatory Note A. Estimates of r* may change at the beginning of a
quarter even when there is no shift in the staff outlook because the twelve quarter horizon covered by the calculation
has rolled forward one quarter. Therefore, whenever the Tealbook is published early in the quarter, this table includes
a third column labeled "Current Quarter Estimate as of Previous Tealbook."
Page 2 of 46

--- Page 6 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
Constrained vs. Unconstrained Monetary Policy
(2 Percent Inflation Goal)
s
e
Nominal Federal Funds Rate Real Federal Funds Rate g i
e
Percent Percent t
8 8 4 4 r
a
Current Tealbook: Constrained S t
Current Tealbook: Unconstrained
Previous Tealbook: Unconstrained
6 6
2 2
4 4
0 0
2 2
-2 -2
0 0
-4 -4
-2 -2
-6 -6
-4 -4
-6 -6 -8 -8
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Civilian Unemployment Rate Core PCE Inflation
Percent Four-quarter average Percent
1 1 11 3.0 3.0
10 10
2.5 2.5
9 9
2.0 2.0
8 8
7 7 1.5 1.5
6 6
1.0 1.0
5 5
0.5 0.5
4 4
3 3 0.0 0.0
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Page 3 of 46

--- Page 7 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
extended staff baseline projection. As discussed in Tealbook Part A, the staff baseline
incorporates the effects of the Federal Reserve’s large-scale asset purchases. In these
s simulations, policymakers are assumed to place equal weight on keeping core PCE
e
i
g
e inflation close to a 2 percent inflation goal, on keeping unemployment close to the
t
a
r
t effective NAIRU, and on minimizing changes in the federal funds rate. As has been true
S
for some time, these simulations indicate that optimal policy is severely constrained by
the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates. With the lower-bound constraint
imposed, the federal funds rate does not begin to rise appreciably until mid-2014, the
unemployment rate remains above the staff’s assumed NAIRU of 5¾ percent until early
2014, and inflation stays persistently below target until the end of 2015 (black solid line).
But if the nominal funds rate could fall below zero, optimal policy would call for the
nominal funds rate to decline to around minus 4 percent in the fourth quarter of 2011
(blue dashed line). This unconstrained funds rate path is similar in shape to that in the
August Tealbook (red dashed line); although the funds rate is on average somewhat
higher during 2011 and 2012, most of this shift is an artifact of starting the optimization
procedure one quarter later than in the August Tealbook. The unconstrained policy, if it
were feasible, would bring the unemployment rate down to the staff estimate of the
NAIRU more rapidly and would allow inflation to reach the 2 percent target in early
2015.
As shown in the exhibit, “The Policy Outlook in an Uncertain Environment,” the
staff’s estimated outcome-based policy rule prescribes keeping the federal funds rate at
its effective lower bound through the first quarter of 2013, one quarter later than in the
August Tealbook. Over the intermeeting period, the expected federal funds rate path
implied by financial market data also has shifted down on net, consistent with the
weaker-than-expected incoming data. The upper bounds of the confidence intervals
derived from options prices have moved down, suggesting that financial market
participants have reduced the odds they place on outcomes with relatively high funds
rates. The table in the lower panel of the exhibit provides near-term prescriptions from
simple policy rules for the nominal federal funds rate. As shown in the left-hand
columns, all of the prescriptions remain at the effective lower bound. The right-hand
columns show the prescriptions that would be implied by these rules in the absence of the
lower bound. The rule prescriptions all continue to be negative, but are uniformly higher
Page 4 of 46

--- Page 8 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
The Policy Outlook in an Uncertain Environment
s
FRB/US Model Simulations of Information from Financial Markets e
i
Estimated Outcome-Based Rule g
e
Percent Percent t
9 9 9 9 r
a
Current Tealbook Current Tealbook t
S
Previous Tealbook Previous Tealbook
8 8 8 8
Staff assumption
7 7 7 7
6 6 6 6
5 5 5 5
4 4 4 4
3 3 3 3
2 2 2 2
1 1 1 1
0 0 0 0
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Note: In both panels, the dark and light shading represent the 70 and 90 percent confidence intervals respectively.
Financial market quotes are as of September 15.
Near-Term Prescriptions of Simple Policy Rules
Constrained Policy Unconstrained Policy
2010Q4 2011Q1 2010Q4 2011Q1
Taylor (1993) rule 0.13 0.13 -0.92 -1.00
Previous Tealbook 0.13 0.13 -1.23 -1.28
Taylor (1999) rule 0.13 0.13 -4.51 -4.59
Previous Tealbook 0.13 0.13 -5.04 -5.03
Estimated outcome-based rule 0.13 0.13 -0.70 -1.64
Previous Tealbook 0.13 0.13 -1.62 -2.49
Estimated forecast-based rule 0.13 0.13 -0.71 -1.60
Previous Tealbook 0.13 0.13 -1.72 -2.50
First-difference rule 0.13 0.13 -0.19 -0.34
Previous Tealbook 0.13 0.13 -0.38 -0.40
Memo
2010Q4 2011Q1
Staff assumption 0.13 0.13
Fed funds futures 0.16 0.14
Median expectation of primary dealers 0.13 0.13
Blue Chip forecast (September 1, 201 0) 0.20 0.20
Note: In calculating the near-term prescriptions of these simple policy rules, policymakers’ long-run inflation objective is
assumed to be 2 percent. Explanatory Note B provides further background information.
Page 5 of 46

--- Page 9 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
than in the August Tealbook, reflecting the effect of the upward adjustment, in the staff
forecast, in near-term inflation and the staff’s reduced estimate of near-term slack.3
s
e
i
g
e
t
a
r
t
S
3 The unconstrained prescriptions from the estimated outcome-based rule and the estimated forecast-
based rule have risen by a greater amount than the other rule prescriptions. A mechanical source of
increase in the prescriptions from these rules arises from the presence of the lagged policy rate as a right-
hand-side variable in the rules. In the August Tealbook, the lagged policy rate entering the 2010 Q4 rule
prescription was the (negative) value for 2010 Q3 obtained by projecting from the rule. As the quarter
nears its end, the observation for the 2010 Q3 funds rate is replaced by the value used in the staff projection
(0.125 percent), and this change boosts the rule prescription. In addition to this mechanical source of
increase, the increase in the prescriptions also partly reflects the high weight assigned to inflation in these
rules.
Page 6 of 46

--- Page 10 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
Monetary Policy Alternatives
This Tealbook presents four policy alternatives—labeled A1, A2, B, and C—for
the Committee’s consideration that span a range of policy choices. In light of the staff
outlook for a prolonged period of significant resource slack and undesirably low
inflation, Alternatives A1, A2, and B are more explicit than past statements about the
Committee’s assessment of inflation relative to its dual mandate. All of the alternatives
maintain the existing target range for the federal funds rate. However, the alternatives
vary in their policies regarding the Federal Reserve’s securities portfolio and in their
descriptions of the Committee’s inclination and approach to taking policy action going
forward. As always, the Committee could mix components of the various alternatives to
s
construct its desired statement. e
v
i
t
a
n
The statement issued under Alternative B would note that information received r
e
t
since the last FOMC meeting “confirms” that the pace of recovery has slowed in recent A l
months. It would also note that measures of underlying inflation have trended down to
levels “somewhat below” those the Committee judges most consistent, over the longer
run, with its dual mandate. In addition, although inflation is characterized as likely to
remain subdued for some time, the language would indicate that inflation subsequently is
expected to rise to mandate-consistent levels. Alternative B would not introduce
additional policy accommodation at this time, and it would maintain the Committee’s
existing reinvestment policy. But the statement for this alternative would make clear that
the Committee “is prepared to provide additional accommodation” to foster the
Committee’s objectives.
Under both of the A alternatives, the Committee would be more direct about its
characterization of inflation and would couple that language with additional large-scale
asset purchases. The statement for Alternative A2 would say that measures of underlying
inflation have trended lower in recent quarters, to levels “below” those the Committee
judges most consistent with its dual mandate. It would also note that in the current
environment, disinflation is an impediment to economic recovery. In the statement for
Alternative A1, the Committee would be even more explicit, indicating that it judges
inflation of “2 percent or a bit less, as measured by the price index for personal
consumption expenditures,” to be most consistent, over the longer run, with its mandate
and noting that underlying inflation is now running below that level. Under either of the
Page 7 of 46

--- Page 11 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
A alternatives, the Committee would announce that it will increase its total holdings of
securities to approximately $2.5 trillion by purchasing an additional $500 billion of
longer-term Treasury securities over the next six months while maintaining its existing
reinvestment policy, in order “to help foster a stronger pace of economic recovery and to
move underlying inflation closer, over time, to rates consistent with its mandate.” The
Committee could then indicate that it will “act as needed” going forward to support a
stronger economic recovery and foster price stability. Or, in Alternative A2, the
Committee could choose language that indicates a more flexible and incremental
approach to managing the size of its securities portfolio under which it would “determine,
each time it meets, whether an adjustment—either upward or downward—to its holdings
of securities is needed to foster maximum employment and price stability.”
s
e The statement under Alternative C would say that the economic recovery “is
v
i
t
a proceeding,” and that the Committee continues to anticipate a gradual return to higher
n
r
e levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability. In addition, this alternative
t
l
A
would change the forward guidance regarding the federal funds rate to state that
economic conditions are likely to warrant “low” (rather than “exceptionally low”) levels
of the federal funds rate for “some time” (rather than for an “extended period”). The
statement would also indicate that the Committee expects to maintain its existing
securities reinvestment policy “for the time being.”
A table summarizing the key components of each alternative appears on the next
page, followed by complete draft statements and the arguments for each alternative.
Page 8 of 46

--- Page 12 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
Table 1: Overview of Alternatives for the September 21 FOMC Statement
Key August September Alternatives
Components Statement A1 A2 B C
Economic Activity
Recent pace of recovery has economic recovery
pace of recovery has slowed in recent months
Developments slowed in recent months is proceeding
pace of recovery in
employment has slowed;
pace of recovery in employment has slowed;
Labor high unemployment; economic recovery
high unemployment;
Market employers remain is proceeding
employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls
reluctant to add to
payrolls
gradual return to although pace of
gradual return to higher
higher resource gradual return to higher resource recovery likely
resource utilization w/
utilization, utilization w/ price stability, although… modest in near
price stability; pace of
Outlook although… term, gradual
recovery likely more return to higher e s
modest in near term than pace of recovery likely modest in near term resource utilization v
had been anticipated t i
w/ price stability a
n
Financial Conditions r
e
t
l
Recent bank lending has bank lending has continued to contract, A
bank lending has continued to contract
Developments continued to contract but at a reduced rate in recent months
Inflation
trended lower;
trended somewhat
underlying trended below
below mandate- stayed subdued;
trended lower; and… inflation running mandate-
consistent levels; and…
Recent below 2 percent consistent levels
and…
Developments PCE inflation
substantial slack;
substantial slack; stable stable inflation
n.a. stable inflation
inflation expectations expectations
expectations
gradual return to
subdued for some
higher resource
time before rising
Outlook subdued for some time n.a. utilization in a
toward mandate-
context of price
consistent levels
stability
Target Federal Funds Rate
Intermeeting
0 to ¼ percent 0 to ¼ percent
Period
Forward exceptionally low levels exceptionally low levels low levels for some
Guidance for an extended period for an extended period time
SOMA Portfolio Policy
keep constant:
keep constant: reinvest increase: purchase $500 billion of keep constant:
for the time being,
Approach principal payments in Treasuries over next six months; maintain existing
maintain existing
Treasuries maintain existing reinvestment policy reinvestment policy
reinvestment policy
Future Policy Action
act as needed |
prepared to provide
each time it meets,
additional employ tools as
Approach employ tools as necessary act as needed determine needed
accommodation as necessary
adjustment, up or
needed
down
Page 9 of 46

--- Page 13 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
AUGUST FOMC STATEMENT
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in June indicates
that the pace of recovery in output and employment has slowed in recent months.
Household spending is increasing gradually, but remains constrained by high
unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight credit.
Business spending on equipment and software is rising; however, investment in
nonresidential structures continues to be weak and employers remain reluctant to add
to payrolls. Housing starts remain at a depressed level. Bank lending has continued to
contract. Nonetheless, the Committee anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of
resource utilization in a context of price stability, although the pace of economic
recovery is likely to be more modest in the near term than had been anticipated.
2. Measures of underlying inflation have trended lower in recent quarters and, with
substantial resource slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer-term
inflation expectations stable, inflation is likely to be subdued for some time.
s
e
v 3. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
i
t
a percent and continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of
n
e r resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are
t
A l likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended
period.
4. To help support the economic recovery in a context of price stability, the Committee
will keep constant the Federal Reserve's holdings of securities at their current level by
reinvesting principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed
securities in longer-term Treasury securities.1 The Committee will continue to roll
over the Federal Reserve's holdings of Treasury securities as they mature.
5. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial
developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to promote economic
recovery and price stability.
1 The Open Market Desk will issue a technical note shortly after the statement providing operational
details on how it will carry out these transactions.
Page 10 of 46

--- Page 14 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
SEPTEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A1
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in JuneAugust
indicatesconfirms that the pace of recovery in output and employment has slowed in
recent months. Household spending is increasing only gradually, but remains
constrained by high unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing wealth,
and tight credit. Business spending on equipment and software is rising; however,has
slowed and investment in nonresidential structures continues to be weak. and
Employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls. Housing starts remain at a depressed
level. Bank lending has continued to contract. Nonetheless, The Committee
anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of
price stability, although the pace of economic recovery is likely to be more modest in
the near term than had been anticipated.
2. Measures of underlying inflation have trended lower in recent quarters. Underlying
inflation is now running below the level of 2 percent or a bit less, as measured by
s
the price index for personal consumption expenditures, that the Committee e
v
judges most consistent, over the longer run, with its mandate to promote t i
a
maximum employment and price stability. In the current environment, n
r
e
disinflation is an impediment to economic recovery. and, with substantial resource t
l
A
slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer-term inflation expectations
stable, inflation is likely to be subdued for some time.
3. To help foster a stronger pace of economic recovery and to move underlying
inflation closer, over time, to rates consistent with its mandate, the Committee
will increase its total holdings of securities to approximately $2.5 trillion by
purchasing an additional $500 billion of longer-term Treasury securities over the
next six months. The Committee will maintain its existing policy of reinvesting
principal payments from its securities holdings. The Committee also will maintain
the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and continues to anticipate
that economic conditions, including low rates of resource utilization, subdued
inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are likely to warrant exceptionally
low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period. To help support the
economic recovery in a context of price stability, the Committee will keep constant
the Federal Reserve's holdings of securities at their current level by reinvesting
principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in
longer-term Treasury securities. The Committee will continue to roll over the Federal
Reserve's holdings of Treasury securities as they mature.
4. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial
developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to promote economic
recovery and price stabilityact as needed to support a stronger economic recovery
and foster price stability.
Page 11 of 46

--- Page 15 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
SEPTEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE A2
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in JuneAugust
indicatesconfirms that the pace of recovery in output and employment has slowed in
recent months. Household spending is increasing only gradually, but remains
constrained by high unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing wealth,
and tight credit. Business spending on equipment and software is rising; however,has
slowed and investment in nonresidential structures continues to be weak. and
Employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls. Housing starts remain at a depressed
level. Bank lending has continued to contract. Nonetheless, The Committee
anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of
price stability, although the pace of economic recovery is likely to be more modest in
the near term than had been anticipated.
2. Measures of underlying inflation have trended lower in recent quarters, to levels
below those the Committee judges most consistent, over the longer run, with its
s
e mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. In the current
v
t i environment, disinflation is an impediment to economic recovery. and, with
a
n
substantial resource slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer-term
r
e
t inflation expectations stable, inflation is likely to be subdued for some time.
l
A
3. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of
resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended
period.
4. To help foster a stronger pace of economic recovery and to move underlying
inflation closer, over time, to rates consistent with its mandate, the Committee
will increase its total holdings of securities to approximately $2.5 trillion by
purchasing an additional $500 billion of longer-term Treasury securities over the
next six months. The Committee will maintain its existing policy of reinvesting
principal payments from its securities holdings. To help support the economic
recovery in a context of price stability, the Committee will keep constant the Federal
Reserve's holdings of securities at their current level by reinvesting principal
payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in longer-term
Treasury securities. The Committee will continue to roll over the Federal Reserve's
holdings of Treasury securities as they mature.
5. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial
developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to promote economic
recovery and price stabilityact as needed to support a stronger economic recovery
and foster price stability.
— OR —
5. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial
developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to promote economic
recovery and price stability. The Committee will determine, each time it meets,
whether an adjustment—either upward or downward—to its holdings of
securities is needed to foster maximum employment and price stability.
Page 12 of 46

--- Page 16 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
SEPTEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE B
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in JuneAugust
indicatesconfirms that the pace of recovery in output and employment has slowed in
recent months. Household spending is increasing gradually, but remains constrained
by high unemployment, modest income growth, lower housing wealth, and tight
credit. Business spending on equipment and software is rising, though less rapidly
than earlier in the year; however, while investment in nonresidential structures
continues to be weak. and Employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls. Housing
starts remainare at a depressed level. Bank lending has continued to contract, but at a
reduced rate in recent months. Nonetheless, The Committee anticipates a gradual
return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability, although
the pace of economic recovery is likely to be more modest in the near term than had
been anticipated.
2. Measures of underlying inflation have trended lower in recent quarters, to levels
s
somewhat below those the Committee judges most consistent, over the longer e
v
run, with its mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. and t i
a
With substantial resource slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer-term n
r
e
inflation expectations stable, inflation is likely to beremain subdued for some time t
l
A
before rising to levels the Committee considers consistent with its mandate.
3. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and continues to anticipate that economic conditions, including low rates of
resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate for an extended
period. The Committee also will maintain its existing policy of reinvesting
principal payments from its securities holdings.
4. To help support the economic recovery in a context of price stability, the Committee
will keep constant the Federal Reserve's holdings of securities at their current level by
reinvesting principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed
securities in longer-term Treasury securities. The Committee will continue to roll
over the Federal Reserve's holdings of Treasury securities as they mature.
4. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial
developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to promote economic
recovery and price stability. is prepared to provide additional accommodation as
needed to foster a stronger economic recovery and to help return inflation, over
time, to levels consistent with its mandate.
Page 13 of 46

--- Page 17 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
SEPTEMBER FOMC STATEMENT—ALTERNATIVE C
1. Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in JuneAugust
indicates that the pace of economic recovery in output and employment has slowed in
recent monthsis proceeding. Household income and spending isare increasing
gradually. , but remains constrained by high unemployment, modest income growth,
lower housing wealth, and tight credit. Manufacturing activity and business
spending on equipment and software have risen.is rising; however, investment in
nonresidential structures continues to be weak and employers remain reluctant to add
to payrolls. Housing starts remain at a depressed level. Bank lending has continued to
contract, but at a reduced rate in recent months. Measures of underlying inflation
have trended lowerstayed subdued in recent quarters, and longer-term inflation
expectations have remained stable. Nonetheless, the Committee anticipates a gradual
return to higher levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability, Although
the pace of economic recovery is likely to be more modest in the near term, than had
s been anticipated.the Committee continues to anticipate a gradual return to higher
e
v levels of resource utilization in a context of price stability.
i
t
a
n
2. Measures of underlying inflation have trended lower in recent quarters and, with
r
e
t substantial resource slack continuing to restrain cost pressures and longer-term
l
A
inflation expectations stable, inflation is likely to be subdued for some time.
2. The Committee will maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼
percent and continues to anticipates that economic conditions, including low rates of
resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations, are
likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended
periodsome time. To help support the economic recovery in a context of price
stability, For the time being, the Committee also will maintain its existing policy of
reinvesting principal payments to keep constant the Federal Reserve’s holdings of
securities at their current level. by reinvesting principal payments from agency debt
and agency mortgage-backed securities in longer-term Treasury securities. The
Committee will continue to roll over the Federal Reserve's holdings of Treasury
securities as they mature.
3. The Committee will continue to monitor the economic outlook and financial
developments and will employ its policy tools as necessary to promote economic
recovery and price stability.
Page 14 of 46

--- Page 18 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE B
The Committee may not see economic conditions as having deteriorated
sufficiently over recent months to warrant additional policy accommodation at this
meeting, but it may feel that current conditions―little if any progress in reducing
elevated levels of resource slack and underlying inflation that is running below levels
consistent with the dual mandate―if they were to persist much longer, would call for
policy action. If so, the Committee might choose an announcement along the lines of that
provided in Alternative B.
Committee members may interpret the recent data on economic activity and
employment as having confirmed that the pace of economic recovery has slowed in
recent months. Nevertheless, members may still view the recent weakness in economic s
e
v
activity as most likely to be a temporary “soft patch,” and continue to anticipate that i
t
a
n
growth will strengthen going forward without additional policy action. The improvement r
e
t
in the tone of the incoming economic data released late in the intermeeting period might A l
be seen as supporting this view. Indeed, the Committee’s assessment of the prospects for
economic growth and inflation beyond the near term may not have materially changed
over the intermeeting period, and thus members may not see the threshold for further
policy action at this meeting as having been met. Under Alternative B, the Committee
would state that it “anticipates a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a
context of price stability, although the pace of economic recovery is likely to be modest
in the near term.” Even if the Committee is more concerned about the downside risks to
the outlook than it was in August, it could view the uncertainty about the economy as
being unusually high and therefore want to wait for additional information about the
trajectory of output and inflation before undertaking a new policy action. If so, the
Committee would likely want to maintain the current target range for the federal funds
rate as well as its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities
holdings, as under Alternative B.2
Market participants appear to have appropriately interpreted the “extended
period” language in past statements as conditioning the Committee’s anticipation for the
2 At the August 2010 FOMC meeting, the Committee directed the Desk to reinvest principal payments
from Treasury securities, agency debt, and agency MBS into Treasury issues. All else equal, in the absence
of this policy, the size of the SOMA portfolio would have gradually declined; with this policy in place, the
size of the SOMA portfolio is kept approximately constant over time while the share of Treasury securities
held in the portfolio gradually increases.
Page 15 of 46

--- Page 19 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
federal funds rate on the economic outlook. Indeed, market measures of the expected
federal funds rate dropped and then moved back up over the intermeeting period in line
with the way market participants reportedly interpreted the incoming economic data.
Therefore, the Committee may wish to retain the current language at this meeting, as in
the policy paragraph in Alternative B.
Nonetheless, the Committee may be concerned that the deceleration in economic
activity could prove more protracted than currently expected. Indeed, members may have
found the slow pace of the economic recovery since spring disappointing, and believe
that the persistent slow growth with high levels of resource slack would be unacceptable.
Moreover, underlying inflation has trended lower in recent quarters, to levels somewhat
below those seen by the Committee as consistent with its dual mandate (as indicated by
s
e participants’ longer-run inflation projections reported in recent Summaries of Economic
v
i
t
a Projections). While the staff has narrowed slightly its assessment of resource slack and
n
r
e edged up its forecast of inflation over the next couple of quarters, it anticipates that
t
l
A
inflation will tick down again next year, and does not see inflation beginning to creep up
until 2013. In this environment, the Committee may see some increase in the risk of
further disinflation, with potentially adverse consequences for the real economy. Given
these concerns, the Committee might think it appropriate to signal that if economic
conditions do not begin to improve soon, it stands ready to provide additional monetary
accommodation.
Consistent with this assessment, Alternative B continues to indicate that the pace
of economic recovery is likely to be modest in the near term, but notes that measures of
underlying inflation have trended lower in recent quarters, “to levels somewhat below
those the Committee judges most consistent, over the longer run, with its mandate to
promote maximum employment and price stability.” Alternative B ends by stating that
the Committee “is prepared to provide additional accommodation as needed to foster a
stronger economic recovery and to help return inflation, over time, to levels consistent
with its mandate.” Market participants have indicated a strong desire for greater clarity
about the Committee’s threshold for undertaking additional policy action, and a statement
along the lines of Alternative B would help in this regard.
According to the Desk’s latest survey, primary dealers do not see major changes
in the statement language as the most likely outcome at this meeting. In addition, the
results suggest that dealers generally do not anticipate that additional asset purchases will
Page 16 of 46

--- Page 20 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
be announced at this time, although they reportedly put material odds on such an outcome
by the end of the year. Even though the statement language points to “additional
accommodation” without specifically mentioning LSAPs, the announcement of
Alternative B nonetheless would likely lead investors to price in higher odds that
additional LSAPs will be implemented by the Committee, perhaps as soon as at the
November meeting. As a consequence, longer-term interest rates would likely fall
somewhat, stock prices would rise, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar would
decline. However, the statement could possibly leave investors more uncertain about the
Committee’s economic outlook, or cause them to conclude the Committee had a
significantly more downbeat assessment of economic activity than in August. If so, risk
premiums could widen to some extent and the rise in stock prices could be muted.
s
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A2 v e
i
t
a
n
Policymakers may conclude that, with the weakness to date in the economic r
e
t
recovery and the downtrend in underlying inflation, the Committee is increasingly falling A l
short of both of its statutory objectives. If so, they may see the need for additional policy
accommodation at this meeting, as in Alternative A2. Committee members may view the
incoming data as confirming that the economic recovery has slowed significantly since
spring, with inflation well below levels most consistent with the Committee’s dual
mandate. Indeed, in the staff forecast, the output gap does not begin to diminish until the
middle of next year, two quarters later than in the previous forecast.3 And this revision
follows others of a similar nature—at the time of the April FOMC meeting, staff
estimated that resource slack had already stepped down in late 2009. With both
economic growth and inflation running below desired levels, members may be concerned
that a prolonged period of very low inflation could weigh heavily on the economic
recovery and, as a result, they may be quite reluctant to tolerate the status quo. And
members may also worry about the extent to which the downward trend in underlying
inflation is itself impeding the economic recovery.
Additional accommodation would seem particularly appropriate if the Committee
was also concerned about other factors that could undermine the recovery. For example,
members might believe that ongoing weakness in house prices was impairing
3 In its latest forecast, the staff revised down its assessment of the recent and projected path of potential
output, and therefore the amount of resource slack in the economy. However, going forward on the new
trajectory, the point at which the amount of resource slack in the economy begins to diminish has been
pushed out.
Page 17 of 46

--- Page 21 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
households’ balance sheets and so weighing on their spending. In addition, the federal
fiscal stimulus is projected to soon become a source of drag on economic growth, and
members may be worried that private demand could prove insufficient to sustain a robust
recovery. Accordingly, the Committee may generally view the downside risks to the
outlook for economic growth and inflation as quite pronounced, as in the “Weaker
Economic Recovery” and “Greater Disinflation” scenarios presented in the Tealbook.
Although the current target range for the federal funds rate would remain
unchanged, Alternative A2 would nonetheless deliver an explicit message that the
Committee is dissatisfied with both the pace of economic recovery and with the trajectory
of inflation by making three major changes relative to the Committee’s August statement.
First, the Committee would make clear its discomfort with the recent behavior of
s
e inflation by noting that measures of underlying inflation have trended lower in recent
v
i
t
a quarters, “to levels below those the Committee judges most consistent, over the longer
n
r
e run, with its mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability.” Second, the
t
l
A
Committee would go on to state that, “in the current environment, disinflation is an
impediment to economic recovery,” making clear that such low inflation is unwelcome.
Moreover, the indication employed in the statement for Alternative B that inflation was
expected to rise eventually to levels the Committee considers consistent with its mandate
would not be used in this case. Third, the Committee would announce that it will
increase its total holdings of securities to approximately $2.5 trillion by purchasing an
additional $500 billion of longer-term Treasury securities over the next six months while
maintaining its existing policy of reinvesting principal payments.
Relative to several months ago, Committee members may judge the costs of
expanding its securities portfolio as having diminished to some degree. In particular,
members may be more comfortable expanding LSAPs in light of the substantial progress
that has been made in developing the mechanisms for managing the aggregate level of
reserve balances. The Term Deposit Facility, in which interest-bearing term deposits are
auctioned to depository institutions, has been successfully tested, and a program of
regular small-value auctions has been announced. In addition, the Desk is prepared to
transact large-dollar reverse repurchase agreements with its recently expanded list of
counterparties. Members may therefore be at least somewhat less concerned that the
large size of the Federal Reserve’s portfolio will end up posing substantial constraints on
the ability of the Committee to tighten financial conditions when needed.
Page 18 of 46

--- Page 22 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
If, in addition to taking this policy step, the Committee wanted to adopt a strategy
of using the size of its securities portfolio more actively as a tool to adjust financial
conditions going forward, it could decide to announce that it will “determine, each time it
meets, whether an adjustment to its holdings of securities is needed to foster maximum
employment and price stability.” Spelling out the Committee’s intention to take a more
incremental approach from meeting to meeting could help investors understand the
Committee’s reaction function and so take into account possible future policy decisions.
Such an outcome could prove stabilizing, helping the Committee to achieve its desired
outcomes. On the other hand, more frequent, incremental purchases would likely reduce
the size of the announcement effects associated with the purchases, possibly limiting their
effectiveness. Moreover, unless more information was provided to complement the
statement, perhaps through subsequent speeches and testimony, the Committee’s reaction
s
e
function likely would remain unclear at least for a time. Indeed, without further v
i
t
a
explanation, the words “upward or downward” in the statement could increase n
r
e
uncertainty if they were viewed as signaling a readiness to withdraw accommodation in t
l
A
the near term. (For more discussion of the various issues that such a strategy could raise,
see the box entitled, “Issues Related to Using a More Flexible Approach to Adjusting the
SOMA Securities Portfolio.”)
Based on the results of the latest survey of primary dealers, market participants
would be surprised by the Committee’s resumption of LSAPs at this meeting. While the
effects of additional purchases of longer-term Treasury securities are difficult to predict,
staff estimates suggest that additional purchases of longer-term Treasury securities in the
amount of $500 billion would initially reduce long-term yields by around 15 to 20 basis
points, although a part of this effect appears to already be priced into markets.4 Such a
4 This estimate was calibrated assuming that the effects of additional asset purchases on long-term
interest rates would be in the middle of the wide range of estimates provided in the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York Staff Report of March 2010, “Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They
Work?” by Joseph Gagnon, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack. In contrast, analyses of
different SOMA portfolio strategies that the staff produced for the June and August 2010 FOMC meetings
were based on estimates of LSAP effects that were at the upper end of the range reported by Gagnon et al.
These higher estimates were similar to those originally used by staff to calibrate the effects of asset
purchases, such as in the two memos sent to the FOMC in March 2009: “Economic Effects of Large-Scale
Purchases of Long-Term Treasury Securities and Agency Debt and MBS,” by Eileen Mauskopf and David
Reifschneider; and “Expanding Large-Scale Asset Purchases: Effectiveness, Benefits, Risks, and,
Strategies,” by Joseph Gagnon, David Lucca, Jonathan McCarthy, Julie Remache, and Jennifer Roush.
Because the latest study by Gagnon et al exploits additional data and analytical methods, it seems
appropriate to adjust the calibration to reflect the more comprehensive results.
That said, the effects of asset purchases are subject to considerable uncertainty and depend on a
number of factors, including whether market participants expect the Committee to repeat its action, how
Page 19 of 46

--- Page 23 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
Issues Related to Using a More Flexible Approach to Adjusting the SOMA
Securities Portfolio
During the past two years, the FOMC undertook frequent adjustments in the SOMA portfolio, it
large-scale purchases of longer-term assets to could use a framework akin to the Taylor rule to
provide policy stimulus by reducing term help guide its decisions. For example, a Taylor
premiums and thus longer-term interest rates. (1993) rule would call for a 25 basis point reduction
Although the Committee stated that it would in the federal funds rate in response to a ½
purchase “up to” specified amounts of securities percentage point increase in the output gap or 0.2
over a given time frame, market participants percentage point decrease in inflation. The staff
generally did not expect the FOMC to buy estimates that expanding the SOMA portfolio of
significantly less than the maximum absent a longer-term assets by $150 to $200 billion would
substantial improvement in the economic outlook. provide roughly the same stimulus as a 25 basis
s
e
v The Committee’s August 2010 decision to reinvest point reduction in the federal funds rate.1
i
t
a principal payments from agency debt and agency
n
r Of course, the Committee need not follow a Taylor
e MBS appears more open-ended; the Committee
t
l rule. Many estimated reaction functions recognize
A explained that its decision was a response to the
that the FOMC typically moved the federal funds
somewhat softer economic outlook but did not
rate gradually toward the level prescribed by Taylor-
specify how long it would maintain the new
like rules by making a series of small adjustments.
policy. In addition, market participants now
The Committee could choose a similarly gradual
believe that further deterioration in the outlook
approach to adjusting the size of the SOMA
could trigger additional expansion in the balance
portfolio. Moreover, if the Committee judges that
sheet. Under one variant of Alternative A2, the
the costs associated with altering the portfolio
Committee would explicitly adopt an approach of
exceed those associated with changing the target
more frequently adjusting the size of the SOMA
federal funds rate, it could decide that somewhat
portfolio as economic conditions or the outlook
larger shifts in economic conditions would be
change.
required to trigger changes in the SOMA’s securities
The FOMC might choose such an approach to holdings than in the funds rate.2
managing the SOMA portfolio because it sees this
An incremental approach to adjusting the SOMA
approach as similar to its method for adjusting the
portfolio might be fairly easy to explain to markets
target federal funds rate before the financial crisis.
and the public if it were similar to the Committee’s
If the Committee chooses to consider more
1 This rough equivalence is consistent with the middle of the wide range of estimates of the effects of the Committee’s
large-scale asset purchases on longer-term Treasury yields in 2008 and 2009, and with estimates of the historical
relationship between changes in the federal funds rate and longer-term interest rates. Given this equivalence, the FRB/US
model would suggest that a $150 to $200 billion increase in the SOMA’s holdings of longer-term assets would raise real
GDP by 0.1 percentage point after 4 quarters and by 0.2 percentage point after 8 quarters.
2 If the costs associated with expanding or contracting the SOMA portfolio are primarily fixed costs, an incremental
approach might be seen as inferior to a policy of changing the size of the portfolio only by a sizable increment, and only
in response to a substantial change in economic conditions or the outlook.
Page 20 of 46

--- Page 24 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
historical reaction function for the target federal The Committee also would need to
funds rate. Under the relevant variant of reconsider the link between balance sheet polic y
Alternative A2, the Committee would announce and federal funds rate policy. One possibility is a
tha t it will reconsider the size of the SOMA “Last In, First Out” (LIFO) approach under which,
portfolio at each future FOMC meeting, implying as the recovery proceeds, the Committee sells
that changes in the outlook for economic activity assets before it begins to increase the federal funds
and inflation may lead to adjustments in the rate; the FOMC could vary the pace of asset sales
portfolio. in response to economic developments. A second
possibility is that the Committee could stick with
Though a strategy of making incremental changes
its stated intention of raising the federal funds rate
in the SOMA portfolio would be similar in some
first and selling securities later, potentially on a
respects to the Committee’s pre-crisis approach to
fixed schedule; under this approach, the
s
adjusting its target for the federal funds rate, it e
Committee presumably would change the federal v
could pose significant challenges nonetheless. The funds rate rather than the size and composition of a t i
n
degree of stimulus associated with a given change
the SOMA portfolio to adjust the stance of r
e
in the size or composition of the portfolio is quite t
monetary policy. A third possibility is for the l
A
uncertain, as are the potential effects of such
Committee to adjust the federal funds rate and the
changes on the public’s perceptions of the
size of its securities portfolio simultaneously. The
Committee’s ability to exit smoothly from the
LIFO approach likely implies a longer period of
period of exceptionally accommodative policy.
near-zero interest rates than the others. The
Accordingly, the Committee—and the markets—
second approach—raising the federal funds rate
would have to be prepared for a period of “learning
before beginning to adjust the balance sheet—
by doing.” In addition, the Committee would need
likely would rely more heavily on new reserve
to make decisions not only about the size of the
draining tools, and result in a more gradual
SOMA portfolio but also about its composition (the
reduction in the size of the balance sheet, once it
mix of Treasury securities and agency MBS, for
becomes appropriate to begin removing policy
example) and the time period over which the Desk
accommodation. Both approaches are consistent
would undertake the purchases or sales that would
with an eventual return to a regime in which the
be required to implement a desired change in the
Committee adjusts the stance of monetary policy
portfolio. Such decisions presumably would be
by moving the federal funds rate. Under the third
guided by an assessment of conditions in these
approach, adjustments to the size of the portfolio
markets, the anticipated economic effects of
would remain an important instrument of monetary
purchases of different instruments, and the Desk’s
policy even after the federal funds rate rises above
ability to change the SOMA’s holdings in an its effective lower bound.3
orderly fashion.
3 If the costs associated with expanding or contracting the SOMA portfolio are primarily fixed costs, an incremental
approach might be seen as inferior to a policy of changing the size of the portfolio only by a sizable increment, and only
in response to a substantial change in economic conditions or the outlook.
Page 21 of 46

--- Page 25 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
response would likely be accompanied by a rise in stock prices and a decline in the
foreign-exchange value of the dollar. However, if the unexpected decision to provide
additional policy accommodation caused investors to conclude the Committee was more
concerned than had been thought about the economic outlook, the effect on stock prices
could be quite small.
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE A1
If the Committee were particularly concerned about the possibility that underlying
inflation and inflation expectations might remain too low or even trend lower still over
time, it might be inclined to couple the policy actions taken under Alternative A2 with the
additional step of being even more explicit in describing the level of inflation that the
s Committee sees as consistent with its mandate to promote maximum employment and
e
v
t i price stability. Alternatives A1 and A2 both note that measures of underlying inflation
a
n
r have trended lower in recent quarters. But Alternative A1 would go on to point
e
t
A l specifically to the Committee’s primary benchmark for monitoring inflation—the price
index for personal consumption expenditures—and state that underlying inflation is now
running below the level of “2 percent or a bit less” that the Committee judges most
consistent, over the longer run, with its mandate, where that judgment is read from the
most recent Summary of Economic Projections.5 By including such words in the
statement, the Committee would indicate that it will give greater emphasis to the level of
inflation relative to its benchmark when setting monetary policy to achieve its dual
mandate going forward.
This increased clarity regarding the Committee’s intentions for inflation could
serve to better anchor inflation expectations, and therefore actual inflation. If so, then in
the current environment, this change could help arrest the downtrend in underlying
inflation. On the other hand, without additional communication from policymakers, the
announcement might increase uncertainty about how the Committee will decide on its
quickly the purchases are expected to be made, and how long investors expect the Federal Reserve to hold
the securities it acquires. The effects also may depend importantly on the pace at which the Desk buys or
sells. In addition, the effects clearly depend on how market expectations for the path of the federal funds
rate would respond to an asset purchase or sale.
5 In the Summary of Economic Projections published in June, the central tendency of the Committee’s
longer-run projections of PCE inflation was 1.7 percent to 2.0 percent.
Page 22 of 46

--- Page 26 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
policy stance.6 In particular, market participants could come to question the Committee’s
commitment to the “maximum employment” component of its dual mandate. (For a
discussion of the operational issues raised by introducing more explicit language
regarding the Committee’s longer-run inflation objectives, see the box entitled,
“Communication of the FOMC’s Objectives and the Link to Its Policy Strategy.”)
THE CASE FOR ALTERNATIVE C
Unlike the staff, Committee members may view the incoming data on economic
activity and employment as having generally continued to evolve as they had expected
over the intermeeting period. They may see the recent period of uneven economic
performance as likely to be only a temporary “soft patch,” with growth likely to pickup in
a sustained way going forward, especially in light of the recent improvement in the s
e
v
incoming data. Members may also be concerned that as the economy recovers, the highly i
t
a
n
accommodative stance of monetary policy and very large Federal Reserve balance sheet r
e
t
currently in place could make it difficult to tighten policy as quickly as may be required, A l
potentially allowing inflation pressures to build. In this case, the Committee might
choose the statement and policy options outlined in Alternative C. Under this alternative,
the Committee would characterize the economic recovery as “proceeding” and note that it
“continues to anticipate a gradual return to higher levels of resource utilization in a
context of price stability.”
In addition, Alternative C would change the statement language to begin
positioning the Committee for removal of policy accommodation. Although the target
range for the federal funds rate would be maintained in this alternative, the forward
guidance would indicate that economic conditions warranted “low levels” of the federal
funds rate for “some time,” instead of the “exceptionally low levels” for an “extended
period” indicated in the Committee’s August statement and retained in the other
alternatives. Moreover, the Committee would maintain its existing policy of reinvesting
principal payments from securities held in the SOMA only “for the time being,” which
would likely be read as suggesting that this policy could possibly be reversed quite soon.
Aside from their assessment of the incoming data, it could also be the case that
some policymakers worry that an extended period of near-zero short-term interest rates
6 To ensure that the Committee’s change in strategy was well understood, additional communication
about the strategy—outside of the statement and FOMC meeting minutes—would likely be useful for the
Congress, the Administration, and the public.
Page 23 of 46

--- Page 27 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
Communication of the FOMC’s Objectives and the Link to Its Policy Strategy
T he expectations of financial mark et While a more explicit focus on the inflation
participants, firms, and households regarding outlook has some potential advantages, it could
monetary policy, inflation, and real activity raise communications challenges. For
depend in part on their perceptions of the example, the Committee would likely have to
Federal Reserve’s inflation goal. The explain deviations of inflation from the
Committee could provide greater clarity about announced range. The Committee might also
its desired inflation outcomes and hence about need to provide more information to the public
its policy strategy by specifying clearly the rate regarding its assessment of the persistent and
of inflation that it judges to be consistent, over transitory factors affecting inflation and the
the longer run, with its mandate to promote policy steps that would be consistent with
s maximum employment and price stability. In achieving its long-run inflation objective over
e
v providing this information, policymakers might time. Such information could be provided to
i
t
a
n wish to proceed by building on the framework the public in FOMC statements, the minutes of
r
e embedded in the Summary of Economic FOMC meetings, and the Monetary Policy
t
l
A Projections (SEP), which currently reports on Report to the Congress, as well as in speeches
participants’ individual assessments of the and testimonies of Federal Reserve officials.
longer-run mandate-consistent inflation rate as An increased focus on inflation and the
measured by the price index for personal inflation outlook in communications with the
consumption expenditures (PCE). For public might also call for a greater focus on
example, the Committee could indicate – as in these issues in the Committee’s deliberations.
Alternative A1 – its judgment that the dual
An increased focus on inflation in Committee
mandate is consistent with PCE inflation over
communications could lead some to question
the longer run of “2 percent or a bit less” (in
the Committee’s commitment to the
line with the central tendency of 1.7 to 2
“maximum employment” component of its
percent for those projections in the SEP).
dual mandate. Indeed, the Committee might
A more explicit focus on the Committee’s choose to confer with members of the
longer-run inflation goal in its communications Congress and the Administration before
could, if the goal were deemed credible, be announcing a specific numerical range for
helpful in anchoring inflation expectations inflation consistent with its mandate in order to
more firmly, which in turn could provide the avoid any misunderstanding on this point. In
Committee with greater latitude to provide addition, the Committee might choose to
policy stimulus in response to an adverse emphasize its continuing commitment to the
demand shock. A firmer anchoring of long-run dual mandate, but note that adopting a fixed
expectations may also grant the Committee target for the unemployment rate is not feasible
further leeway to “look through” transitory because the natural rate of unemployment is
fluctuations in inflation—perhaps due to swings outside of the central bank’s control and varies
in food or energy prices—and to focus its over time due to demographic and structural
actions on offsetting persistent shifts in factors. Policymakers could emphasize the
inflation. extent to which the Committee’s two
Page 24 of 46

--- Page 28 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
objectives are complementary and mutually currently have similar implications for the
reinforcing over longer periods of time, and policy stance. Of course, the implications for
FOMC communications could also draw further the policy stance of the two legs of the dual
a ttention to participants’ longer-term mandate will likely conflict at times in the
projections of the unemployment rate in the future. In such situations, providing the public
SEP. At the present time, for example, the with greater clarity about the Committee’s
Committee could note that the actual intentions with regard to both parts of its
unemployment rate is far above the range of 4.5 mandate would be helpful in communicating
to 6 percent for the longer-term unemployment the factors determining the Committee’s policy
rate projections in the June SEP, and that the stance.
outlooks for inflation and unemployment
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
Page 25 of 46

--- Page 29 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
could foster unintended consequences, potentially including a buildup of macroeconomic
or financial imbalances. If left unchecked, such forces could conceivably culminate in a
scenario such as the one presented in the “Higher Inflation” alternative simulation, in
which inflation expectations jump. Members may view the associated economic costs of
such outcomes as being high enough, and may view the effectiveness of the Committee’s
available policy tools in combating such scenarios as being uncertain enough, that they
choose to guard against such outcomes by adopting Alternative C.
The announcement of the statement under Alternative C would come as a
complete surprise to market participants. As noted above, the primary dealers largely do
not expect major changes to the statement language at this meeting, and even see material
odds of additional asset purchases by year-end. Therefore, the announcement of
s
e Alternative C would lead investors to greatly reassess their trajectory for the path of
v
i
t
a monetary policy, especially in the near term. Short- and intermediate-term interest rates
n
r
e would rise and stock prices would fall, possibly by substantial amounts. The foreign-
t
l
A
exchange value of the dollar would likely appreciate. With no advanced warning of this
change in the Federal Reserve’s strategy, the functioning of some financial markets could
possibly be disturbed, at least initially.
Page 26 of 46

--- Page 30 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
LONG-RUN PROJECTIONS OF THE BALANCE SHEET AND MONETARY BASE
The staff has prepared three scenarios for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet that
correspond to the policy alternatives presented above: a baseline scenario corresponding
to Alternative B, a second scenario corresponding to Alternatives A1 and A2, and a third
scenario corresponding to Alternative C. Projections under each scenario are based on
assumptions about each component of the balance sheet. Details of these assumptions as
well as projections for each major component of the balance sheet can be found in
Explanatory Note C.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
Under the baseline and the scenario corresponding to Alternative C, the balance
sheet peaked in size at $2.34 trillion in May 2010 and edges down in the near term as
credit extensions are repaid, before declining more rapidly in the medium term as
securities mature, prepay, or are sold. The rate of contraction differs under the two
scenarios reflecting the different assumptions made regarding the duration of the
reinvestment policy; under the baseline, the reinvestment policy is maintained through
the third quarter of 2012 and under Alternative C, the reinvestment policy is maintained
through the second quarter of 2011. Under Alternatives A1 and A2, the balance sheet
expands in the near term and peaks at $2.78 trillion in March 2011, due to the additional
$500 billion of longer-term Treasury securities purchased in these Alternatives, before
contracting and eventually returning to the total asset path projected under the baseline in
July 2016, at which time assets will be about $1.44 trillion. In all three scenarios, after
reserve balances hit the assumed $25 billion floor and the U.S. Treasury’s supplementary
financing account has been drained, the balance sheet begins to expand as purchases of
Treasury securities match the growth of Federal Reserve capital and notes in circulation.
Page 27 of 46

--- Page 31 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
In all three scenarios, the balance sheet reaches a size of about $1.8 trillion by the end of
2020.7
In the baseline scenario, which corresponds to Alternative B, the proceeds from
maturing Treasury securities continue to be reinvested. Additionally, principal payments
of agency MBS and agency debt securities are reinvested in longer-term Treasury
securities until the target federal funds rate is assumed to liftoff from its current setting.8
Immediately after the target federal funds rate increases, the baseline projection assumes
that agency MBS and agency debt securities holdings are allowed to mature or prepay
without reinvestment, while principal payments from Treasury securities continue to be
reinvested. Six months after the assumed rise in the target federal funds rate, the FOMC
begins asset sales.9 Specifically, beginning at that time, remaining holdings of agency
MBS and agency debt securities as well as longer-term Treasury securities that were
s
e
v purchased under the reinvestment policy are sold or run off over five years and reach zero
i
t
n a by the end of the first quarter of 2018.10
r
e
t In the scenario corresponding to Alternatives A1 and A2, an additional $500
l
A
billion of longer-term Treasury securities are purchased by the end of the first quarter of
2011, at which time, total SOMA holdings reach $2.55 trillion. Asset sales under this
scenario, which begin at the same time as in the baseline scenario, include the sale of this
additional $500 billion of longer-term Treasury securities. For this reason, total assets
decline somewhat more rapidly relative to the baseline scenario once the sale of securities
begins, as more securities are being sold over the same five-year period.
In the scenario corresponding to Alternative C, the reinvestment of agency MBS
and agency debt securities is halted at the end of the second quarter of 2011, five quarters
earlier than in the baseline. As a result, total assets decrease more rapidly than in the
baseline from this point until the sale of assets starts.
Under the baseline scenario, total assets are projected to be higher over the next
few years than in the baseline projection that was presented in August. This revision
7 The composition of Federal Reserve assets in these projections differs notably at times from historical
patterns. Prior to August 2007, U.S. Treasury securities made up 100 percent of the domestic securities
portfolio. By contrast, under the baseline scenario, Treasury securities are projected to account for only
around 44 percent of the domestic securities portfolio at the end of 2010. However, by the end of 2020,
Treasury securities again account for 100 percent of the domestic securities portfolio.
8 The Tealbook projection assumes that the federal funds rate lifts off in the fourth quarter of 2012. All
scenarios assume a path for the federal funds rate consistent with this projection, independent of the
projected size of the balance sheet under the different scenarios.
9 The baseline balance sheet projection assumes that the tools to drain reserve balances (reverse
repurchase agreements and the term deposit facility) are not used.
10 Given the maturity schedule for agency debt securities, the amount of sales necessary to reduce
holdings of these securities to zero over the five year period is minimal.
Page 28 of 46

--- Page 32 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
reflects the increase in holdings of longer-term Treasury securities stemming from the
reinvestment policy. The path for holdings of agency MBS is lower than in the August
Tealbook balance sheet projection resulting from a somewhat faster rate of forecasted
prepayments of agency MBS.
On the liability side of the balance sheet, under the baseline, reserve balances are
higher than in the previous Tealbook balance sheet projection over the next couple of
years as a result of the reinvestment policy. With this higher path for reserve balances,
the U.S. Treasury’s supplementary financing account is not run down to zero until
January 2016, one year later than in the last projection. Under the baseline scenario, the
monetary base is projected to contract, on net, through mid-2015, reflecting the decline in
reserve balances.
s
e
Growth Rates for the Monetary Base v
i
t
a
n
Alternatives e r
Date Baseline Alternative C t
A1 and A2 l
A
Percent, annual rate
Monthly
Jan-10 -17.8 -17.8 -17.8
Feb-10 72.2 72.2 72.2
Mar-10 -19.7 -19.7 -19.7
Apr-10 -37.6 -37.6 -37.6
May-10 -2.0 -2.0 -2.0
Jun-10 -5.8 -5.8 -5.8
Jul-10 -2.2 -2.2 -2.2
Aug-10 -2.3 -2.3 -2.3
Sep-10 1.5 23.0 1.5
Oct-10 13.3 55.3 13.3
Nov-10 0.8 41.1 0.8
Dec-10 -16.5 23.9 -16.5
Quarterly
2010 Q1 14.0 14.0 14.0
2010 Q2 -10.4 -10.4 -10.4
2010 Q3 -2.6 -0.2 -2.6
2010 Q4 2.8 36.0 2.8
Annual - Q4 to Q4
2009 41.5 41.5 41.5
2010 0.9 9.8 0.9
2011 -0.4 14.3 -4.8
2012 -3.5 -2.8 -11.6
2013 -12.9 -12.8 -12.9
2014 -16.7 -18.0 -15.6
2015 -8.2 -21.1 3.5
Note: Not seasonally adjusted.
Page 29 of 46

--- Page 33 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
DEBT, BANK CREDIT, AND MONEY FORECASTS
Domestic nonfinancial sector debt is projected to expand at an average annual rate
of about 4 percent during the second half of this year, with private domestic nonfinancial
debt remaining about unchanged and government debt growing rapidly; domestic
nonfinancial debt is expected to grow at a 5 percent pace in 2011 and 2012. In spite of
historically low mortgage rates, sluggish housing demand and declining house prices are
projected to weigh heavily on the growth of residential mortgage debt through the first
half of 2011; this category of debt is projected to expand a bit in late 2011 and 2012 as
conditions in the housing sector improve. After declining a bit further in the current
quarter, consumer credit is expected to pick up late this year and then expand at a robust
pace in 2011 and 2012, supported by a gradual increase in spending on consumer
s
e durables. Although standards and terms for bank loans to businesses are easing
v
i
a t somewhat, lending conditions nonetheless remain tight, and the relatively low projected
n
r
e level of capital spending and firms’ very high holdings of liquid assets suggest continued
t
l
A
weak demand for external funding. Consequently, borrowing by nonfinancial businesses
is expected to be tepid, with debt in this sector increasing at about a 1½ percent rate over
the second half of 2010 and at a somewhat faster pace in 2011 and 2012. Federal
government debt is projected to grow at a double-digit rate over the forecast period.
Commercial bank credit is expected to increase slightly in the current quarter, as a
continued decline in loans is offset by robust growth in banks’ securities holdings. After
running off for the first three quarters of 2010, however, bank credit is projected to
increase about 1½ percent in the fourth quarter, 2¾ percent in 2011, and 3½ percent in
2012, as modest loan growth resumes and securities expand at a moderate rate. The
runoff in commercial and industrial loans is expected to end next quarter, but growth in
this loan category is projected to remain subdued throughout the forecast period. We
expect commercial real estate loans to contract over 2011 and remain flat in 2012, as
fundamentals continue to depress activity in that market. Consumer loans at banks are
forecasted to contract slightly in the second half of 2010, and then increase modestly in
2011 and 2012 as economic activity picks up, and we anticipate residential real estate
loans will accelerate gradually over the same period. Banks’ securities holdings are
projected to expand at a moderate pace over the forecast period, as banks continue to
favor safe and liquid investments amid weak loan demand and solid deposit growth.
Page 30 of 46

--- Page 34 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
M2 is projected to expand at a slower pace than nominal GDP over the forecast
period. The relatively slow growth of M2 reflects a projected shift in investors’ portfolio
allocations away from safe assets in M2 and toward riskier assets as overall financial
conditions and the economic outlook continue to improve. Growth of liquid deposits is
anticipated to slow somewhat from its robust 2009 pace but remain solid over the forecast
period. Small time deposits and retail money market funds are projected to contract
through 2012, though with a moderating pace of decline. Currency growth is projected to
be subdued as precautionary demand for currency from abroad wanes.
Growth Rates for M2
(Percent, seasonally adjusted annual rate)
Monthly Growth Rates Tealbook Forecast*
s
e
Jan-10 -7.9 v
i
t
Feb-10 8.7 a
n
r
Mar-10 -3.4 e
t
l
Apr-10 -3.9 A
May-10 11.6
Jun-10 4.4
Jul-10 0.0
Aug-10 6.6
Sep-10 4.8
Oct-10 1.1
Nov-10 1.1
Dec-10 1.2
Quarterly Growth Rates
2010 Q1 0.0
2010 Q2 2.0
2010 Q3 4.2
2010 Q4 2.5
Annual Growth Rates
2009 5.1
2010 2.2
2011 1.3
2012 4.5
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Tealbook
forecast. Actual data through August 2010; projections thereafter.
Page 31 of 46

--- Page 35 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
DIRECTIVE
The August directive appears below. Drafts for a September directive that
correspond to each of the four policy alternatives appear on subsequent pages. The
directive for Alternatives B and C would instruct the Desk to maintain the SOMA’s total
holdings of longer-term securities at approximately its current level by continuing to
reinvest repayments of principal from agency debt and MBS in longer-term Treasury
securities. The directives corresponding to Alternatives A1 and A2 would instruct the
Desk to purchase $500 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of March
2011 while continuing the current portfolio policy of reinvesting principal payments.
s
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
A
August 2010 FOMC Directive
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
maintain the total face value of domestic securities held in the System Open Market
Account at approximately $2 trillion by reinvesting principal payments from agency debt
and agency mortgage-backed securities in longer-term Treasury securities. The
Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions. The
System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee
informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect
the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and
price stability.
Page 32 of 46

--- Page 36 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
September 2010 FOMC Directive — Alternative A1
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk
to execute purchases of about $500 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the
end of March 2011 in order to increase the total face value of domestic securities
held in the System Open Market Account to approximately $2.5 trillion. The
Committee also directs the Desk to maintain the total face value of domestic securities
held in the System Open Market Account at approximately $2 trillion by reinvesting
principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in longer-
term Treasury securities. The Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and
s
e
coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s v
i
t
a
agency MBS transactions. The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary n
r
e
will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s l t
A
balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of
maximum employment and price stability.
Page 33 of 46

--- Page 37 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
September 2010 FOMC Directive — Alternative A2
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk
to execute purchases of about $500 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the
end of March 2011 in order to increase the total face value of domestic securities
held in the System Open Market Account to approximately $2.5 trillion. The
Committee also directs the Desk to maintain the total face value of domestic securities
held in the System Open Market Account at approximately $2 trillion by reinvesting
principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in longer-
term Treasury securities. The Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and
s
e
v coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s
i
t
a
n agency MBS transactions. The System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary
r
e
l t will keep the Committee informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s
A
balance sheet that could affect the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of
maximum employment and price stability.
Page 34 of 46

--- Page 38 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
September 2010 FOMC Directive — Alternative B
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
maintain the total face value of domestic securities held in the System Open Market
Account at approximately $2 trillion by reinvesting principal payments from agency debt
and agency mortgage-backed securities in longer-term Treasury securities. The
Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions. The
System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee
informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect
s
e
the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and v
i
t
a
price stability. n
r
e
t
l
A
Page 35 of 46

--- Page 39 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
September 2010 FOMC Directive — Alternative C
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
federal funds trading in a range from 0 to ¼ percent. The Committee directs the Desk to
maintain the total face value of domestic securities held in the System Open Market
Account at approximately $2 trillion by reinvesting principal payments from agency debt
and agency mortgage-backed securities in longer-term Treasury securities. The
Committee directs the Desk to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve’s agency MBS transactions. The
System Open Market Account Manager and the Secretary will keep the Committee
informed of ongoing developments regarding the System’s balance sheet that could affect
s
e
v the attainment over time of the Committee’s objectives of maximum employment and
i
t
a
n price stability.
r
e
t
l
A
Page 36 of 46

--- Page 40 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
Explanatory Notes
A. Measures of the Equilibrium Real Rate
The equilibrium real rate is the real federal funds rate that, if maintained, would be
projected to return output to its potential level over time. The short-run equilibrium rate is
defined as the rate that would close the output gap in twelve quarters given the corresponding
model’s projection of the economy. The medium-run concept is the value of the real federal
funds rate projected to keep output at potential in seven years, under the assumption that
monetary policy acts to bring actual and potential output into line in the short run and then keeps
them equal thereafter. The TIPS-based factor model measure provides an estimate of market
expectations for the real federal funds rate seven years ahead.
Measure Description
The measure of the equilibrium real rate in the single-equation model is
Single-equation based on an estimated aggregate-demand relationship between the current
Model value of the output gap and its lagged values as well as the lagged values of
the real federal funds rate.
The small-scale model of the economy consists of equations for six
Small
variables: the output gap, the equity premium, the federal budget surplus,
Structural
the trend growth rate of output, the real bond yield, and the real federal
Model
funds rate.
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using EDO—an estimated dynamic-
stochastic-general-equilibrium (DSGE) model of the U.S. economy—
EDO Model depend on data for major spending categories, price and wages, and the s
e
t
federal funds rate as well as the model’s structure and estimate of the output o
N
gap.
y
r
o
Estimates of the equilibrium real rate using FRB/US—the staff’s large-scale a t
n
econometric model of the U.S. economy—depend on a very broad array of a
FRB/US Model l
economic factors, some of which take the form of projected values of the p
x
model’s exogenous variables. E
Two measures are presented—based on the FRB/US and the EDO models.
Tealbook- Both models are matched to the extended Tealbook forecast. Model
consistent simulations determine the value of the real federal funds rate that closes the
output gap conditional on the extended baseline.
Page 37 of 46

--- Page 41 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
Measure Description
Yields on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) reflect investors’
expectations of the future path of real interest rates. The TIPS-based
measure of the equilibrium real rate is constructed using the seven-year-
TIPS-based ahead instantaneous real forward rate derived from TIPS yields as of the
Factor Model Tealbook publication date. This forward rate is adjusted to remove
estimates of the term and liquidity premiums based on a three-factor
arbitrage-free term-structure model applied to TIPS yields, nominal yields,
and inflation.
The actual real federal funds rate is constructed as the difference between the nominal
rate and realized inflation, where the nominal rate is measured as the quarterly average of the
observed federal funds rate, and realized inflation is given by the log difference between the core
PCE price index and its lagged value four quarters earlier. If the upcoming FOMC meeting falls
early in the quarter, the lagged inflation measure ends in the last quarter. For the current quarter,
the nominal rate is specified as the target federal funds rate on the Tealbook publication date.
Estimates of the real federal funds rate depend on the proxies for expected inflation used.
The table below shows estimated real federal funds rates based on lagged core PCE inflation, the
definition used in the Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate chart; lagged four-quarter headline
PCE inflation; and projected four-quarter headline PCE inflation beginning with the next quarter.
For each estimate of the real rate, the table also provides the Tealbook-consistent FRB/US-based
measure of the short-run equilibrium real rate and the average actual real federal funds rate over
the next twelve quarters.
Tealbook-consistent
Average actual
s
e Actual real federal FRB/US-based
t Proxy used for real funds rate
o funds rate measure of the
N
expected inflation (twelve-quarter
y (current value) equilibrium real funds
r average)
o rate (current value)
t
a
n Lagged core inflation -1.2 -2.4 -0.6
a
l
p
Lagged headline
x -1.3 -2.5 -0.7
E
inflation
Projected headline
-1.1 -2.5 -0.7
inflation
Page 38 of 46

--- Page 42 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
B. Analysis of Policy Paths and Confidence Intervals
RULE SPECIFICATIONS
For the following rules, ݅ denotes the federal funds rate for quarter t, while the right-
௧
hand-side variables include the staff’s projection of trailing four-quarter core PCE inflation (ߨ ),
௧
inflation two and three quarters ahead (ߨ and ߨ ), the output gap in the current period and
௧ାଶ|௧ ௧ାଷ|௧
one quarter ahead ( ݕ െ ݕכ and ݕ െ ݕכ ), and the three-quarter-ahead forecast of annual
௧ ௧ ௧ାଵ|௧ ௧ାଵ|௧
average GDP growth relative to potential (Δସݕ െ Δସݕכ ), and denotes an assumed value of
௧ାଷ|௧ ௧ାଷ|௧
policymakers’ long-run inflation objective. The outcome-based and forecast-based rules were
estimated using real-time data over the sample 1988:1-2006:4; each specification was chosen
using the Bayesian information criterion. Each rule incorporates a 75 basis point shift in the
intercept, specified as a sequence of 25 basis point increments during the first three quarters of
1998. The first two simple rules were proposed by Taylor (1993, 1999). The prescriptions of the
first-difference rule do not depend on assumptions regarding r* or the level of the output gap; see
Orphanides (2003).
݅ ൌ 1.20݅ െ 0.39݅ ൅ 0.19ሾ1.17 ൅ 1.73ߨ
௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ିଶ ௧
Outcome-based rule
൅ 3.66ሺݕ െ ݕכ ሻ െ 2.72 ሺݕ െݕ כ ሻሿ
௧ ௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ିଵ
݅ ൌ 1.18݅ െ 0.38݅ ൅ 0.20ሾ0.98 ൅ 1.72ߨ
௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ିଶ ௧ାଶ|௧
Forecast-based rule
൅2.29൫ݕ െ ݕכ ൯െ 1.37 ሺݕ െݕ כ ሻሿ
௧ାଵ|௧ ௧ାଵ|௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ିଵ
Taylor (1993) rule ݅ ൌ 2 ൅ߨ ൅ 0.5 ሺߨ െ ߨ כ ሻ ൅ 0.5 ሺݕ െ ݕכ ሻ
௧ ௧ ௧ ௧ ௧
s
Taylor (1999) rule ݅ ௧ ൌ 2 ൅ߨ ௧ ൅ 0.5 ሺߨ ௧ െ ߨ כ ሻ ൅ ሺݕ ௧ െ ݕ ௧ כ ሻ o t e
N
First-difference rule ݅ ൌ ݅ ൅ 0.5൫ߨ െߨ כ ൯൅0 .5ሺ ߂ସݕ െ ߂ସݕכ ሻ y
௧ ௧ିଵ ௧ାଷ|௧ ௧ାଷ|௧ ௧ାଷ|௧ r
o
a
t
n
FRB/US MODEL SIMULATIONS a
l
p
x
E
Prescriptions from the two empirical rules are computed using dynamic simulations of
the FRB/US model, implemented as though the rule were followed starting at this FOMC
meeting. The dotted line labeled “Previous Tealbook” is based on the current specification of the
policy rule, applied to the previous Tealbook projection. Confidence intervals are based on
stochastic simulations of the FRB/US model with shocks drawn from the estimated residuals over
1969-2008.
INFORMATION FROM FINANCIAL MARKETS
The expected funds rate path is based on Eurodollar quotes and implied three-month
forward rates from swaps, and the confidence intervals for this path are constructed using prices
of interest rate caps.
Page 39 of 46

--- Page 43 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
NEAR-TERM PRESCRIPTIONS OF SIMPLE POLICY RULES
These prescriptions are calculated using Tealbook projections for inflation and the output
gap. Because the first-difference rule involves the lagged funds rate, the value labeled “Previous
Tealbook” for the current quarter is computed using the actual value of the lagged funds rate, and
the one-quarter-ahead prescriptions are based on this rule’s prescription for the current quarter.
REFERENCES
Taylor, John B. (1993). “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39 (December), pp. 195214.
————— (1999). “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B.
Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules. University of Chicago Press, pp. 319341.
Orphanides, Athanasios (2003). “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor
Rule,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (July), pp. 9831022.
s
e
t
o
N
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
Page 40 of 46

--- Page 44 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
C. Long-run Projections of the Balance Sheet and Monetary Base
This explanatory note presents the assumptions underlying the projections provided in the
section entitled “Long-Run Projections of the Balance Sheet and Monetary Base,” as well as
projections for each major component of the balance sheet.
GENERAL ASSUMPTIONS
The balance sheet projections are constructed on a monthly frequency from September
2010 to December 2020. The few balance sheet items that are not discussed below are assumed
to be constant over the projection period at the level observed on August 31, 2010. The
projections for all major asset and liability categories under each scenario are summarized in the
tables that follow the bullet points.
The Tealbook projection assumes that the federal funds rate begins to increase in the
fourth quarter of 2012. The balance sheet projections assume that no use of short-term draining
tools is necessary to achieve the projected path for the federal funds rate.
ASSETS
Treasury securities, agency MBS, and agency debt securities
 The baseline scenario, which corresponds to Alternative B.
o Treasury securities held in the SOMA portfolio are reinvested as they mature.
The current weighted average maturity of Treasury securities is about seven
years. s
e
t
o
N
o Principal payments of agency MBS and agency debt securities are reinvested in
y
Treasury coupon securities (“longer-term Treasury securities”) until the federal r
o
t
funds rate increases in the fourth quarter of 2012. a
n
a
l
o The Federal Reserve will begin to sell agency MBS and agency debt securities, p
x
E
as well as longer-term Treasury securities that were purchased under the
reinvestment policy, six months after the FOMC increases the federal funds rate.
At this point, the holdings of agency MBS and agency debt securities and longer-
term Treasury securities purchased under the reinvestment policy are reduced
over five years and reach zero by the end of the first quarter of 2018.
o For agency MBS, the rate of prepayment is based on estimates of housing market
factors from one of the program’s investment managers and interest rate
projections from the Tealbook. The projected rate of prepayment is sensitive to
these underlying assumptions.
 Under Alternatives A1 and A2, an additional $500 billion of longer-term Treasury
securities are purchased by the end of the first quarter of 2011. Asset sales under the
Page 41 of 46

--- Page 45 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
scenario associated with these alternatives, which begin at the same time as in the
baseline scenario, include the sale of the additional $500 billion of longer-term Treasury
securities.
 Under Alternative C, the reinvestment of the proceeds of agency MBS and agency debt
securities is halted at the end of the second quarter of 2011, five quarters earlier than in
the baseline. The Tealbook projects that GDP accelerates in 2011, and this alternative
assumes that the FOMC halts its policy of reinvestment in response.
 In all three scenarios, a minimum level of $25 billion is set for reserve balances. To
ensure that reserve balances do not fall below this minimum level, first the U.S.
Treasury’s supplementary financing account (SFA) is reduced. After the SFA declines to
zero, Treasury bills are purchased. Purchases of bills continue until these securities
comprise one-third of the Federal Reserve’s total Treasury securities holdings – about the
average level prior to the crisis. Once this level is reached, the Federal Reserve buys
notes and bonds in addition to bills to maintain an approximate composition of the
portfolio of one-third bills and two-thirds coupon securities.
Liquidity Programs and Credit Facilities
 Loans through the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) peaked at $49
billion in March 2010. Credit extended through this facility declines to zero by the end
of 2015, reflecting loan maturities and prepayments.
 The assets held by TALF LLC increase to $1.3 billion by the end of 2014, before
declining to zero thereafter. Assets held by TALF LLC consist of investments of
commitment fees collected by the LLC and the U.S. Treasury’s initial funding. In this
s
e projection, the LLC does not purchase any asset-backed securities received by the
t
o
N Federal Reserve Bank of New York in connection with a decision of a borrower not to
y repay a TALF loan.
r
o
t
a
n  Credit extended to AIG, the sum of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s extension
a
l of revolving credit and its preferred interests in AIA Aurora LLC and ALICO Holdings
p
x
E LLC, increases slightly to $51 billion in October 2010 and then declines to zero by the
end of 2013.
 The assets held by Maiden Lane LLC, Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III LLC
are sold over time and reach either zero or a minimal level by the end of 2016.
LIABILITIES AND CAPITAL
 Federal Reserve notes in circulation grow in line with the staff forecast for money stock
currency through the end of 2012. From 2013 to the end of the projection period, Federal
Reserve notes in circulation grow at the same rate as nominal GDP, as projected in the
extended Tealbook forecast.
Page 42 of 46

--- Page 46 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
 The U.S. Treasury’s general account (TGA) follows the staff forecast for end-of-month
U.S. Treasury operating cash balances through the first quarter of 2011.1 At that point,
the TGA drops back to its historical target level of $5 billion as it is assumed that the
Treasury will have implemented a new cash management system that allows it to invest
funds in excess of $5 billion. The TGA remains constant at $5 billion over the remainder
of the forecast period.
 Balances in the SFA remain at their current level until the SFA is reduced to ensure that
the level of reserve balances does not fall below $25 billion.
 Federal Reserve capital grows 15 percent per year, in line with the average rate of the
past ten years.
 In general, increases in the level of assets of the Federal Reserve generate higher levels of
reserve balances. Increases in the levels of other liability items, such as Federal Reserve
notes in circulation or the Treasury’s general account, like increases in the level of
Reserve Bank capital, drain reserve balances. When increases in these liability or capital
items would otherwise cause reserve balances to fall below $25 billion, purchases of
Treasury securities are assumed in order to maintain that level of reserve balances.
s
e
t
o
N
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
1 The staff forecast for end-of-month U.S. Treasury operating cash balances includes forecasts of
both the TGA and balances associated with the U.S. Treasury’s Tax and Loan program. Because balances
associated with the Tax and Loan program are $2 billion, for the time being, this forecast is a good proxy
for the level of TGA balances.
Page 43 of 46

--- Page 47 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Baseline Scenario (Alternative B)
End-of-Year
Aug 01, 2010 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
$ Billions
Total assets 2,308 2,292 2,172 1,653 1,471 1,631 1,820
Selected assets:
Liquidity programs for financial firms 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Lending though other credit facilities 37 37 11 2 0 0 0
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 37 37 11 2 0 0 0
Support for specific institutions 114 100 49 9 2 0 0
Credit extended to AIG 46 47 20 0 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC,
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III 68 53 29 9 2 0 0
Securities held outright 2,046 2,054 2,024 1,565 1,399 1,564 1,757
U.S. Treasury securities 786 906 1,311 1,124 1,228 1,564 1,757
Agency debt securities 157 147 77 39 16 0 0
Agency mortgage-backed securities 1,103 1,000 636 402 154 0 0
Special drawing rights certificate account 5 5 7 7 7 7 7
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1 1 1 1 0 0 0
Total other assets 111 100 87 76 70 67 64
Total liabilities 2,250 2,233 2,094 1,550 1,334 1,450 1,582
Selected liabilities:
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 908 917 978 1,109 1,226 1,342 1,474
Reverse repurchase agreements with foreign official
and international accounts 60 60 59 59 59 59 59
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,264 1,237 1,041 367 35 35 35
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 984 964 831 157 25 25 25
U.S. Treasury, general account 76 70 5 5 5 5 5
U.S. Treasury, supplementary financing account 200 200 200 200 0 0 0
Other balances1 2 2 5 5 5 5 5
s
e
o t Total capital 57 59 78 103 136 180 239
N Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
y Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
Page 44 of 46

--- Page 48 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Alternatives A1 and A2
End-of-Year
Aug 01, 2010 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
$ Billions
Total assets 2,308 2,578 2,672 1,978 1,471 1,631 1,820
Selected assets:
Liquidity programs for financial firms 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Lending though other credit facilities 37 37 11 2 0 0 0
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 37 37 11 2 0 0 0
Support for specific institutions 114 100 49 9 2 0 0
Credit extended to AIG 46 47 20 0 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC,
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III 68 53 29 9 2 0 0
Securities held outright 2,046 2,340 2,524 1,890 1,399 1,564 1,757
U.S. Treasury securities 786 1,192 1,811 1,449 1,228 1,564 1,757
Agency debt securities 157 147 77 39 16 0 0
Agency mortgage-backed securities 1,103 1,000 636 402 154 0 0
Special drawing rights certificate account 5 5 7 7 7 7 7
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1 1 1 1 0 0 0
Total other assets 111 100 87 76 70 67 64
Total liabilities 2,250 2,519 2,594 1,875 1,334 1,450 1,582
Selected liabilities:
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 908 917 978 1,109 1,226 1,342 1,474
Reverse repurchase agreements with foreign official
and international accounts 60 60 59 59 59 59 59
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,264 1,522 1,541 692 35 35 35
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 984 1,250 1,331 482 25 25 25
U.S. Treasury, general account 76 70 5 5 5 5 5
U.S. Treasury, supplementary financing account 200 200 200 200 0 0 0
Other balances1 2 2 5 5 5 5 5
Total capital 57 59 78 103 136 180 239 s
Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations. e
t
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding. o
N
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
Page 45 of 46

--- Page 49 ---

Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR) September 16, 2010
Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Alternative C
End-of-Year
Aug 01, 2010 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020
$ Billions
Total assets 2,308 2,292 1,931 1,496 1,471 1,631 1,820
Selected assets:
Liquidity programs for financial firms 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Lending though other credit facilities 37 37 11 2 0 0 0
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 37 37 11 2 0 0 0
Support for specific institutions 114 100 49 9 2 0 0
Credit extended to AIG 46 47 20 0 0 0 0
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC,
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III 68 53 29 9 2 0 0
Securities held outright 2,046 2,054 1,783 1,408 1,399 1,564 1,757
U.S. Treasury securities 786 906 1,070 968 1,228 1,564 1,757
Agency debt securities 157 147 77 39 16 0 0
Agency mortgage-backed securities 1,103 1,000 636 402 154 0 0
Special drawing rights certificate account 5 5 7 7 7 7 7
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1 1 1 1 0 0 0
Total other assets 111 100 87 76 70 67 64
Total liabilities 2,250 2,233 1,853 1,393 1,334 1,450 1,582
Selected liabilities:
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 908 917 978 1,109 1,226 1,342 1,474
Reverse repurchase agreements with foreign official
and international accounts 60 60 59 59 59 59 59
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,264 1,237 800 211 35 35 35
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 984 964 590 25 25 25 25
U.S. Treasury, general account 76 70 5 5 5 5 5
U.S. Treasury, supplementary financing account 200 200 200 176 0 0 0
Other balances1 2 2 5 5 5 5 5
s Total capital 57 59 78 103 136 180 239
e
t Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
o Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.
N
y
r
o
t
a
n
a
l
p
x
E
Page 46 of 46

# Tables

## Page_12_Table_1


|                     | Table 1: Overview of Alternatives for the September 21 FOMC Statement   |                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                             |    |    |                                                                             |    |    |                                                                                |    |    |                                                                                                                        |    |    |
|---------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----|----|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|----|----|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----|----|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----|----|
| Key
Components      |                                                                         | August
Statement                                                                                                                             | September Alternatives                                                                                      |    |    |                                                                             |    |    |                                                                                |    |    |                                                                                                                        |    |    |
|                     |                                                                         |                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                             | A1 |    |                                                                             | A2 |    |                                                                                | B  |    |                                                                                                                        | C  |    |
| Economic Activity   |                                                                         |                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                             |    |    |                                                                             |    |    |                                                                                |    |    |                                                                                                                        |    |    |
| Recent
Developments |                                                                         | pace of recovery has
slowed in recent months                                                                                                 | pace of recovery has slowed in recent months                                                                |    |    |                                                                             |    |    |                                                                                |    |    | economic recovery
is proceeding                                                                                        |    |    |
| Labor
Market        |                                                                         | pace of recovery in
employment has slowed;
high unemployment;
employers remain
reluctant to add to
payrolls                                  | pace of recovery in employment has slowed;
high unemployment;
employers remain reluctant to add to payrolls |    |    |                                                                             |    |    |                                                                                |    |    | economic recovery
is proceeding                                                                                        |    |    |
| Outlook             |                                                                         | gradual return to higher
resource utilization w/
price stability; pace of
recovery likely more
modest in near term than
had been anticipated | gradual return to
higher resource
utilization,
although…                                                    |    |    | gradual return to higher resource
utilization w/ price stability, although… |    |    |                                                                                |    |    | although pace of
recovery likely
modest in near
term, gradual
return to higher
resource utilization
w/ price stability |    |    |
|                     |                                                                         |                                                                                                                                              | pace of recovery likely modest in near term                                                                 |    |    |                                                                             |    |    |                                                                                |    |    |                                                                                                                        |    |    |
|                     | Financial Conditions                                                    |                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                             |    |    |                                                                             |    |    |                                                                                |    |    |                                                                                                                        |    |    |
| Recent
Developments |                                                                         | bank lending has
continued to contract                                                                                                       | bank lending has continued to contract                                                                      |    |    |                                                                             |    |    | bank lending has continued to contract,
but at a reduced rate in recent months |    |    |                                                                                                                        |    |    |
|                     | Inflation                                                               |                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                             |    |    |                                                                             |    |    |                                                                                |    |    |                                                                                                                        |    |    |
| Recent
Developments |                                                                         | trended lower; and…                                                                                                                          | trended lower;
underlying
inflation running
below 2 percent
PCE inflation                                   |    |    | trended below
mandate-
consistent levels                                    |    |    | trended somewhat
below mandate-
consistent levels;
and…                        |    |    | stayed subdued;
and…                                                                                                   |    |    |
|                     |                                                                         | substantial slack; stable
inflation expectations                                                                                             | n.a.                                                                                                        |    |    |                                                                             |    |    | substantial slack;
stable inflation
expectations                               |    |    | stable inflation
expectations                                                                                          |    |    |
| Outlook             |                                                                         | subdued for some time                                                                                                                        | n.a.                                                                                                        |    |    |                                                                             |    |    | subdued for some
time before rising
toward mandate-
consistent levels          |    |    | gradual return to
higher resource
utilization in a
context of price
stability                                          |    |    |
|                     | Target Federal Funds Rate                                               |                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                             |    |    |                                                                             |    |    |                                                                                |    |    |                                                                                                                        |    |    |
| Intermeeting
Period |                                                                         | 0 to ¼ percent                                                                                                                               | 0 to ¼ percent                                                                                              |    |    |                                                                             |    |    |                                                                                |    |    |                                                                                                                        |    |    |
| Forward
Guidance    |                                                                         | exceptionally low levels
for an extended period                                                                                              | exceptionally low levels
for an extended period                                                             |    |    |                                                                             |    |    |                                                                                |    |    | low levels for some
time                                                                                               |    |    |
|                     | SOMA Portfolio Policy                                                   |                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                             |    |    |                                                                             |    |    |                                                                                |    |    |                                                                                                                        |    |    |
| Approach            |                                                                         | keep constant: reinvest
principal payments in
Treasuries                                                                                     | increase: purchase $500 billion of
Treasuries over next six months;
maintain existing reinvestment policy   |    |    |                                                                             |    |    | keep constant:
maintain existing
reinvestment policy                           |    |    | keep constant:
for the time being,
maintain existing
reinvestment policy                                               |    |    |
|                     | Future Policy Action                                                    |                                                                                                                                              |                                                                                                             |    |    |                                                                             |    |    |                                                                                |    |    |                                                                                                                        |    |    |
| Approach            |                                                                         | employ tools as necessary                                                                                                                    | act as needed                                                                                               |    |    | act as needed |
each time it meets,
determine needed
adjustment, up or
down |    |    | prepared to provide
additional
accommodation as
needed                         |    |    | employ tools as
necessary                                                                                              |    |    |


## Page_32_Table_1


| Growth Rates for the Monetary Base                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |          |                        |               |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------|------------------------|---------------|
| Date                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | Baseline | Alternatives
A1 and A2 | Alternative C |
| Percent, annual rate
Monthly
Jan-10 -17.8 -17.8 -17.8
Feb-10 72.2 72.2 72.2
Mar-10 -19.7 -19.7 -19.7
Apr-10 -37.6 -37.6 -37.6
May-10 -2.0 -2.0 -2.0
Jun-10 -5.8 -5.8 -5.8
Jul-10 -2.2 -2.2 -2.2
Aug-10 -2.3 -2.3 -2.3
Sep-10 1.5 23.0 1.5
Oct-10 13.3 55.3 13.3
Nov-10 0.8 41.1 0.8
Dec-10 -16.5 23.9 -16.5
Quarterly
2010 Q1 14.0 14.0 14.0
2010 Q2 -10.4 -10.4 -10.4
2010 Q3 -2.6 -0.2 -2.6
2010 Q4 2.8 36.0 2.8
Annual - Q4 to Q4
2009 41.5 41.5 41.5
2010 0.9 9.8 0.9
2011 -0.4 14.3 -4.8
2012 -3.5 -2.8 -11.6
2013 -12.9 -12.8 -12.9
2014 -16.7 -18.0 -15.6
2015 -8.2 -21.1 3.5 |          |                        |               |
| Note: Not seasonally adjusted.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |          |                        |               |


## Page_34_Table_1


| Growth Rates for M2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| (Percent, seasonally adjusted annual rate)
Monthly Growth Rates Tealbook Forecast*
Jan-10 -7.9
Feb-10 8.7
Mar-10 -3.4
Apr-10 -3.9
May-10 11.6
Jun-10 4.4
Jul-10 0.0
Aug-10 6.6
Sep-10 4.8
Oct-10 1.1
Nov-10 1.1
Dec-10 1.2
Quarterly Growth Rates
2010 Q1 0.0
2010 Q2 2.0
2010 Q3 4.2
2010 Q4 2.5
Annual Growth Rates
2009 5.1
2010 2.2
2011 1.3
2012 4.5
* This forecast is consistent with nominal GDP and interest rates in the Tealbook
forecast. Actual data through August 2010; projections thereafter. |


## Page_47_Table_1


| Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Baseline Scenario (Alternative B)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Aug 01, 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | End-of-Year
2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Total assets 2,308
Selected assets:
Liquidity programs for financial firms 0
Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 0
Lending though other credit facilities 37
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 37
Support for specific institutions 114
Credit extended to AIG 46
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC,
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III 68
Securities held outright 2,046
U.S. Treasury securities 786
Agency debt securities 157
Agency mortgage-backed securities 1,103
Special drawing rights certificate account 5
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1
Total other assets 111
Total liabilities 2,250
Selected liabilities:
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 908
Reverse repurchase agreements with foreign official
and international accounts 60
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,264
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 984
U.S. Treasury, general account 76
U.S. Treasury, supplementary financing account 200
Other balances1 2
Total capital 57 | $ Billions
2,292 2,172 1,653 1,471 1,631 1,820
0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0
37 11 2 0 0 0
37 11 2 0 0 0
100 49 9 2 0 0
47 20 0 0 0 0
53 29 9 2 0 0
2,054 2,024 1,565 1,399 1,564 1,757
906 1,311 1,124 1,228 1,564 1,757
147 77 39 16 0 0
1,000 636 402 154 0 0
5 7 7 7 7 7
1 1 1 0 0 0
100 87 76 70 67 64
2,233 2,094 1,550 1,334 1,450 1,582
917 978 1,109 1,226 1,342 1,474
60 59 59 59 59 59
1,237 1,041 367 35 35 35
964 831 157 25 25 25
70 5 5 5 5 5
200 200 200 0 0 0
2 5 5 5 5 5
59 78 103 136 180 239 |
| Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |


## Page_48_Table_1


| Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Alternatives A1 and A2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Aug 01, 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | End-of-Year
2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Total assets 2,308
Selected assets:
Liquidity programs for financial firms 0
Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 0
Lending though other credit facilities 37
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 37
Support for specific institutions 114
Credit extended to AIG 46
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC,
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III 68
Securities held outright 2,046
U.S. Treasury securities 786
Agency debt securities 157
Agency mortgage-backed securities 1,103
Special drawing rights certificate account 5
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1
Total other assets 111
Total liabilities 2,250
Selected liabilities:
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 908
Reverse repurchase agreements with foreign official
and international accounts 60
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,264
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 984
U.S. Treasury, general account 76
U.S. Treasury, supplementary financing account 200
Other balances1 2
Total capital 57 | $ Billions
2,578 2,672 1,978 1,471 1,631 1,820
0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0
37 11 2 0 0 0
37 11 2 0 0 0
100 49 9 2 0 0
47 20 0 0 0 0
53 29 9 2 0 0
2,340 2,524 1,890 1,399 1,564 1,757
1,192 1,811 1,449 1,228 1,564 1,757
147 77 39 16 0 0
1,000 636 402 154 0 0
5 7 7 7 7 7
1 1 1 0 0 0
100 87 76 70 67 64
2,519 2,594 1,875 1,334 1,450 1,582
917 978 1,109 1,226 1,342 1,474
60 59 59 59 59 59
1,522 1,541 692 35 35 35
1,250 1,331 482 25 25 25
70 5 5 5 5 5
200 200 200 0 0 0
2 5 5 5 5 5
59 78 103 136 180 239 |
| Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |


## Page_49_Table_1


| Federal Reserve Balance Sheet
End-of-Year Projections -- Alternative C                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Aug 01, 2010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       | End-of-Year
2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Total assets 2,308
Selected assets:
Liquidity programs for financial firms 0
Primary, secondary, and seasonal credit 0
Central bank liquidity swaps 0
Lending though other credit facilities 37
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) 37
Support for specific institutions 114
Credit extended to AIG 46
Net portfolio holdings of Maiden Lane LLC,
Maiden Lane II LLC, and Maiden Lane III 68
Securities held outright 2,046
U.S. Treasury securities 786
Agency debt securities 157
Agency mortgage-backed securities 1,103
Special drawing rights certificate account 5
Net portfolio holdings of TALF LLC 1
Total other assets 111
Total liabilities 2,250
Selected liabilities:
Federal Reserve notes in circulation 908
Reverse repurchase agreements with foreign official
and international accounts 60
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks 1,264
Reserve balances held by depository institutions 984
U.S. Treasury, general account 76
U.S. Treasury, supplementary financing account 200
Other balances1 2
Total capital 57 | $ Billions
2,292 1,931 1,496 1,471 1,631 1,820
0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0
37 11 2 0 0 0
37 11 2 0 0 0
100 49 9 2 0 0
47 20 0 0 0 0
53 29 9 2 0 0
2,054 1,783 1,408 1,399 1,564 1,757
906 1,070 968 1,228 1,564 1,757
147 77 39 16 0 0
1,000 636 402 154 0 0
5 7 7 7 7 7
1 1 1 0 0 0
100 87 76 70 67 64
2,233 1,853 1,393 1,334 1,450 1,582
917 978 1,109 1,226 1,342 1,474
60 59 59 59 59 59
1,237 800 211 35 35 35
964 590 25 25 25 25
70 5 5 5 5 5
200 200 176 0 0 0
2 5 5 5 5 5
59 78 103 136 180 239 |
| Source: Federal Reserve H.4.1 statistical release and staff calculations.
Note: Components may not sum to totals due to rounding.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |