# 20180321_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:38:53*
*Pages: 27, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
March 20–21, 2018
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of Board of Governors
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 20, 2018, at Matthew J. Eichner,3 Director, Division of Reserve
1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, March 21, 2018, Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of
at 9:00 a.m.1 Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division
of Supervision and Regulation, Board of
PRESENT: Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of
Jerome H. Powell, Chairman Financial Stability, Board of Governors
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman
Thomas I. Barkin Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of
Raphael W. Bostic Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Michael T.
Lael Brainard Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial
Loretta J. Mester Stability, Board of Governors
Randal K. Quarles
John C. Williams Antulio N. Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Chairman,
Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George,
Eric Rosengren, and Michael Strine,2 Alternate Joseph W. Gruber and John M. Roberts,2 Special
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members,
Board of Governors
Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari,
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively Board Members, Board of Governors
James A. Clouse, Secretary Shaghil Ahmed, Brian M. Doyle, and Christopher J.
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Erceg, Senior Associate Directors, Division of
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary International Finance, Board of Governors; Eric
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary M. Engen and Diana Hancock, Senior Associate
Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Directors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Board of Governors
Thomas Laubach, Economist
David W. Wilcox, Economist Ellen E. Meade, Stephen A. Meyer, Edward Nelson,
and Robert J. Tetlow, Senior Advisers, Division of
David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Thomas A. Connors, Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Trevor A. Reeve, Ellis W. Tallman, and William
Wascher, Associate Economists Stacey Tevlin, Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account
Glenn Follette and Karen M. Pence,2 Assistant
Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Directors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Market Account Board of Governors
1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the 3 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan-
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. cial markets and open market operations.
2 Attended Tuesday session only.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Eric C. Engstrom, Adviser, Division of Monetary the prospects for higher inflation and higher interest
Affairs, and Adviser, Division of Research and rates. These concerns reportedly contributed to a steep
Statistics, Board of Governors decline in equity prices and an associated rise in
measures of volatility. Some reports suggested that the
Penelope A. Beattie,2 Assistant to the Secretary, Office increase in volatility was amplified by the unwinding of
of the Secretary, Board of Governors trading positions based on various types of volatility
trading strategies. Measures of equity market volatility
Etienne Gagnon, Section Chief, Division of Monetary declined over subsequent weeks but remained above lev-
Affairs, Board of Governors els that prevailed earlier in the year, and stock prices fin-
ished lower, on net, over the intermeeting period. Inter-
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of est rates rose modestly over the period. Respondents to
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors the Open Market Desk’s surveys of primary dealers and
market participants suggested that revisions in investors’
Kurt F. Lewis, Principal Economist, Division of views regarding the fiscal outlook were an important fac-
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors tor boosting yields and contributing to a slightly steeper
expected trajectory of the federal funds rate. The deputy
Anna Orlik, Senior Economist, Division of Monetary manager noted that a rapid and sizable increase in Treas-
Affairs, Board of Governors ury bill issuance over recent weeks had put upward pres-
sure on money market yields over the period. Three-
Valerie Hinojosa, Information Manager, Division of month Treasury bill yields moved up significantly and
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors those increases passed through to rates on other short-
term instruments such as three-month Eurodollar de-
Meredith Black, First Vice President, Federal Reserve posits and commercial paper. The spread of market
Bank of Dallas rates on overnight repurchase agreements over the of-
fering rate at the Federal Reserve’s overnight reverse re-
Michael Dotsey, Glenn D. Rudebusch, and Daniel G. purchase (ON RRP) facility widened, and take-up at the
Sullivan, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal facility fell to quite low levels as a result. Rates on over-
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, San Francisco, and night federal funds and Eurodollar transactions edged
Chicago, respectively higher relative to the interest rate on excess reserves.
The Desk continued to execute the FOMC’s balance
Marc Giannoni, Luke Woodward, and Mark L.J. sheet normalization plan initiated in October of last year.
Wright, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Open
Banks of Dallas, Kansas City, and Minneapolis,
Market Desk’s domestic transactions over the
respectively
intermeeting period. There were no intervention
operations in foreign currencies for the System’s account
David Andolfatto, Jonathan P. McCarthy, Giovanni
during the intermeeting period.
Olivei, and Jonathan L. Willis, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, New York, Staff Review of the Economic Situation
Boston, and Kansas City, respectively The information reviewed for the March 20–21 meeting
indicated that labor market conditions continued to
strengthen through February and suggested that real
Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar-
gross domestic product (GDP) was rising at a moderate
ket Operations
pace in the first quarter. Consumer price inflation, as
The deputy manager of the System Open Market Ac-
measured by the 12-month percentage change in the
count (SOMA) provided a summary of developments in
price index for personal consumption expenditures
domestic and global financial markets over the inter-
(PCE), remained below 2 percent in January.
meeting period; she also reported on open market oper-
Survey-based measures of longer-run inflation expecta-
ations and related issues. Financial markets experienced
tions were little changed on balance.
a notable bout of volatility early in the intermeeting pe-
riod; volatility was particularly pronounced in equity Gains in total nonfarm payroll employment were strong
markets. Market participants pointed to incoming eco- over the two months ending in February. The labor
nomic data released in early February—particularly data force participation rate held steady in January and then
on average hourly earnings—as raising concerns about stepped up markedly in February, with the participation

--- Page 3 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 2_0_–_2_1_,_ 2_0_1_8________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
rates for prime-age (defined as ages 25 to 54) women and Real residential investment looked to be slowing in the
men moving up on net. The national unemployment first quarter after rising briskly in the fourth quarter.
rate remained at 4.1 percent. Similarly, the unemploy- Starts of new single-family homes increased in January
ment rates for African Americans, Asians, and Hispanics and February, although building permit issuance moved
were roughly flat, on balance, in recent months. The down somewhat. Starts of multifamily units jumped in
share of workers employed part time for economic rea- January but fell back in February. Sales of both new and
sons edged up but remained close to its pre-recession existing homes declined in January.
levels. The rates of private-sector job openings and quits
Growth in real private expenditures for business equip-
increased slightly, on net, over the two months ending
ment and intellectual property appeared to be moderat-
in January, and the four-week moving average of initial
ing in the first quarter after increasing at a solid pace in
claims for unemployment insurance benefits continued
the preceding quarter. Nominal shipments of nonde-
to be low in early March. Recent readings showed that
fense capital goods excluding aircraft edged down in Jan-
increases in labor compensation remained modest.
uary. However, recent forward-looking indicators of
Compensation per hour in the nonfarm business sector
business equipment spending—such as the backlog of
advanced 2¾ percent over the four quarters of last year,
unfilled capital goods orders, along with upbeat readings
and average hourly earnings for all employees rose
on business sentiment from national and regional sur-
2½ percent over the 12 months ending in February.
veys—pointed to further solid gains in equipment
Total industrial production expanded, on net, in January spending in the near term. Firms’ nominal spending for
and February, with gains in both manufacturing and nonresidential structures outside of the drilling and min-
mining. Automakers’ schedules indicated that assem- ing sector declined in January. In contrast, the number
blies of light motor vehicles would likely edge down in of crude oil and natural gas rigs in operation—an indica-
coming months. However, broader indicators of manu- tor of business spending for structures in the drilling and
facturing production, such as the new orders indexes mining sector—continued to move up through mid-
from national and regional manufacturing surveys, March.
pointed to further solid increases in factory output in the
Total real government purchases seemed to be flattening
near term.
out, on balance, in the first quarter after rising solidly in
Consumer expenditures appeared likely to rise at a mod- the fourth quarter. Nominal defense spending in Janu-
est pace in the first quarter following a strong gain in the ary and February was consistent with a decline in real
preceding quarter. Real PCE edged down in January, federal purchases. In contrast, real purchases by state
and the components of the nominal retail sales data used and local governments looked to be rising, as the pay-
by the Bureau of Economic Analysis to construct its es- rolls of these governments increased in January and Feb-
timate of PCE rose somewhat in February while the pace ruary and nominal state and local construction spending
of light motor vehicle sales declined slightly. However, advanced somewhat in January.
household spending was probably held back somewhat
The change in net exports was a significant drag on real
in February because of a delay in many federal tax re-
GDP growth in the fourth quarter of 2017, as imports
funds, and the subsequent delivery of those refunds
grew rapidly. The nominal U.S. international trade defi-
would likely contribute to an increase in consumer
cit widened in January; exports declined, led by lower ex-
spending in March. Moreover, the lower tax withhold-
ports of capital goods and industrial supplies, while im-
ing resulting from the tax cuts enacted late last year,
ports were about flat. The slowing of real import growth
which was beginning to show through in consumers’
following the rapid increase in the fourth quarter sug-
paychecks, would likely provide some impetus to spend-
gested that the drag on real GDP growth from net ex-
ing in coming months. More broadly, recent readings
ports would lessen in the first quarter.
on key factors that influence consumer spending—in-
cluding gains in employment and real disposable per- Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE
sonal income, along with households’ elevated net price index, increased 1¾ percent over the 12 months
worth—continued to be supportive of solid real PCE ending in January. Core PCE price inflation, which ex-
growth in the near term. In addition, consumer senti- cludes changes in consumer food and energy prices, was
ment in early March, as measured by the University of 1½ percent over that same period. The consumer price
Michigan Surveys of Consumers, was at its highest level index (CPI) rose 2¼ percent over the 12 months ending
since 2004. in February, while core CPI inflation was 1¾ percent.
Recent readings on survey-based measures of longer-run

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
inflation expectations—including those from the Michi- 2019 and 2020, derived from overnight index swap
gan survey, the Survey of Professional Forecasters, and (OIS) quotes, moved up somewhat since late January.
the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of
On net, the nominal Treasury yield curve shifted up and
Market Participants—were little changed on balance.
flattened a bit. Monetary policy communications,
Foreign economic activity expanded at a moderate pace higher-than-expected domestic price data, and expecta-
in the fourth quarter. Real GDP growth picked up in tions for increases in the supply of Treasury securities
Mexico but slowed a bit in some advanced foreign econ- following the federal budget agreement in early February
omies (AFEs) and in emerging Asia. Recent indicators contributed to the increase in Treasury yields. Measures
pointed to solid economic growth abroad in the first of inflation compensation derived from Treasury
quarter of this year. Inflation abroad continued to be Inflation-Protected Securities were little changed on net.
boosted by the pass-through to consumer prices of past Option-implied volatility on longer-term rates rose no-
increases in oil prices. However, excluding food and en- tably following the jump in equity market volatility on
ergy prices, inflation remained subdued in many foreign February 5 but mostly retraced that increase by the end
economies, including the euro area and Japan. of the intermeeting period. On balance, spreads on
investment- and speculative-grade corporate bond yields
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
over comparable-maturity Treasury yields widened but
Financial markets were turbulent over the intermeeting
remained near the lower end of their historical ranges.
period, and market volatility increased notably. On net,
U.S. equity prices declined, corporate bond spreads wid- In short-term funding markets, increased issuance of
ened, and nominal Treasury yields rose. Treasury bills lifted Treasury bill yields above
comparable-maturity OIS rates for the first time in al-
Broad equity price indexes decreased over the intermeet-
most a decade. The rise in bill yields was a factor that
ing period. Market participants pointed to a larger-than-
pushed up money market rates and widened the spreads
expected increase in average hourly earnings in the Jan-
of certificates of deposit and term London interbank of-
uary employment report as a factor triggering increased
fered rates relative to OIS rates. The upward pressure
investor concerns about inflation and the associated
on money market rates also showed up in slight increases
pace of interest rate increases. Those concerns appeared
in the effective federal funds rate and the overnight bank
to induce a substantial decline in equity prices. The de-
funding rate relative to the interest rate on excess re-
cline may have been exacerbated by broader concerns
serves. The rise in market rates on overnight repurchase
about the level of stock market valuations. On Febru-
agreements relative to the offering rate on the Federal
ary 5, the VIX—an index of option-implied volatility for
Reserve’s ON RRP facility resulted in low levels of take-
one-month returns on the S&P 500 index—rose to its
up at the facility. Reductions in the size of the Federal
highest level since 2015, reportedly driven in part by the
Reserve’s balance sheet continued as scheduled without
unwinding of investment strategies designed to profit
a notable effect on markets.
from low volatility. Subsequently, equity prices recov-
ered about half of their decline, and the VIX partially Despite the recent volatility in some financial markets,
retraced its earlier increase. financing conditions for nonfinancial corporations and
households remained accommodative over the inter-
Monetary policy communications over the intermeeting
meeting period and continued to support further expan-
period—including the January FOMC statement, the
sion of economic activity. Gross issuance of invest-
minutes of the January FOMC meeting, and the Chair-
ment- and speculative-grade bonds was slightly lower
man’s semiannual testimony to the Congress—were
than usual in January and February, while gross issuance
generally viewed by market participants as signaling a
of institutional leveraged loans stayed strong. The pro-
somewhat stronger economic outlook and thus rein-
vision of bank-intermediated credit to businesses slowed
forced expectations for further gradual increases in the
further, likely reflecting weak loan demand rather than
target range for the federal funds rate. The probability
tight supply. Small business owners continued to report
of the next rate hike occurring at the March FOMC
accommodative credit supply conditions but also weak
meeting, as implied by quotes on federal funds futures
demand for credit. Credit conditions in municipal bond
contracts, increased to near certainty. Conditional on a
markets remained accommodative.
March rate hike, the market-implied probability of an-
other increase in the federal funds rate target range at the In commercial real estate markets, loan growth at banks
June FOMC meeting edged up to just above 70 percent. slowed further in January and February. Financing con-
Expectations for the federal funds rate at the end of ditions in commercial mortgage-backed securities
(CMBS) markets remained accommodative, as issuance

--- Page 5 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 2_0_–_2_1_,_ 2_0_1_8________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
was robust (relative to the usual seasonal slowdown) and the pound still ended the intermeeting period modestly
CMBS spreads continued to be at low levels. Financing weaker against the dollar.
conditions in the residential mortgage market remained
Staff Economic Outlook
accommodative for most borrowers, though credit con-
The staff projection for U.S. economic activity prepared
ditions stayed tight for borrowers with low credit scores
for the March FOMC meeting was somewhat stronger,
or with hard-to-document incomes. Mortgage rates
on balance, than the forecast at the time of the January
moved up, on net, over the period, along with the rise in
meeting. The near-term forecast for real GDP growth
other long-term rates.
was revised down a little; the incoming spending data
Consumer credit grew at a solid pace in January follow- were a bit softer than the staff had expected, and the
ing a rapid expansion in the fourth quarter. Aggregate staff judged that the softness was not associated with re-
credit card balances continued to expand steadily in Jan- sidual seasonality in the data. However, the slowing in
uary. Nonetheless, for subprime borrowers, conditions the pace of spending in the first quarter was expected to
remained tight, with credit limits and balances still low be transitory, and the medium-term projection for GDP
by historical standards. Auto lending continued to grow growth was revised up modestly, largely reflecting the
at a moderate pace in recent months; although under- expected boost to GDP from the federal budget agree-
writing standards in the subprime segment continued to ment enacted in February. Real GDP was projected to
tighten, there were few signs of a significant restriction increase at a faster pace than potential output through
in credit supply for auto loans. 2020. The unemployment rate was projected to decline
further over the next few years and to continue to run
Since the January FOMC meeting, foreign equity prices
below the staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate
moved notably lower, on net, and generally declined
over this period.
more in the AFEs than in the United States. Longer-
term yields on sovereign debt in AFEs either decreased The projection for inflation over the medium term was
moderately or ended the period little changed, in con- revised up a bit, reflecting the slightly tighter resource
trast to the increase in U.S. Treasury yields. Weaker- utilization in the new forecast. The rates of both total
than-expected economic data weighed on market-based and core PCE price inflation were projected to be faster
measures of expected policy rate paths and on longer- in 2018 than in 2017. The staff projected that inflation
term yields in Canada and in the euro area. Communi- would reach the Committee’s 2 percent objective in
cations from the Bank of Canada also seemed to con- 2019.
tribute to the decline in Canadian yields. In the United
The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections
Kingdom, longer-term yields were little changed, on net,
for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla-
although the market-based path of expected policy rates
tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years. The
moved up moderately in response to Bank of England
staff saw the risks to the forecasts for real GDP growth
communications. In emerging market economies
and the unemployment rate as balanced. On the upside,
(EMEs), sovereign yield spreads widened modestly, and
recent fiscal policy changes could lead to a greater ex-
flows into EME mutual funds were volatile over the pe-
pansion in economic activity over the next few years
riod.
than the staff projected. On the downside, those fiscal
The broad nominal dollar index appreciated moderately policy changes could yield less impetus to the economy
over the period, largely reflecting an outsized deprecia- than the staff expected if the economy was already op-
tion of the Canadian dollar and a massive devaluation of erating above its potential level and resource utilization
the Venezuelan bolivar. (The Venezuelan government continued to tighten, as the staff projected. Risks to the
devalued the official Venezuelan exchange rate by more inflation projection also were seen as balanced. An up-
than 99 percent against the dollar, bringing the official side risk was that inflation could increase more than ex-
rate closer to its black market value.) Lower oil prices, pected in an economy that was projected to move fur-
weaker-than-expected economic data, and uncertainty ther above its potential. Downside risks included the
over U.S. trade policy likely contributed to the weakness possibilities that longer-term inflation expectations may
in the Canadian dollar. In contrast, the Japanese yen ap- have edged lower or that the run of low core inflation
preciated against the dollar, in part supported by safe- readings last year could prove to be more persistent than
haven demand. Late in the intermeeting period, the Brit- the staff expected.
ish pound was boosted by news of a preliminary agree-
ment between U.K. and European Union authorities re-
garding the transition period of the Brexit process, but

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the months and to stabilize around the Committee’s 2 per-
Economic Outlook cent objective over the medium term. Several partici-
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of pants noted that the 12-month PCE price inflation rate
the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank pres- would likely shift upward when the March data are re-
idents submitted their projections of the most likely out- leased because the effects of the outsized decline in the
comes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, prices of cell phone service plans in March of last year
and inflation for each year from 2018 through 2020 and will drop out of that calculation. Near-term risks to the
over the longer run, based on their individual assess- economic outlook appeared to be roughly balanced, but
ments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate. participants agreed that it would be important to con-
The longer-run projections represented each partici- tinue to monitor inflation developments closely.
pant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable
Many participants reported considerable optimism
would be expected to converge, over time, under appro-
among the business contacts in their Districts, consistent
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further
with a firming in business expenditures. Respondents to
shocks to the economy. These projections and policy
District surveys in both the manufacturing and service
assessments are described in the Summary of Economic
sectors were generally upbeat about the economic out-
Projections (SEP), which is an addendum to these
look. In some Districts, reports from business contacts
minutes.
or evidence from surveys pointed to continuing short-
In their discussion of economic conditions and the out- ages of workers in segments of the labor market. Activ-
look, meeting participants agreed that information re- ity in the energy sector continued to expand, with con-
ceived since the FOMC met in January indicated that tacts suggesting that further increases were likely, pro-
economic activity had been rising at a moderate rate and vided that sufficient labor resources were forthcoming.
that the labor market had continued to strengthen. Job In contrast, contacts in the agricultural sector reported
gains had been strong in recent months, and the unem- that farm income continued to experience downward
ployment rate had stayed low. On a 12-month basis, pressure due to low crop prices.
both overall inflation and inflation for items other than
A number of participants reported concern among their
food and energy continued to run below 2 percent.
business contacts about the possible ramifications of the
Market-based measures of inflation compensation had
recent imposition of tariffs on imported steel and alumi-
increased in recent months but remained low; survey-
num. Participants did not see the steel and aluminum
based measures of longer-term inflation expectations
tariffs, by themselves, as likely to have a significant effect
were little changed, on balance.
on the national economic outlook, but a strong majority
Participants noted incoming data suggesting some slow- of participants viewed the prospect of retaliatory trade
ing in the rate of growth of household spending and actions by other countries, as well as other issues and
business fixed investment after strong fourth-quarter uncertainties associated with trade policies, as downside
readings. However, they expected that the first-quarter risks for the U.S. economy. Contacts in the agricultural
softness would be transitory, pointing to a variety of fac- sector reported feeling particularly vulnerable to retalia-
tors, including delayed payment of some personal tax re- tion.
funds, residual seasonality in the data, and more gener-
Tax changes enacted late last year and the recent federal
ally to strong economic fundamentals. Among the fun-
budget agreement, taken together, were expected to pro-
damentals that participants cited were high levels of con-
vide a significant boost to output over the next few
sumer and business sentiment, supportive financial con-
years. However, participants generally regarded the
ditions, improved economic conditions abroad, and re-
magnitude and timing of the economic effects of the fis-
cent changes in fiscal policy. Participants generally saw
cal policy changes as uncertain, partly because there have
the news on spending and the labor market over the past
been few historical examples of expansionary fiscal pol-
few quarters as being consistent with continued above-
icy being implemented when the economy was operating
trend growth and a further strengthening in labor mar-
at a high level of resource utilization. A number of par-
kets. Participants expected that, with further gradual in-
ticipants also suggested that uncertainty about whether
creases in the federal funds rate, economic activity would
all elements of the tax cuts would be made permanent,
expand at a solid rate during the remainder of this year
or about the implications of higher budget deficits for
and a moderate pace in the medium term, and that labor
fiscal sustainability and real interest rates, represented
market conditions would remain strong. Inflation on a
sources of downside risk to the economic outlook. A
12-month basis was expected to move up in coming

--- Page 7 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 2_0_–_2_1_,_ 2_0_1_8________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
few participants noted that the changes in tax policy few participants argued that either an absence of pricing
could boost the level of potential output. power among at least some firms—perhaps stemming
from globalization and technological innovations, in-
Most participants described labor market conditions as
cluding ones that facilitate price comparisons—or the
strong, noting that payroll gains had remained well
ability of firms to find ways to cut costs of production
above the pace regarded as consistent with absorbing
has been damping inflationary pressures. Many partici-
new labor force entrants over time, the unemployment
pants stated that recent readings from indicators on in-
rate had stayed low, job openings had been high, or that
flation and inflation expectations increased their confi-
initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits had
dence that inflation would rise to the Committee’s 2 per-
been low. Many participants observed that the labor
cent objective in coming months and then stabilize
force participation rate had been higher recently than
around that level; others suggested that downside risks
they had expected, helping to keep the unemployment
to inflation were subsiding. In contrast, a few partici-
rate flat over the past few months despite strong payroll
pants cautioned that, despite increases in market-based
gains. The firmness in the overall participation rate—
measures of inflation compensation in recent months
relative to its demographically driven downward trend—
and the stabilization of some survey measures of infla-
and the rising participation rate of prime-age adults were
tion expectations, the levels of these indicators remained
regarded as signs of continued strengthening in labor
too low to be consistent with the Committee’s 2 percent
market conditions. A few participants thought that these
inflation objective.
favorable developments could continue for a time,
whereas others expressed doubts. A few participants In their discussion of developments in financial markets,
warned against inferring too much from comparisons of some participants observed that financial conditions re-
the current low level of the unemployment rate with his- mained accommodative despite the rise in market vola-
torical benchmarks, arguing that the much higher levels tility and repricing of assets that had occurred in Febru-
of education of today’s workforce—and the lower aver- ary. Many participants reported that their contacts had
age unemployment rate of more highly educated work- taken the previous month’s turbulence in stride, al-
ers than less educated workers—suggested that the U.S. though a few participants suggested that financial devel-
economy might be able to sustain lower unemployment opments over the intermeeting period highlighted some
rates than was the case in the 1950s or 1960s. downside risks associated with still-high valuations for
equities or from market volatility more generally. A few
In some Districts, reports from business contacts or ev-
participants expressed concern that a lengthy period in
idence from surveys pointed to a pickup in wages, par-
which the economy operates beyond potential and fi-
ticularly for unskilled or entry-level workers. However,
nancial conditions remain highly accommodative could,
business contacts or national surveys led a few partici-
over time, pose risks to financial stability.
pants to conclude that some businesses facing labor
shortages were changing job requirements so that they In their consideration of monetary policy, participants
matched more closely the skills of available workers, in- discussed the implications of recent economic and finan-
creasing training, or offering more flexible work arrange- cial developments for the appropriate path of the federal
ments, rather than increasing wages in a broad-based funds rate. All participants agreed that the outlook for
fashion. Regarding wage growth at the national level, the economy beyond the current quarter had strength-
several participants noted a modest increase, but most ened in recent months. In addition, all participants ex-
still described the pace of wage gains as moderate; a few pected inflation on a 12-month basis to move up in com-
participants cited this fact as suggesting that there was ing months. This expectation partly reflected the arith-
room for the labor market to strengthen somewhat fur- metic effect of the soft readings on inflation in early
ther. 2017 dropping out of the calculation; it was noted that
the increase in the inflation rate arising from this source
In some Districts, surveys or business contacts reported
was widely expected and, by itself, would not justify a
increases in nonwage costs, particularly in the cost of
change in the projected path for the federal funds rate.
materials, and in a few Districts, contacts reported pass-
Most participants commented that the stronger eco-
ing on some of those costs in the form of higher prices.
nomic outlook and the somewhat higher inflation read-
Contacts in a few Districts suggested that widely known,
ings in recent months had increased the likelihood of
observable cost increases—such as those associated with
progress toward the Committee’s 2 percent inflation ob-
rising commodity prices—would be more likely to be ac-
jective. A few participants suggested that a modest in-
cepted and passed through to final goods prices than
would less observable costs such as wage increases. A

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
flation overshoot might help push up longer-term infla- it would likely become appropriate at some point for the
tion expectations and anchor them at a level consistent Committee to set the federal funds rate above its longer-
with the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. A run normal value for a time. Some participants sug-
number of participants offered their views on the poten- gested that, at some point, it might become necessary to
tial benefits and costs associated with an economy oper- revise statement language to acknowledge that, in pur-
ating well above potential for a prolonged period while suit of the Committee’s statutory mandate and con-
inflation remained low. On the one hand, the associated sistent with the median of participants’ policy rate pro-
tightness in the labor market might help speed the return jections in the SEP, monetary policy eventually would
of inflation to the Committee’s 2 percent goal and in- likely gradually move from an accommodative stance to
duce a further increase in labor force participation; on being a neutral or restraining factor for economic activ-
the other hand, an overheated economy could result in ity. However, participants expressed a range of views on
significant inflation pressures or lead to financial insta- the amount of policy tightening that would likely be re-
bility. quired over the medium term to achieve the Commit-
tee’s goals. Participants agreed that the actual path of
Based on their current assessments, almost all partici-
the federal funds rate would depend on the economic
pants expressed the view that it would be appropriate for
outlook as informed by incoming data.
the Committee to raise the target range for the federal
funds rate 25 basis points at this meeting. These partic- Committee Policy Action
ipants agreed that, even after such an increase in the tar- In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
get range, the stance of monetary policy would remain ahead, members judged that information received since
accommodative, supporting strong labor market condi- the Committee met in January indicated that the labor
tions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation. A market had continued to strengthen and that economic
couple of participants pointed to possible benefits of activity had been rising at a moderate rate. Job gains had
postponing an increase in the target range for the federal been strong in recent months, and the unemployment
funds rate until a subsequent meeting; these participants rate had stayed low. Recent data suggested that growth
suggested that waiting for additional data to provide rates of household spending and business fixed invest-
more evidence of a sustained return of the 12-month in- ment had moderated from their strong fourth-quarter
flation rate to 2 percent might more clearly demonstrate readings. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation
the data dependence of the Committee’s decisions and and inflation for items other than food and energy had
its resolve to achieve the price-stability component of its continued to run below 2 percent. Market-based
dual mandate. measures of inflation compensation had increased in re-
cent months but remained low; survey-based measures
With regard to the medium-term outlook for monetary
of longer-term inflation expectations were little changed,
policy, all participants saw some further firming of the
on balance.
stance of monetary policy as likely to be warranted. Al-
most all participants agreed that it remained appropriate All members viewed the recent data and other develop-
to follow a gradual approach to raising the target range ments bearing on real economic activity as suggesting
for the federal funds rate. Several participants com- that the outlook for the economy beyond the current
mented that this gradual approach was most likely to be quarter had strengthened in recent months. In addition,
conducive to maintaining strong labor market condi- notwithstanding increased market volatility over the in-
tions and returning inflation to 2 percent on a sustained termeeting period, financial conditions had stayed ac-
basis without resulting in conditions that would eventu- commodative, and developments since the January
ally require an abrupt policy tightening. A number of meeting had indicated that fiscal policy was likely to pro-
participants indicated that the stronger outlook for eco- vide greater impetus to the economy over the next few
nomic activity, along with their increased confidence years than members had previously thought. Conse-
that inflation would return to 2 percent over the medium quently, members expected that, with further gradual ad-
term, implied that the appropriate path for the federal justments in the stance of monetary policy, economic ac-
funds rate over the next few years would likely be slightly tivity would expand at a moderate pace in the medium
steeper than they had previously expected. Participants term, and labor market conditions would remain strong.
agreed that the longer-run normal federal funds rate was Members generally continued to judge the risks to the
likely lower than in the past, in part because of secular economic outlook as remaining roughly balanced.
forces that had put downward pressure on real interest
Most members noted that recent readings on inflation,
rates. Several participants expressed the judgment that
along with the strengthening of the economic outlook,

--- Page 9 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 2_0_–_2_1_,_ 2_0_1_8________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
provided support for the view that inflation on a of 1½ to 1¾ percent, including overnight re-
12-month basis would likely move up in coming months verse repurchase operations (and reverse repur-
and stabilize around the Committee’s 2 percent objective chase operations with maturities of more than
over the medium term. Members agreed to continue to one day when necessary to accommodate week-
monitor inflation developments closely. end, holiday, or similar trading conventions) at
an offering rate of 1.50 percent, in amounts lim-
After assessing current conditions and the outlook for
ited only by the value of Treasury securities held
economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, mem-
outright in the System Open Market Account
bers voted to raise the target range for the federal funds
that are available for such operations and by a
rate to 1½ to 1¾ percent. They indicated that the stance
per-counterparty limit of $30 billion per day.
of monetary policy remained accommodative, thereby
supporting strong labor market conditions and a sus- The Committee directs the Desk to continue
tained return to 2 percent inflation. rolling over at auction the amount of principal
payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings
Members agreed that the timing and size of future ad-
of Treasury securities maturing during March
justments to the target range for the federal funds rate
that exceeds $12 billion, and to continue rein-
would depend on their assessments of realized and ex-
vesting in agency mortgage-backed securities
pected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s
the amount of principal payments from the
objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent in-
Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and
flation. They reiterated that this assessment would take
agency mortgage-backed securities received
into account a wide range of information, including
during March that exceeds $8 billion. Effective
measures of labor market conditions, indicators of infla-
in April, the Committee directs the Desk to roll
tion pressures and inflation expectations, and readings
over at auction the amount of principal pay-
on financial and international developments. Members
ments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of
also agreed that they would carefully monitor actual and
Treasury securities maturing during each calen-
expected developments in inflation in relation to the
dar month that exceeds $18 billion, and to rein-
Committee’s symmetric inflation goal. Members ex-
vest in agency mortgage-backed securities the
pected that economic conditions would evolve in a man-
amount of principal payments from the Federal
ner that would warrant further gradual increases in the
Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency
federal funds rate. They judged that raising the target
mortgage-backed securities received during
range gradually would balance the risks to the outlook
each calendar month that exceeds $12 billion.
for inflation and unemployment and was most likely to
Small deviations from these amounts for oper-
support continued economic expansion. Members
ational reasons are acceptable.
agreed that the strengthening in the economic outlook
in recent months increased the likelihood that a gradual The Committee also directs the Desk to engage
upward trajectory of the federal funds rate would be ap- in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
propriate. Members continued to anticipate that the fed- necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal
eral funds rate would likely remain, for some time, below Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities
levels that were expected to prevail in the longer run. transactions.”
Nonetheless, they again stated that the actual path for
The vote also encompassed approval of the statement
the federal funds rate would depend on the economic
below to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
outlook as informed by incoming data.
“Information received since the Federal Open
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
Market Committee met in January indicates that
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
the labor market has continued to strengthen
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to
and that economic activity has been rising at a
execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with
moderate rate. Job gains have been strong in
the following domestic policy directive, to be released at
recent months, and the unemployment rate has
2:00 p.m.:
stayed low. Recent data suggest that growth
“Effective March 22, 2018, the Federal Open rates of household spending and business fixed
Market Committee directs the Desk to under- investment have moderated from their strong
take open market operations as necessary to fourth-quarter readings. On a 12-month basis,
maintain the federal funds rate in a target range both overall inflation and inflation for items
other than food and energy have continued to

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
run below 2 percent. Market-based measures of monitor actual and expected inflation develop-
inflation compensation have increased in recent ments relative to its symmetric inflation goal.
months but remain low; survey-based measures The Committee expects that economic condi-
of longer-term inflation expectations are little tions will evolve in a manner that will warrant
changed, on balance. further gradual increases in the federal funds
rate; the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
some time, below levels that are expected to
mittee seeks to foster maximum employment
prevail in the longer run. However, the actual
and price stability. The economic outlook has
path of the federal funds rate will depend on the
strengthened in recent months. The Committee
economic outlook as informed by incoming
expects that, with further gradual adjustments in
data.”
the stance of monetary policy, economic activity
will expand at a moderate pace in the medium Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, William C.
term and labor market conditions will remain Dudley, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Lael
strong. Inflation on a 12-month basis is ex- Brainard, Loretta J. Mester, Randal K. Quarles, and John
pected to move up in coming months and to C. Williams.
stabilize around the Committee’s 2 percent ob-
Voting against this action: None.
jective over the medium term. Near-term risks
to the economic outlook appear roughly bal- To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target
anced, but the Committee is monitoring infla- range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors
tion developments closely. voted unanimously to raise the interest rates on required
and excess reserve balances ¼ percentage point, to
In view of realized and expected labor market
1¾ percent, effective March 22, 2018. The Board of
conditions and inflation, the Committee de-
Governors also voted unanimously to approve a ¼ per-
cided to raise the target range for the federal
centage point increase in the primary credit rate (dis-
funds rate to 1½ to 1¾ percent. The stance of
count rate) to 2¼ percent, effective March 22, 2018.4
monetary policy remains accommodative,
thereby supporting strong labor market condi- It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
tions and a sustained return to 2 percent infla- would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, May 1–2, 2018.
tion. The meeting adjourned at 9:55 a.m. on March 21, 2018.
In determining the timing and size of future ad- Notation Vote
justments to the target range for the federal By notation vote completed on February 20, 2018, the
funds rate, the Committee will assess realized Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
and expected economic conditions relative to its Committee meeting held on January 30–31, 2018.
objectives of maximum employment and 2 per-
cent inflation. This assessment will take into ac-
count a wide range of information, including
measures of labor market conditions, indicators
_____________________________
of inflation pressures and inflation expectations,
James A. Clouse
and readings on financial and international de-
Secretary
velopments. The Committee will carefully
4 In taking this action, the Board approved requests submitted the Secretary of the Board of such a request. (Secretary’s note:
by the boards of directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Subsequently, the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and Min-
Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, At- neapolis were informed by the Secretary of the Board of the
lanta, St. Louis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco. This Board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit
vote also encompassed approval by the Board of Governors rate of 2¼ percent, effective March 22, 2018.) The second
of the establishment of a 2¼ percent primary credit rate by vote of the Board also encompassed approval of the establish-
the remaining Federal Reserve Banks, effective on the later of ment of the interest rates for secondary and seasonal credit
March 22, 2018, and the date such Reserve Banks informed under the existing formulas for computing such rates.

--- Page 11 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- changes in fiscal policy, a stronger outlook for economic
tee (FOMC) meeting held on March 20–21, 2018, meet- growth abroad, or recent strong job gains. For inflation,
ing participants submitted their projections of the most a majority of participants made slight upward revisions
likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP) to their projections; these revisions were attributed to re-
growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each cent price data and the effects of a stronger economic
year from 2018 to 2020 and over the longer run.1 Each outlook than in the December SEP. Table 1 and fig-
participant’s projections were based on information ure 1 provide summary statistics for the projections.
available at the time of the meeting, together with his or
As shown in figure 2, participants generally continued to
her assessment of appropriate monetary policy—includ-
expect that the evolution of the economy relative to their
ing a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-run
objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent in-
value—and assumptions about other factors likely to af-
flation would likely warrant further gradual increases in
fect economic outcomes. The longer-run projections
the federal funds rate. Although the median of partici-
represent each participant’s assessment of the value to
pants’ projections for the federal funds rate at the end of
which each variable would be expected to converge, over
2018 was unchanged relative to the December SEP, a
time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the ab-
number of participants marked up their projections for
sence of further shocks to the economy.2 “Appropriate
this year. Moreover, a substantial majority of partici-
monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy
pants revised up their federal funds rate projections for
that each participant deems most likely to foster out-
2019 and 2020. The median of participants’ projections
comes for economic activity and inflation that best sat-
for the longer-run level of the federal funds rate was
isfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory
slightly higher relative to the December SEP. Nearly all
mandate to promote maximum employment and price
participants who submitted longer-run projections ex-
stability.
pected that evolving economic conditions would make
All participants who submitted longer-run projections it appropriate for the federal funds rate to move above
expected that real GDP in 2018 would expand at a pace their estimates of its longer-run level during part of the
exceeding their individual estimates of the longer-run projection period.
growth rate of real GDP. Participants generally saw real
In general, participants continued to view the uncer-
GDP growth moderating somewhat in each of the fol-
tainty attached to their economic projections as broadly
lowing two years, with almost all participants who sub-
similar to the average of the past 20 years. As in Decem-
mitted longer-run projections anticipating that real GDP
ber, most participants judged the risks around their pro-
growth in 2020 would be at or within a few tenths of a
jections for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate,
percentage point of their longer-run estimates. All par-
and inflation to be broadly balanced.
ticipants who submitted longer-run projections expected
that, throughout the projection period, the unemploy- The Outlook for Economic Activity
ment rate would run below their estimates of its longer- The median of participants’ projections for the growth
run level. All participants projected that inflation, as rate of real GDP, conditional on their individual assess-
measured by the four-quarter percentage change in the ments of appropriate monetary policy, was 2.7 percent
price index for personal consumption expenditures for this year and 2.4 percent for next year. The median
(PCE), would rise to or toward the Committee’s 2 per- projection for real GDP growth in 2020 was 2.0 percent,
cent objective this year and would be at or a little above a touch above the 1.8 percent median of participants’
that objective by 2020. Compared with the Summary of longer-run estimates. Most participants cited federal fis-
Economic Projections (SEP) from December, a sub- cal policy developments—specifically, the enactment of
stantial majority of participants marked up their projec- the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act and the Bipartisan Budget Act
tions for real GDP growth and lowered their projections of 2018—as boosting their projections for economic ac-
for the unemployment rate; participants indicated that tivity over the next couple of years. Several participants
these revisions reflected a number of factors, such as mentioned other factors that influenced their economic
1 Three members of the Board of Governors were in office at 2 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for
the time of the March 2018 meeting, one member fewer than real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds
in December 2017. rate.

--- Page 12 ---

,stnediserp
knaB
evreseR
laredeF
dna
srebmem
draoB
evreseR
laredeF
fo
snoitcejorp
cimonocE
.1
elbaT
8102
hcraM
,ycilop
yratenom
etairporppa
detcejorp
fo
stnemssessa
laudividni
rieht
rednu
tnecreP
3egnaR
2ycnednetlartneC
1naideM
regnoL
0202
9102
8102
regnoL
0202
9102
8102
regnoL
0202
9102
8102
elbairaV
nur
nur
nur
2.2–7.1
3.2–5.1
8.2–0.2
0.3–5.2
0.2–8.1
1.2–8.1
6.2–2.2
0.3–6.2
8.1
0.2
4.2
7.2
PDGlaerniegnahC
2.2–7.1
2.2–1.1
4.2–7.1
8.2–2.2
9.1–8.1
0.2–7.1
3.2–9.1
6.2–2.2
8.1
0.2
1.2
5.2
noitcejorprebmeceD
8.4–2.4
4.4–3.3
2.4–3.3
0.4–6.3
7.4–3.4
8.3–5.3
7.3–4.3
8.3–6.3
5.4
6.3
6.3
8.3
etartnemyolpmenU
0.5–3.4
5.4–5.3
2.4–5.3
0.4–6.3
7.4–4.4
2.4–6.3
0.4–6.3
0.4–7.3
6.4
0.4
9.3
9.3
noitcejorprebmeceD
0.2
3.2–0.2
3.2–9.1
1.2–8.1
0.2
2.2–1.2
2.2–0.2
0.2–8.1
0.2
1.2
0.2
9.1
noitaflniECP
0.2
2.2–9.1
3.2–8.1
1.2–7.1
0.2
1.2–0.2
0.2
9.1–7.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
9.1
noitcejorprebmeceD
3.2–0.2
3.2–9.1
1.2–8.1
2.2–1.2
2.2–0.2
0.2–8.1
1.2
1.2
9.1
4noitaflniECPeroC
3.2–9.1
3.2–8.1
0.2–7.1
1.2–0.2
0.2
9.1–7.1
0.2
0.2
9.1
noitcejorprebmeceD
detcejorP:omeM
htapycilopetairporppa
5.3–3.2
9.4–6.1
9.3–6.1
6.2–6.1
0.3–8.2
6.3–1.3
4.3–8.2
4.2–1.2
9.2
4.3
9.2
1.2
etarsdnuflaredeF
0.3–3.2
1.4–4.1
6.3–4.1
6.2–1.1
0.3–8.2
1.3–6.2
1.3–4.2
4.2–9.1
8.2
1.3
7.2
1.2
noitcejorprebmeceD
eht
morf
segnahc
tnecrep
era
noitaflni
fo
serusaem
htob
rof
snoitcejorp
dna
)PDG(
tcudorp
citsemod
ssorg
laer
ni
egnahc
fo
snoitcejorP
:etoN
egnahcfosetaregatnecrepehteranoitaflniECPerocdnanoitaflniECP
.detacidniraeyehtforetrauqhtruofehtotraeysuoiverpehtforetrauqhtruof
rofsnoitcejorP
.ygrenednadoofgnidulcxeECProfxedniecirpehtdna)ECP(serutidnepxenoitpmusnoclanosreprofxedniecirpeht,ylevitcepser,ni
era
snoitcejorp
s’tnapicitrap
hcaE
.detacidni
raey
eht
fo
retrauq
htruof
eht
ni
etar
tnemyolpmenu
nailivic
egareva
eht
rof
era
etar
tnemyolpmenu
eht
hcaehcihwotetarehtfotnemssessas’tnapicitraphcaetneserpersnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.ycilopyratenometairporppafotnemssessarehrosihnodesab
ehtrofsnoitcejorpehT
.ymonoceehtotskcohsrehtruffoecnesbaehtnidnaycilopyratenometairporpparednuegrevnocotdetcepxeebdluowelbairav
tegratetairporppadetcejorpehtroetarsdnuflaredefehtrofegnartegratetairporppadetcejorpehtfotniopdimehtfoeulavehteraetarsdnuflaredef htiwnoitcnujnocniedamerewsnoitcejorprebmeceDehT
.nurregnolehtrevororaeyradnelacdefiicepsehtfodneehttaetarsdnuflaredefehtroflevel
niegnahcehtrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoltimbustondidtnapicitrapenO
.7102,31–21rebmeceDnoeettimmoCtekraMnepOlaredeFehtfogniteemeht
timbustondidtnapicitrapenodna,gniteem,7102,31–21rebmeceDehthtiwnoitcnujnocnietarsdnuflaredefehtro,etartnemyolpmenueht,PDGlaer
.gniteem,8102,12–02hcraMehthtiwnoitcnujnocnisnoitcejorphcus
snoitcejorpforebmunehtnehW
.tsehgihottsewolmorfdegnarraerasnoitcejorpehtnehwnoitcejorpelddimehtsinaidemeht,doirephcaeroF
.1
.snoitcejorpelddimowtehtfoegarevaehtsinaidemeht,nevesi
.raeyhcaenielbairavhcaerofsnoitcejorptsewoleerhtdnatsehgiheerhtehtsedulcxeycnednetlartnecehT
.2
.raeytahtnielbairavtahtrof,tsehgihottsewolmorf,snoitcejorp’stnapicitrapllasedulcniraeyneviganielbairavarofegnarehT
.3
.detcelloctoneranoitaflniECPerocrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.4
_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________

--- Page 13 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _2_0_–_2_1_, _2_0_18______________P_a_g_e_ _3
Figure1. Medians,centraltendencies,andrangesofeconomicprojections,2018–20andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections
3
Actual
2
1
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
7
6
5
4
3
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesof
thevariablesareannual.

--- Page 14 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure2. FOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy: Midpointoftargetrangeortargetlevelfor
thefederalfundsrate
Percent
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
2018 2019 2020 Longer run
Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual par-
ticipant’sjudgmentofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfundsrateortheappropriatetarget
levelforthefederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun. Oneparticipantdidnot
submitlonger-runprojectionsforthefederalfundsrate.

--- Page 15 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_ f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _2_0_–_2_1_, _2_0_18______________P_a_g_e_ _5
projections, including accommodative monetary policy each measure to increase to no more than 2 percent this
and financial conditions, strength in the global economic year and to rise to, or edge above, 2 percent in 2019 and
outlook, and continued momentum in the labor market. 2020.
Compared with the December SEP, the medians of par-
Appropriate Monetary Policy
ticipants’ projections for real GDP growth this year and
Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’
next year were up a few tenths of a percentage point.
judgments regarding the appropriate target—or mid-
Consistent with their projections for economic activity, point of the target range—for the federal funds rate at
almost all participants expected labor market conditions the end of each year from 2018 to 2020 and in the longer
to strengthen further over the projection period. The run. The distributions of projected policy rates through
medians of projections for the unemployment rate 2020 shifted modestly higher, consistent with the revi-
showed that rate stepping down from 4.1 percent in the sions to participants’ projections of real GDP growth,
final quarter of 2017 to 3.8 percent in the final quarter the unemployment rate, and inflation. For 2018, there
of this year, and then to 3.6 percent in the final quarters was a notable reduction in the dispersion of participants’
of 2019 and 2020. The median of participants’ estimates views, with most participants now regarding the appro-
of the longer-run unemployment rate was 4.5 percent. priate target at the end of the year as being between 2.13
Compared with the December SEP, almost all partici- and 2.62 percent. For each subsequent year, the disper-
pants marked down their unemployment rate projec- sion of participants’ year-end projections was somewhat
tions. Some participants also lowered their estimates of greater than that in the December SEP, and the range of
the longer-run level of the unemployment rate, leading participants’ projections was noticeably larger than for
to a small decline in the corresponding median projec- 2018.
tion.
The median of participants’ projections of the federal
Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of partici- funds rate rises gradually to a level of 2.1 percent at the
pants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unem- end of this year, 2.9 percent at the end of 2019, and
ployment rate from 2018 to 2020 and in the longer run. 3.4 percent at the end of 2020. The median of partici-
The distributions of individual projections for real GDP pants’ longer-run estimates, at 2.9 percent, was a bit
growth this year and next year shifted up noticeably from higher than in the December SEP. Nearly all partici-
those in the December SEP; participants’ projections pants projected that it would likely be appropriate for
ranged from 2.5 to 3.0 percent in 2018 and from 2.0 to the federal funds rate to rise above their individual
2.8 percent in 2019. By contrast, the distributions of longer-run estimates at some point over the forecast pe-
projected real GDP growth in 2020 and in the longer run riod.
shifted up modestly since December. Consistent with
In discussing their projections, many participants con-
participants’ generally more upbeat outlook for real
tinued to express the view that the appropriate trajectory
GDP growth, the distributions of individual projections
of the federal funds rate over the next few years would
for the unemployment rate were lower than the corre-
likely involve gradual increases. This view was predi-
sponding distributions in December for each year of the
cated on several factors, including a judgment that a
projection period.
gradual path likely would appropriately balance the risks
The Outlook for Inflation associated with, among other considerations, the possi-
The medians of participants’ projections for both total bility that inflation pressures and financial imbalances
and core PCE price inflation were 1.9 percent in 2018— could build if economic activity were to run well above
with all participants anticipating that each measure its long-run sustainable level and the possibility that the
would rise from its 2017 rate—and 2.1 percent by 2020. forces depressing inflation could prove to be more per-
Compared with the December SEP, the medians of par- sistent than currently anticipated. Another factor men-
ticipants’ projections for each measure were unchanged tioned was the view that the neutral real interest rate was
this year and up 0.1 percentage point in 2020. historically low and would likely move up only slowly.
As always, the appropriate path of the federal funds rate
Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri-
would depend on evolving economic conditions and
butions of participants’ views about the outlook for in-
their implications for participants’ economic outlooks
flation. Participants generally made minor upward ad-
and assessments of risks.
justments to their inflation projections, resulting in slight
shifts of the distributions to the right relative to the dis-
tributions in December. Participants generally expected

--- Page 16 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2018–20andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2018
March projections 18
December projections
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 0 1. 2 1. 4 1. 6 1. 8 2. 0 2. 2 2. 4 2. 6 2. 8 3. 0
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 0 1. 2 1. 4 1. 6 1. 8 2. 0 2. 2 2. 4 2. 6 2. 8 3. 0
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 0 1. 2 1. 4 1. 6 1. 8 2. 0 2. 2 2. 4 2. 6 2. 8 3. 0
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 0 1. 2 1. 4 1. 6 1. 8 2. 0 2. 2 2. 4 2. 6 2. 8 3. 0
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 17 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _2_0_–_2_1_, _2_0_18______________P_a_g_e_ _7
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2018–20andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2018
March projections 18
December projections
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3. 0 3. 2 3. 4 3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2 4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0
3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3. 0 3. 2 3. 4 3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2 4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0
3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3. 0 3. 2 3. 4 3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2 4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0
3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3. 0 3. 2 3. 4 3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2 4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0
3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 18 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2018–20andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2018
March projections 18
December projections
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 19 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _2_0_–_2_1_, _2_0_18______________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2018–20
Number of participants
2018
March projections
December projections 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’judgmentsofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfunds
rateortheappropriatetargetlevelforthefederalfundsrate,2018–20andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2018
March projections 18
December projections
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8 4.6 3 4.8 8
1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62 4.87 5.12
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8 4.6 3 4.8 8
1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62 4.87 5.12
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8 4.6 3 4.8 8
1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62 4.87 5.12
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8 4.6 3 4.8 8
1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62 4.87 5.12
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_ f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _2_0_–_2_1_, _2_0_18_____________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Uncertainty and Risks Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
In assessing the path for the federal funds rate that, in Percentage points
Variable 2018 2019 2020
their view, is likely to be appropriate, FOMC participants
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . ±1.5 ±2.0 ±2.0
take account of the range of possible economic out-
comes, the likelihood of those outcomes, and the poten- Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . ±0.5 ±1.3 ±1.7
tial benefits and costs should they occur. As a reference,
Total consumer prices2 . . . . . ±0.9 ±1.0 ±1.1
table 2 provides measures of forecast uncertainty, based
Short-term interest rates3 . . . . ±0.9 ±2.0 ±2.5
on the forecast errors of various private and government
forecasts over the past 20 years, for real GDP growth,
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root
mean squared error of projections for 1998 through 2017 that were re-
the unemployment rate, and total PCE inflation. Those leased in the spring by various private and government forecasters. As
measures are represented graphically in the “fan charts” described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions,
there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real
shown in the top panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. The
GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will
fan charts display the median SEP projections for the be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the
three variables surrounded by symmetric confidence in- past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip
(2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using His-
tervals derived from the forecast errors reported in ta- torical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance
ble 2. If the degree of uncertainty attending these pro- and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), www.federal
jections is similar to the typical magnitude of past fore-
reserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2017/files/2017020pap.pdf.
cast errors and the risks around the projections are 1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
broadly balanced, then future outcomes of these varia- 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
that has been most widely used in government and private economic
bles would have about a 70 percent probability of being
forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth
within these confidence intervals. For all three variables, quarter basis.
this measure of uncertainty is substantial and generally 3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds
rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills.
increases as the forecast horizon lengthens. Projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent, in the
fourth quarter.
Participants’ assessments of the level of uncertainty sur-
rounding their individual economic projections are
were little changed overall, with one more participant re-
shown in the bottom-left panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and
porting that the risks to the unemployment rate were
4.C. Nearly all participants viewed the degree of uncer-
weighted to the downside and two fewer participants re-
tainty attached to their economic projections about real
porting that the risks to either total or core PCE inflation
GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation as
were weighted to the downside.
broadly similar to the average of the past 20 years, a view
In discussing the uncertainty and risks surrounding their
that was essentially unchanged from December.3
projections, most participants noted that the magnitude
Because the fan charts are constructed to be symmetric
and timing of the economic effects of recent changes in
around the median projections, they do not reflect any
fiscal policy were uncertain or that fiscal policy develop-
asymmetries in the balance of risks that participants may
ments posed upside risks to real economic activity. Most
see in their economic projections. Participants’ assess-
participants also cited trade policy as a source of either
ments of the balance of risks to their economic projec-
uncertainty or downside risk. A few participants noted
tions are shown in the bottom-right panels of fig-
that a prolonged period of tight labor markets posed
ures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. As in December, most partici-
risks of higher inflation, could fuel financial imbalances,
pants judged the risks to their projections of real GDP
and might contribute to heightened recession risks.
growth, the unemployment rate, total inflation, and core
Participants’ assessments of the appropriate future path
inflation as broadly balanced—in other words, as
of the federal funds rate are also subject to considerable
broadly consistent with a symmetric fan chart. Partici-
uncertainty. Because the Committee adjusts the federal
pants who saw the risks as skewed typically judged that
funds rate in response to actual and prospective devel-
the balance of risks was tilted toward stronger GDP
opments over time in real GDP growth, the unemploy-
growth, lower unemployment rates, and higher inflation.
ment rate, and inflation, uncertainty surrounding the
Compared with the December SEP, participants’ assess-
ments of the balance of risks attending their projections
3 At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the partici-
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty sur- pants’ projections.
rounding the economic forecasts and explains the approach

--- Page 22 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4.A.UncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsofGDPgrowth
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections
70% confidence interval
4
3
Actual 2
1
0
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth Risks to GDP growth
March projections March projections
December projections 18 December projections 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Theblueandredlinesinthetoppanelshowactualvaluesandmedianprojectedvalues,respectively,ofthe
percentchangeinrealgrossdomesticproduct(GDP)fromthefourthquarterofthepreviousyeartothefourthquarter
of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is
basedonrootmeansquarederrorsofvariousprivateandgovernmentforecastsmadeovertheprevious20years;more
information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed,
on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the
historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around
theirprojections;thesecurrentassessmentsaresummarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,participantswho
judgetheuncertaintyabouttheirprojectionsas“broadlysimilar”totheaveragelevelsofthepast20yearswouldview
the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of
the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as“broadly
balanced”would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of
uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 23 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _2_0_–_2_1_, _2_0_18_____________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Figure4.B.Uncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsoftheunemploymentrate
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Unemployment rate
Median of projections 10
70% confidence interval
9
8
7
6
Actual
5
4
3
2
1
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate
March projections March projections
December projections 18 December projections 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of
the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around
the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private
and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2.
Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width
and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC
participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are
summarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,participantswhojudgetheuncertaintyabouttheirprojectionsas
“broadlysimilar”totheaveragelevelsofthepast20yearswouldviewthewidthoftheconfidenceintervalshowninthe
historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise,
participants who judge the risks to their projections as“broadly balanced”would view the confidence interval around
theirprojectionsasapproximatelysymmetric. Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethe
box“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 24 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_4____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4.C.UncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsofPCEinflation
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
PCE inflation
Median of projections
70% confidence interval
3
2
1
Actual
0
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation Risks to PCE inflation
March projections March projections
December projections 18 December projections 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation Risks to core PCE inflation
March projections March projections
December projections 18 December projections 18
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Theblueandredlinesinthetoppanelshowactualvaluesandmedianprojectedvalues,respectively,ofthe
percentchangeinthepriceindexforpersonalconsumptionexpenditures(PCE)fromthefourthquarteroftheprevious
yeartothefourthquarteroftheyearindicated. Theconfidenceintervalaroundthemedianprojectedvaluesisassumed
to be symmetricand is based on root mean squarederrorsof variousprivateand governmentforecastsmade over the
previous20years;moreinformationaboutthesedataisavailableintable2. Becausecurrentconditionsmaydifferfrom
those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated
onthebasisofthehistoricalforecasterrorsmaynotreflectFOMCparticipants’currentassessmentsoftheuncertainty
andrisksaroundtheirprojections;thesecurrentassessmentsaresummarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,
participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as“broadly similar”to the average levels of the past
20yearswouldviewthewidthoftheconfidenceintervalshowninthehistoricalfanchartaslargelyconsistentwiththeir
assessments of the uncertaintyabout their projections. Likewise, participantswho judgethe risks to their projections
as“broadly balanced”would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For
definitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 25 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_ f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _2_0_–_2_1_, _2_0_18_____________P__ag_e_ _1_5
projected path for the federal funds rate importantly re- dence intervals derived from the results presented in ta-
flects the uncertainties about the paths for those key eco- ble 2. As with the macroeconomic variables, forecast
nomic variables. Figure 5 provides a graphical represen- uncertainty surrounding the appropriate path of the fed-
tation of this uncertainty, plotting the median SEP pro- eral funds rate is substantial and increases for longer ho-
jection for the federal funds rate surrounded by confi- rizons.

--- Page 26 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_6____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure5. Uncertaintyinprojectionsofthefederalfundsrate
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Federal funds rate
Midpoint of target range
Median of projections 6
70% confidence interval*
5
4
3
2
1
Actual
0
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Com-
mittee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the
target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level.
The confidence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private
and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The confidence interval is not strictly consistent with the
projectionsforthefederalfundsrate,primarilybecausetheseprojectionsarenotforecastsofthelikeliestoutcomesfor
the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy.
Still,historicalforecasterrorsprovideabroadsenseoftheuncertaintyaroundthefuturepathofthefederalfundsrate
generatedbytheuncertaintyaboutthemacroeconomicvariablesaswellasadditionaladjustmentstomonetarypolicy
thatmaybeappropriatetooffsettheeffectsofshockstotheeconomy.
Theconfidenceintervalisassumedtobesymmetricexceptwhenitistruncatedatzero—thebottomofthelowest
target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would
not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy
accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools,
including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current
conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the
confidenceintervalestimatedonthebasisofthehistoricalforecasterrorsmaynotreflectFOMCparticipants’current
assessmentsoftheuncertaintyandrisksaroundtheirprojections.
* The confidence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth
quarteroftheyearindicated;moreinformationaboutthesedataisavailableintable2. Theshadedareaencompasses
lessthana70percentconfidenceintervaliftheconfidenceintervalhasbeentruncatedatzero.

--- Page 27 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_ f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _2_0_–_2_1_, _2_0_18_____________P__ag_e_ _1_7
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the members of tions are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those fig-
the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal ures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the
Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are
policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top
projections, however. The economic and statistical models panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to par-
and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts ticipants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that
are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather
the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad than below their projections. These judgments are summa-
unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the rized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C.
stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the
what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as em- future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable
bodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each
possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the poten- participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of mone-
tial costs to the economy should they occur. tary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real ac-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a tivity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve
range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropri-
Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve ate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges
Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges for forecasts of short-term interest rates. They suggest that
shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty as- the historical confidence intervals associated with projections
sociated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted,
participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly con-
and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, sistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these
respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly out-
tending those projections is similar to that experienced in the comes but rather are projections of participants’ individual as-
past and the risks around the projections are broadly bal- sessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-
anced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a prob- of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a
ability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal
within a range of 1.5 to 4.5 percent in the current year and funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeco-
1.0 to 5.0 percent in the second and third years. The corre- nomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary
sponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall infla- policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of
tion would be 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the current year, 1.0 to shocks to the economy.
3.0 percent in the second year, and 0.9 to 3.1 percent in the If at some point in the future the confidence interval
third year. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these confi- around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it
dence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and cen- would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart
tered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target
GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation. How- range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the
ever, in some instances, the risks around the projections may Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of
not be symmetric. In particular, the unemployment rate can- the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention;
not be negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular it would not have any implications for possible future policy
projection might be tilted to either the upside or the down- decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to pro-
side, in which case the corresponding fan chart would be vide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so
asymmetrically positioned around the median projection. were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could
Because current conditions may differ from those that also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset
prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide purchases, to provide additional accommodation.
judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on
projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1
than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncer- provides information on the range of views across FOMC
tainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A
reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections
the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ cur- across participants is much smaller than the average forecast
rent assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projec- errors over the past 20 years.

# Tables

## Page_12_Table_1


|                  | 0202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                 |
|------------------|------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                 |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                 |
| 2ycnednetlartneC | regnoL
nur | 0.2–8.1 9.1–8.1 7.4–3.4 7.4–4.4
0.2 0.2
1.2–8.1 0.2–7.1 8.3–5.3 2.4–6.3 2.2–1.2 1.2–0.2 2.2–1.2 1.2–0.2
6.2–2.2 3.2–9.1 7.3–4.3 0.4–6.3 2.2–0.2 2.2–0.2
0.2 0.2
0.3–6.2 6.2–2.2 8.3–6.3 0.4–7.3 0.2–8.1 9.1–7.1 0.2–8.1 9.1–7.1 | 0.3–8.2 0.3–8.2
6.3–1.3 1.3–6.2
4.3–8.2 1.3–4.2
4.2–1.2 4.2–9.1 |
|                  | 0202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                 |
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                 |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                 |
| 1naideM          | regnoL
nur | 8.1 8.1 5.4 6.4 0.2 0.2
0.2 0.2 6.3 0.4 1.2 0.2 1.2 0.2
4.2 1.2 6.3 9.3 0.2 0.2 1.2 0.2
7.2 5.2 8.3 9.3 9.1 9.1 9.1 9.1                                                                                                         | 9.2 8.2
4.3 1.3
9.2 7.2
1.2 1.2                                 |
|                  | 0202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                 |
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                 |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                 |