# 20180613_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:38:54*
*Pages: 26, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
June 12–13, 2018
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of Board of Governors
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, June 12, 2018, at Matthew J. Eichner,3 Director, Division of Reserve
1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, June 13, 2018, Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of
at 9:00 a.m.1 Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division
of Supervision and Regulation, Board of
PRESENT: Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of
Jerome H. Powell, Chairman Financial Stability, Board of Governors
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman
Thomas I. Barkin Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of
Raphael W. Bostic Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Michael T.
Lael Brainard Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial
Loretta J. Mester Stability, Board of Governors
Randal K. Quarles
John C. Williams Antulio N. Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Chairman,
Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George,
Eric Rosengren, and Michael Strine,2 Alternate Joseph W. Gruber and John M. Roberts, Special
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members,
Board of Governors
Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari,
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively Board Members, Board of Governors
James A. Clouse, Secretary Shaghil Ahmed, Senior Associate Director, Division of
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary International Finance, Board of Governors
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Ellen E. Meade, Stephen A. Meyer, and Robert J.
Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Tetlow, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Affairs, Board of Governors
Steven B. Kamin, Economist
Thomas Laubach, Economist John J. Stevens and Stacey Tevlin, Associate Directors,
David W. Wilcox, Economist Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors
David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Thomas A. Connors,
David E. Lebow, Trevor A. Reeve, Ellis W. Jeffrey D. Walker,3 Deputy Associate Director,
Tallman, William Wascher,2 and Beth Anne Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment
Wilson, Associate Economists Systems, Board of Governors; Min Wei, Deputy
Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Board of Governors
Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open
Market Account
1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the 3 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan-
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. cial markets and open market operations.
2 Attended Tuesday session only.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Burcu Duygan-Bump, Norman J. Morin, John Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau, Senior Research Advisor,
Sabelhaus, and Paul A. Smith, Assistant Directors, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors; Christopher J. Gust, Assistant Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar-
Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of ket Operations
Governors The manager of the System Open Market Account
(SOMA) provided a summary of developments in do-
Penelope A. Beattie,2 Assistant to the Secretary, Office mestic and global financial markets over the intermeet-
of the Secretary, Board of Governors ing period. Developments in emerging market econo-
mies (EMEs) and in Europe were the focus of consider-
John Ammer,2 Senior Economic Project Manager, able attention by financial market participants over re-
Division of International Finance, Board of cent weeks. Investor perceptions of increased economic
Governors and political vulnerabilities in several EMEs led to a no-
table depreciation in EME currencies relative to the dol-
Dan Li, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, lar. Market participants reported that an unwinding of
Board of Governors investor positions had been a factor amplifying these
currency moves. In Europe, concerns about the political
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of situation in Italy and its potential economic implications
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors prompted a significant widening in risk spreads on Ital-
ian sovereign securities. The share prices of Italian
Martin Bodenstein and Marcel A. Priebsch, Principal banks and other banks that could be exposed to Italy
Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board declined sharply. In domestic financial markets, expec-
of Governors; Logan T. Lewis, Principal tations for the path of the federal funds rate were little
Economist, Division of International Finance, changed over the intermeeting period. The manager
Board of Governors; Maria Otoo, Principal noted that the release of the minutes of the May FOMC
Economist, Division of Research and Statistics, meeting, and particularly the reference to a possible tech-
Board of Governors nical adjustment in the interest on excess reserves
(IOER) rate relative to the top of the FOMC’s target
Marcelo Ochoa, Senior Economist, Division of range for the federal funds rate, prompted a small reduc-
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors tion in federal funds futures rates.
The deputy manager followed with a discussion of
Achilles Sangster II, Information Management Analyst,
money markets and open market operations. Rates on
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Treasury repurchase agreements (repo) had remained el-
evated in recent weeks, apparently responding, in part,
Kenneth C. Montgomery, First Vice President, Federal
to increased Treasury issuance over recent months. In
Reserve Bank of Boston
light of the firmness in repo rates, the volume of opera-
tions conducted through the Federal Reserve’s over-
Jeff Fuhrer, Daniel G. Sullivan, and Christopher J.
night reverse repurchase agreement facility remained
Waller, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
low. Elevated repo rates may also have contributed to
Banks of Boston, Chicago, and St. Louis,
some upward pressure on the effective federal funds rate
respectively
in recent weeks as lenders in that market shifted some of
their investments to earn higher rates available in repo
Marc Giannoni, Paolo A. Pesenti, and Mark L.J.
markets. The deputy manager also discussed the current
Wright, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
outlook for reinvestment purchases of agency mortgage-
Banks of Dallas, New York, and Minneapolis,
backed securities (MBS). Based on current projections,
respectively
principal payments on the Federal Reserve’s holdings of
agency MBS would likely be lower than the monthly cap
Roc Armenter, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
on redemptions that will be in effect beginning in the fall
Philadelphia
of this year. Consistent with the June 2017 addendum
to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, rein-
Willem Van Zandweghe, Assistant Vice President,
vestment purchases of agency MBS then are projected
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City

--- Page 3 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_ g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_2_–_1_3,_ 2_0_1_8_________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
to fall to zero from that point onward. However, prin- ending in May (compared with 2.5 percent over the same
cipal payments on agency MBS are sensitive to changes 12 months a year earlier).
in various factors, particularly long-term interest rates.
Total industrial production increased at a solid pace in
As a result, agency MBS principal payments could rise
April, but the available indicators for May, particularly
above the monthly redemption cap in some future sce-
production worker hours in manufacturing, indicated
narios and thus require MBS reinvestment purchases. In
that output declined in that month. Automakers’ sched-
light of this possibility, the deputy manager described
ules suggested that assemblies of light motor vehicles
plans for the Desk to conduct small value purchases of
would increase in the coming months, and broader indi-
agency MBS on a regular basis in order to maintain op-
cators of manufacturing production, such as the new or-
erational readiness.
ders indexes from national and regional manufacturing
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Open surveys, continued to point to solid gains in factory out-
Market Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeet- put in the near term.
ing period. There were no intervention operations in for-
Consumer spending appeared to be increasing briskly in
eign currencies for the System's account during the in-
the second quarter after rising at only a modest pace in
termeeting period.
the first quarter. Real PCE increased at a robust pace in
Staff Review of the Economic Situation April after a strong gain in March. Although light motor
The information reviewed for the June 12–13 meeting vehicle sales declined in May, indicators of vehicle de-
indicated that labor market conditions continued to mand generally remained upbeat. More broadly, recent
strengthen in recent months, and that real gross domes- readings on key factors that influence consumer spend-
tic product (GDP) appeared to be rising at a solid rate in ing—including gains in employment, real disposable
the first half of the year. Consumer price inflation, as personal income, and households’ net worth—contin-
measured by the 12-month percentage change in the ued to be supportive of solid real PCE growth in the
price index for personal consumption expenditures near term. In addition, the lower tax withholding result-
(PCE), was 2 percent in April. Survey-based measures ing from the tax cuts enacted late last year still appeared
of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed likely to provide some additional impetus to spending in
on balance. coming months. Consumer sentiment, as measured by
the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, re-
Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded at a strong
mained elevated in May.
pace, on average, in April and May. The national unem-
ployment rate edged down in both months and was Residential investment appeared to be declining further
3.8 percent in May. The unemployment rates for Afri- in the second quarter after decreasing in the first quarter.
can Americans, Asians, and Hispanics all declined, on Starts for new single-family homes were unchanged in
net, from March to May; the rate for African Americans April from their first-quarter average, but starts of mul-
was the lowest on record but still noticeably above the tifamily units declined noticeably. Sales of both new and
rates for other groups. The overall labor force partici- existing homes decreased in April.
pation rate edged down in April and May but was still at
Real private expenditures for business equipment and in-
about the same level as a year earlier. The share of work-
tellectual property appeared to be rising at a moderate
ers employed part time for economic reasons was little
pace in the second quarter after a somewhat faster in-
changed at a level close to that from just before the pre-
crease in the first quarter. Nominal shipments of non-
vious recession. The rate of private-sector job openings
defense capital goods excluding aircraft rose in April,
rose in March and stayed at that elevated level in April;
and forward-looking indicators of business equipment
the rate of quits edged up, on net, over those two
spending—such as the backlog of unfilled capital goods
months; and initial claims for unemployment insurance
orders, along with upbeat readings on business senti-
benefits continued to be low through early June. Recent
ment from national and regional surveys—continued to
readings showed that increases in labor compensation
point to robust gains in equipment spending in the near
stepped up over the past year. Compensation per hour
term. Real business expenditures for nonresidential
in the nonfarm business sector increased 2.7 percent
structures appeared to be expanding at a solid pace again
over the four quarters ending in the first quarter of this
in the second quarter, and the number of crude oil and
year (compared with 1.9 percent over the same four
natural gas rigs in operation—an indicator of business
quarters a year earlier), and average hourly earnings for
all employees increased 2.7 percent over the 12 months

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
spending for structures in the drilling and mining sec- but these concerns subsequently eased. On net, Treas-
tor—increased, on net, from mid-April through early ury yields were little changed despite significant intra-
June. period moves, and the dollar appreciated notably as a
range of AFE and EME currencies and sovereign bonds
Nominal federal government spending data for April
came under pressure. However, broad domestic stock
and May pointed to an increase in real federal purchases
price indexes increased, on net, as generally strong cor-
in the second quarter. Real state and local government
porate earnings reports helped support prices. Mean-
purchases also appeared to be moving up; although
while, financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses
nominal construction expenditures by these govern-
and households remained supportive of economic activ-
ments edged down in April, their payrolls rose at a mod-
ity on balance.
erate pace, on net, in April and May.
Over the intermeeting period, macroeconomic data re-
Net exports made a negligible contribution to real GDP
leases signaling moderating growth in some foreign
growth in the first quarter, with growth of both real ex-
economies, along with downside risks stemming from
ports and real imports slowing from the brisk pace of
political developments in Italy and several EMEs,
the fourth quarter of last year. After narrowing in
weighed on prices of foreign risk assets. These develop-
March, the nominal trade deficit narrowed further in
ments, together with a still-solid economic outlook for
April, as exports continued to increase while imports de-
the United States, supported an increase in the broad
clined slightly, which suggested that net exports might
trade-weighted index of the foreign exchange value of
add modestly to real GDP growth in the second quarter.
the dollar.
Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE
The dollar appreciated notably against several EME cur-
price index, increased 2.0 percent over the 12 months
rencies (primarily those of Argentina, Turkey, Mexico,
ending in April. Core PCE price inflation, which ex-
and Brazil), as the increase in U.S. interest rates since late
cludes changes in consumer food and energy prices, was
2017, along with political developments and other issues,
1.8 percent over that same period. The consumer price
intensified concerns about financial vulnerabilities.
index (CPI) rose 2.8 percent over the 12 months ending
EME mutual funds saw slight net outflows, and, on bal-
in May, while core CPI inflation was 2.2 percent. Recent
ance, EME sovereign spreads widened and equity prices
readings on survey-based measures of longer-run infla-
edged lower. In the AFEs, sovereign spreads in some
tion expectations—including those from the Michigan
peripheral European countries widened and European
survey, the Survey of Professional Forecasters, and the
bank shares came under pressure, as investors focused
Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market
on political developments in Italy. Broad equity indexes
Participants—were little changed on balance.
in the euro area, with the exception of Italy, ended the
Incoming data suggested that foreign economic activity period little changed, while those in Canada, the United
continued to expand at a solid pace. Real GDP growth Kingdom, and Japan edged higher. Market-based
picked up in the first quarter in several EMEs—includ- measures of expected policy rates were little changed, on
ing Mexico, China, and much of emerging Asia—al- balance, and flight-to-safety flows reportedly contrib-
though recent indicators pointed to some moderation in uted to declines in German longer-term sovereign yields.
the pace of activity in most EMEs. By contrast, in the
FOMC communications over the intermeeting period—
advanced foreign economies (AFEs), real GDP growth
including the May FOMC statement and the May
slowed in the first quarter, owing partly to temporary
FOMC meeting minutes—elicited only minor reactions
factors such as labor strikes in some European countries
in asset markets. Quotes on federal funds futures con-
and bad weather in Japan. More recent indicators
tracts suggested that the probability of an increase in the
pointed to a partial rebound in AFE economic growth
target range for the federal funds rate occurring at the
in the second quarter. Inflation pressures in the foreign
June FOMC meeting inched up further to near certainty.
economies generally remained subdued, even though
Levels of the federal funds rate at the end of 2019 and
higher oil prices put some upward pressure on headline
2020 implied by overnight index swap (OIS) rates were
inflation.
little changed on net.
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
Longer-term nominal Treasury yields ended the period
During the intermeeting period, global financial markets
largely unchanged despite notable movements during
were buffeted by increased concerns about the outlook
for foreign growth and political developments in Italy,

--- Page 5 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_ g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_2_–_1_3,_ 2_0_1_8_________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
the intermeeting period. Measures of inflation compen- Residential mortgage financing conditions remained ac-
sation derived from Treasury Inflation-Protected Secu- commodative for most borrowers. For borrowers with
rities were also little changed on net. low credit scores, conditions stayed tight but continued
to ease. Growth in home-purchase mortgages slowed a
Broad U.S. equity price indexes increased about 5 per-
bit and refinancing activity continued to be muted in re-
cent, on net, since the May FOMC meeting, boosted in
cent months, with both developments partly reflecting
part by the stronger-than-expected May Employment
the rise in mortgage rates earlier this year.
Situation report. Stock prices also appeared to have
been buoyed by first-quarter earnings reports that gen- Financing conditions in consumer credit markets were
erally beat expectations—particularly for the technology little changed in the first few months of 2018, on bal-
sector, which outperformed the broader market. How- ance, and remained largely supportive of growth in
ever, the turbulence abroad and, to a lesser degree, household spending. Growth in consumer credit slowed
mounting concerns about trade policy weighed on equity a bit in the first quarter, as seasonally adjusted credit card
prices at times. Option-implied volatility on the balances were about flat after having surged in the fourth
S&P 500 at the one-month horizon—the VIX—was quarter of last year. Financing conditions for consumers
down somewhat, on net, remaining just a couple of per- with subprime credit scores continued to tighten, likely
centage points above the very low levels that prevailed contributing to a decline in auto loan extensions to such
before early February. Over the intermeeting period, borrowers.
spreads of yields on nonfinancial corporate bonds over
Staff Economic Outlook
those of comparable-maturity Treasury securities wid-
In the U.S. economic forecast prepared for the June
ened moderately for both investment- and speculative-
FOMC meeting, the staff continued to project that the
grade firms. However, these spreads remained low by
economy would expand at an above-trend pace. Real
historical standards.
GDP appeared to be rising at a much faster pace in the
Over the intermeeting period, short-term funding mar- second quarter than in the first, and it was forecast to
kets stayed generally stable despite still-elevated spreads increase at a solid rate in the second half of this year.
between rates on some private money market instru- Over the 2018–20 period, output was projected to rise
ments and OIS rates of similar maturity. While some of further above the staff’s estimate of its potential, and the
the factors contributing to pressures in short-term fund- unemployment rate was projected to decline further be-
ing markets had eased recently, the three-month spread low the staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate.
between the London interbank offered rate and the OIS Relative to the forecast prepared for the May meeting,
rate remained significantly wider than at the start of the the projection for real GDP growth beyond the first half
year. of 2018 was revised down a little in response to a higher
assumed path for the exchange value of the dollar. In
Growth of outstanding commercial and industrial loans
addition, the staff continued to anticipate that supply
held by banks appeared to have moderated in May after
constraints might restrain output growth somewhat.
a strong reading in April. The issuance of institutional
With real GDP rising a little less, on balance, over the
leveraged loans was strong in April and May; meanwhile,
forecast period, the projected decline in the unemploy-
corporate bond issuance was weak, likely reflecting sea-
ment rate over the next few years was a touch smaller
sonal patterns. Gross issuance of municipal bonds in
than in the previous forecast.
April and May was solid, as issuance continued to re-
cover from the slow pace recorded at the start of the The staff forecast for total PCE price inflation from
year. 2018 to 2020 was not revised materially. Total consumer
price inflation over the first half of 2018 appeared to be
Financing conditions for commercial real estate (CRE)
a little lower than in the previous projection, mainly be-
remained accommodative. Even so, the growth of CRE
cause of slightly softer incoming data on nonmarket
loans held by banks ticked down in April and May.
prices, but the forecast for the second half of the year
Commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) issu-
was a little higher, reflecting an upward revision to pro-
ance, in general, continued at a robust pace; although is-
jected consumer energy prices over the next couple of
suance softened somewhat in April, partly reflecting sea-
quarters. The staff continued to project that total PCE
sonal factors, it recovered in May. Spreads on CMBS
inflation would remain near the Committee’s 2 percent
were little changed over the intermeeting period, remain-
objective over the medium term and that core PCE price
ing near their post-crisis lows.
inflation would run slightly higher than total inflation

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
over that period because of a projected decline in con- Participants viewed recent readings on spending, em-
sumer energy prices in 2019 and 2020. ployment, and inflation as suggesting little change, on
balance, in their assessments of the economic outlook.
The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections
Incoming data suggested that GDP growth strengthened
for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla-
in the second quarter of this year, as growth of consumer
tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years. The
spending picked up after slowing earlier in the year. Par-
staff saw the risks to the forecasts for real GDP growth
ticipants noted a number of favorable economic factors
and the unemployment rate as balanced. On the upside,
that were supporting above-trend GDP growth; these
recent fiscal policy changes could lead to a greater ex-
included a strong labor market, stimulative federal tax
pansion in economic activity over the next few years
and spending policies, accommodative financial condi-
than the staff projected. On the downside, those fiscal
tions, and continued high levels of household and busi-
policy changes could yield less impetus to the economy
ness confidence. They also generally expected that fur-
than the staff expected if, for example, the marginal pro-
ther gradual increases in the target range for the federal
pensities to consume for groups most affected by the tax
funds rate would be consistent with sustained expansion
cuts are lower than the staff had assumed. Risks to the
of economic activity, strong labor market conditions,
inflation projection also were seen as balanced. The up-
and inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent
side risk that inflation could increase more than expected
objective over the medium term. Participants generally
in an economy that was projected to move further above
viewed the risks to the economic outlook as roughly bal-
its potential was counterbalanced by the downside risk
anced.
that longer-term inflation expectations may be lower
than was assumed in the staff forecast. Participants reported that business fixed investment had
continued to expand at a strong pace in recent months,
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
supported in part by substantial investment growth in
Economic Outlook
the energy sector. Higher oil prices were expected to
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of
continue to support investment in that sector, and Dis-
the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank pres-
trict contacts in the industry were generally upbeat,
idents submitted their projections of the most likely out-
though supply constraints for labor and infrastructure
comes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate,
were reportedly limiting expansion plans. By contrast,
and inflation for each year from 2018 through 2020 and
District reports regarding the construction sector were
over the longer run, based on their individual assess-
mixed, although here, too, some contacts reported that
ments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate.
supply constraints were acting as a drag on activity. Con-
The longer-run projections represented each partici-
ditions in both the manufacturing and service sectors in
pant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable
several Districts were reportedly strong and were seen as
would be expected to converge, over time, under appro-
contributing to solid investment gains. However, many
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further
District contacts expressed concern about the possible
shocks to the economy. These projections and policy
adverse effects of tariffs and other proposed trade re-
assessments are described in the Summary of Economic
strictions, both domestically and abroad, on future in-
Projections, which is an addendum to these minutes.
vestment activity; contacts in some Districts indicated
In their discussion of the economic situation and the that plans for capital spending had been scaled back or
outlook, meeting participants agreed that information postponed as a result of uncertainty over trade policy.
received since the FOMC met in May indicated that the Contacts in the steel and aluminum industries expected
labor market had continued to strengthen and that eco- higher prices as a result of the tariffs on these products
nomic activity had been rising at a solid rate. Job gains but had not planned any new investments to increase ca-
had been strong, on average, in recent months, and the pacity. Conditions in the agricultural sector reportedly
unemployment rate had declined. Recent data suggested improved somewhat, but contacts were concerned about
that growth of household spending had picked up, while the effect of potentially higher tariffs on their exports.
business fixed investment had continued to grow
Participants agreed that labor market conditions
strongly. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and core
strengthened further over the intermeeting period.
inflation, which excludes changes in food and energy
Nonfarm payroll employment posted strong gains in re-
prices, had both moved close to 2 percent. Indicators of
cent months, averaging more than 200,000 per month
longer-term inflation expectations were little changed,
this year. The unemployment rate fell to 3.8 percent in
on balance.

--- Page 7 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_ g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_2_–_1_3,_ 2_0_1_8_________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
May, below the estimate of each participant who submit- would keep overall inflation near 2 percent over the me-
ted a longer-run projection. Participants pointed to dium term. In light of inflation having run below the
other indicators such as a very high rate of job openings Committee’s 2 percent objective for the past several
and an elevated quits rate as additional signs that labor years, a few participants cautioned that measures of
market conditions were strong. With economic growth longer-run inflation expectations derived from financial
anticipated to remain above trend, participants generally market data remained somewhat below levels consistent
expected the unemployment rate to remain below, or de- with the Committee’s 2 percent objective. Accordingly,
cline further below, their estimates of its longer-run nor- in their view, investors appeared to judge the expected
mal rate. Several participants, however, suggested that path of inflation as running a bit below 2 percent over
there may be less tightness in the labor market than im- the medium run. Some participants raised the concern
plied by the unemployment rate alone, because there was that a prolonged period in which the economy operated
further scope for a strong labor market to continue to beyond potential could give rise to heightened inflation-
draw individuals into the workforce. ary pressures or to financial imbalances that could lead
eventually to a significant economic downturn.
Contacts in several Districts reported difficulties finding
qualified workers, and, in some cases, firms were coping Participants commented on a number of risks and un-
with labor shortages by increasing salaries and benefits certainties associated with their outlook for economic
in order to attract or retain workers. Other business activity, the labor market, and inflation over the medium
contacts facing labor shortages were responding by in- term. Most participants noted that uncertainty and risks
creasing training for less-qualified workers or by invest- associated with trade policy had intensified and were
ing in automation. On balance, for the economy overall, concerned that such uncertainty and risks eventually
recent data on average hourly earnings indicated that could have negative effects on business sentiment and
wage increases remained moderate. A number of partic- investment spending. Participants generally continued
ipants noted that, with the unemployment rate expected to see recent fiscal policy changes as supportive of eco-
to remain below estimates of its longer-run normal rate, nomic growth over the next few years, and a few indi-
they anticipated wage inflation to pick up further. cated that fiscal policy posed an upside risk. A few par-
ticipants raised the concern that fiscal policy is not cur-
Participants noted that the 12-month changes in both
rently on a sustainable path. Many participants saw po-
overall and core PCE prices had recently moved close to
tential downside risks to economic growth and inflation
2 percent. The recent large increases in consumer en-
associated with political and economic developments in
ergy prices had pushed up total PCE price inflation rel-
Europe and some EMEs.
ative to the core measure, and this divergence was ex-
pected to continue in the near term, resulting in a tem- Meeting participants also discussed the term structure of
porary increase in overall inflation above the Commit- interest rates and what a flattening of the yield curve
tee’s 2 percent longer-run objective. In general, partici- might signal about economic activity going forward.
pants viewed recent price developments as consistent Participants pointed to a number of factors, other than
with their expectation that inflation was on a trajectory the gradual rise of the federal funds rate, that could con-
to achieve the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objec- tribute to a reduction in the spread between long-term
tive on a sustained basis, although a number of partici- and short-term Treasury yields, including a reduction in
pants noted that it was premature to conclude that the investors’ estimates of the longer-run neutral real inter-
Committee had achieved that objective. The generally est rate; lower longer-term inflation expectations; or a
favorable outlook for inflation was buttressed by reports lower level of term premiums in recent years relative to
from business contacts in several Districts suggesting historical experience reflecting, in part, central bank as-
some firming of inflationary pressures; for example, set purchases. Some participants noted that such factors
many business contacts indicated that they were experi- might temper the reliability of the slope of the yield
encing rising input costs, and, in some cases, firms ap- curve as an indicator of future economic activity; how-
peared to be passing these cost increases through to con- ever, several others expressed doubt about whether such
sumer prices. Although core inflation and the 12-month factors were distorting the information content of the
trimmed mean PCE inflation rate calculated by the Fed- yield curve. A number of participants thought it would
eral Reserve Bank of Dallas remained a little below be important to continue to monitor the slope of the
2 percent, many participants anticipated that high levels yield curve, given the historical regularity that an in-
of resource utilization and stable inflation expectations verted yield curve has indicated an increased risk of re-
cession in the United States. Participants also discussed

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
a staff presentation of an indicator of the likelihood of longer run, the lags with which changes in monetary pol-
recession based on the spread between the current level icy affect the economy, and the potential constraints on
of the federal funds rate and the expected federal funds adjustments in the target range for the federal funds rate
rate several quarters ahead derived from futures market in response to adverse shocks when short-term interest
prices. The staff noted that this measure may be less rates are low. In addition, a few participants saw survey-
affected by many of the factors that have contributed to or market-based indicators as suggesting that inflation
the flattening of the yield curve, such as depressed term expectations were not yet firmly anchored at a level con-
premiums at longer horizons. Several participants cau- sistent with the Committee’s objective. A few also noted
tioned that yield curve movements should be interpreted that a temporary period of inflation modestly above
within the broader context of financial conditions and 2 percent could be helpful in anchoring longer-run infla-
the outlook, and would be only one among many con- tion expectations at a level consistent with the Commit-
siderations in forming an assessment of appropriate pol- tee’s symmetric objective.
icy.
Participants offered their views about how much addi-
In their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting, tional policy firming would likely be required to sustain-
participants generally agreed that the economic expan- ably achieve the Committee’s objectives of maximum
sion was progressing roughly as anticipated, with real employment and 2 percent inflation. Many noted that,
economic activity expanding at a solid rate, labor market if gradual increases in the target range for the federal
conditions continuing to strengthen, and inflation near funds rate continued, the federal funds rate could be at
the Committee’s objective. Based on their current as- or above their estimates of its neutral level sometime
sessments, almost all participants expressed the view next year. In that regard, participants discussed how the
that it would be appropriate for the Committee to con- Committee’s communications might evolve over com-
tinue its gradual approach to policy firming by raising the ing meetings if the economy progressed about as antici-
target range for the federal funds rate 25 basis points at pated; in particular, a number of them noted that it might
this meeting. These participants agreed that, even after soon be appropriate to modify the language in the
such an increase in the target range, the stance of mon- postmeeting statement indicating that “the stance of
etary policy would remain accommodative, supporting monetary policy remains accommodative.”
strong labor market conditions and a sustained return to
Participants supported a plan to implement a technical
2 percent inflation. One participant remarked that, with
adjustment to the IOER rate that would place it at a level
inflation having run consistently below 2 percent in re-
5 basis points below the top of the FOMC’s target range
cent years and market-based measures of inflation com-
for the federal funds rate. A few participants suggested
pensation still low, postponing an increase in the target
that, before too long, the Committee might want to fur-
range for the federal funds rate would help push infla-
ther discuss how it can implement monetary policy most
tion expectations up to levels consistent with the Com-
effectively and efficiently when the quantity of reserve
mittee’s objective.
balances reaches a level appreciably below that seen re-
With regard to the medium-term outlook for monetary cently.
policy, participants generally judged that, with the econ-
Committee Policy Action
omy already very strong and inflation expected to run at
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
2 percent on a sustained basis over the medium term, it
ahead, members judged that information received since
would likely be appropriate to continue gradually raising
the FOMC met in May indicated that the labor market
the target range for the federal funds rate to a setting that
had continued to strengthen and that economic activity
was at or somewhat above their estimates of its longer-
had been rising at a solid rate. Job gains had been strong,
run level by 2019 or 2020. Participants reaffirmed that
on average, in recent months, and the unemployment
adjustments to the path for the policy rate would depend
rate had declined. Recent data suggested that growth of
on their assessments of the evolution of the economic
household spending had picked up, while business fixed
outlook and risks to the outlook relative to the Commit-
investment had continued to grow strongly. On a
tee’s statutory objectives.
12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for
Participants pointed to various reasons for raising short- items other than food and energy had moved close to
term interest rates gradually, including the uncertainty 2 percent. Indicators of longer-term inflation expecta-
surrounding the level of the federal funds rate in the tions were little changed, on balance.

--- Page 9 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_ g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_2_–_1_3,_ 2_0_1_8_________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
Members viewed the recent data as consistent with a goals and did not reflect a shift in the approach to policy
strong economy that was evolving about as they had ex- going forward.
pected. They judged that continuing along a path of
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
gradual policy firming would balance the risk of moving
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
too quickly, which could leave inflation short of a sus-
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
tained return to the Committee’s symmetric goal, against
cute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the
the risk of moving too slowly, which could lead to a
following domestic policy directive, to be released at
buildup of inflation pressures or material financial im-
2:00 p.m.:
balances. Consequently, members expected that further
gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds “Effective June 14, 2018, the Federal Open
rate would be consistent with sustained expansion of Market Committee directs the Desk to under-
economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and take open market operations as necessary to
inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob- maintain the federal funds rate in a target range
jective over the medium term. Members continued to of 1¾ to 2 percent, including overnight reverse
judge that the risks to the economic outlook remained repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase
roughly balanced. operations with maturities of more than one day
when necessary to accommodate weekend, hol-
After assessing current conditions and the outlook for
iday, or similar trading conventions) at an offer-
economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, mem-
ing rate of 1.75 percent, in amounts limited only
bers voted to raise the target range for the federal funds
by the value of Treasury securities held outright
rate to 1¾ to 2 percent. They indicated that the stance
in the System Open Market Account that are
of monetary policy remained accommodative, thereby
available for such operations and by a per-
supporting strong labor market conditions and a sus-
counterparty limit of $30 billion per day.
tained return to 2 percent inflation.
The Committee directs the Desk to continue
Members agreed that the timing and size of future ad-
rolling over at auction the amount of principal
justments to the target range for the federal funds rate
payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings
would depend upon their assessment of realized and ex-
of Treasury securities maturing during June that
pected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s
exceeds $18 billion, and to continue reinvesting
maximum employment objective and symmetric 2 per-
in agency mortgage-backed securities the
cent inflation objective. They reiterated that this assess-
amount of principal payments from the Federal
ment would take into account a wide range of infor-
Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and agency
mation, including measures of labor market conditions,
mortgage-backed securities received during
indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expecta-
June that exceeds $12 billion. Effective in July,
tions, and readings on financial and international devel-
the Committee directs the Desk to roll over at
opments.
auction the amount of principal payments from
With regard to the postmeeting statement, members fa- the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury se-
vored the removal of the forward-guidance language curities maturing during each calendar month
stating that “the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for that exceeds $24 billion, and to reinvest in
some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in agency mortgage-backed securities the amount
the longer run.” Members noted that, although this of principal payments from the Federal Re-
forward-guidance language had been useful for com- serve’s holdings of agency debt and agency
municating the expected path of the federal funds rate mortgage-backed securities received during
during the early stages of policy normalization, this lan- each calendar month that exceeds $16 billion.
guage was no longer appropriate in light of the strong Small deviations from these amounts for oper-
state of the economy and the current expected path for ational reasons are acceptable.
policy. Moreover, the removal of the forward-guidance
The Committee also directs the Desk to engage
language and other changes to the statement should
in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
streamline and facilitate the Committee’s communica-
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal
tions. Importantly, the changes were a reflection of the
Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities
progress toward achieving the Committee’s statutory
transactions.”

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
The vote also encompassed approval of the statement information, including measures of labor mar-
below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures
and inflation expectations, and readings on fi-
“Information received since the Federal Open
nancial and international developments.”
Market Committee met in May indicates that
the labor market has continued to strengthen Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, William C.
and that economic activity has been rising at a Dudley, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Lael
solid rate. Job gains have been strong, on aver- Brainard, Loretta J. Mester, Randal K. Quarles, and John
age, in recent months, and the unemployment C. Williams.
rate has declined. Recent data suggest that
Voting against this action: None.
growth of household spending has picked up,
while business fixed investment has continued To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target
to grow strongly. On a 12-month basis, both range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors
overall inflation and inflation for items other voted unanimously to raise the interest rates on required
than food and energy have moved close to and excess reserve balances to 1.95 percent, effective
2 percent. Indicators of longer-term inflation June 14, 2018. The Board of Governors also voted
expectations are little changed, on balance. unanimously to approve a ¼ percentage point increase
in the primary credit rate (discount rate) to 2½ percent,
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
effective June 14, 2018.4
mittee seeks to foster maximum employment
and price stability. The Committee expects that Election of Committee Vice Chairman
further gradual increases in the target range for By unanimous vote, the Committee selected John C.
the federal funds rate will be consistent with Williams to serve as Vice Chairman, effective on
sustained expansion of economic activity, June 18, 2018, until the selection of a successor at the
strong labor market conditions, and inflation Committee’s first regularly scheduled meeting in 2019.
near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob-
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
jective over the medium term. Risks to the eco-
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, July 31–
nomic outlook appear roughly balanced.
August 1, 2018. The meeting adjourned at 10:00 a.m. on
In view of realized and expected labor market June 13, 2018.
conditions and inflation, the Committee de-
Notation Vote
cided to raise the target range for the federal
By notation vote completed on May 22, 2018, the Com-
funds rate to 1¾ to 2 percent. The stance of
mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com-
monetary policy remains accommodative,
mittee meeting held on May 1-2, 2018.
thereby supporting strong labor market condi-
tions and a sustained return to 2 percent infla-
tion.
In determining the timing and size of future ad-
_____________________________
justments to the target range for the federal
James A. Clouse
funds rate, the Committee will assess realized
Secretary
and expected economic conditions relative to its
maximum employment objective and its sym-
metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as-
sessment will take into account a wide range of
4 In taking this action, the Board approved requests submitted informed the Secretary of the Board of such a request. (Sec-
by the boards of directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of retary’s note: Subsequently, the Federal Reserve Bank of New
Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, York was informed by the Secretary of the Board of the
St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Fran- Board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit
cisco. This vote also encompassed approval by the Board of rate of 2½ percent, effective June 14, 2018.) The second vote
Governors of the establishment of a 2½ percent primary of the Board also encompassed approval of the establishment
credit rate by the remaining Federal Reserve Bank, effective of the interest rates for secondary and seasonal credit under
on the later of June 14, 2018, and the date such Reserve Bank the existing formulas for computing such rates.

--- Page 11 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- 2018. Table 1 and figure 1 provide summary statistics
tee (FOMC) meeting held on June 12–13, 2018, meeting for the projections.
participants submitted their projections of the most
As shown in figure 2, participants generally continued to
likely outcomes for real gross domestic product (GDP)
expect that the evolution of the economy relative to their
growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for each
objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent in-
year from 2018 to 2020 and over the longer run.1 Each
flation would likely warrant further gradual increases in
participant’s projections were based on information
the federal funds rate. The central tendencies of partic-
available at the time of the meeting, together with his or
ipants’ projections of the federal funds rate for both
her assessment of appropriate monetary policy—includ-
2018 and 2019 were roughly unchanged, but the medians
ing a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-run
for both years were 25 basis points higher relative to
value—and assumptions about other factors likely to af-
March. Nearly all participants who submitted longer-
fect economic outcomes. The longer-run projections
run projections expected that, during part of the projec-
represent each participant’s assessment of the value to
tion period, evolving economic conditions would make
which each variable would be expected to converge, over
it appropriate for the federal funds rate to move some-
time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the ab-
what above their estimates of its longer-run level.
sence of further shocks to the economy.2 “Appropriate
monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy In general, participants continued to view the uncer-
that each participant deems most likely to foster out- tainty attached to their economic projections as broadly
comes for economic activity and inflation that best sat- similar to the average of the past 20 years. As in March,
isfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory most participants judged the risks around their projec-
mandate to promote maximum employment and price tions for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and
stability. inflation to be broadly balanced.
All participants who submitted longer-run projections The Outlook for Economic Activity
expected that, in 2018, real GDP would expand at a pace The median of participants’ projections for the growth
exceeding their individual estimates of the longer-run rate of real GDP, conditional on their individual assess-
growth rate of real GDP. Participants generally saw real ments of appropriate monetary policy, was 2.8 percent
GDP growth moderating somewhat in each of the fol- for this year and 2.4 percent for next year. The median
lowing two years but remaining above their estimates of was 2.0 percent for 2020, a touch above the median pro-
the longer-run rate. All participants who submitted jection of longer-run growth. Most participants contin-
longer-run projections expected that, throughout the ued to cite fiscal policy as a driver of strong economic
projection period, the unemployment rate would run be- activity over the next couple of years. Many participants
low their estimates of its longer-run level. All partici- also mentioned accommodative monetary policy and fi-
pants projected that inflation, as measured by the four- nancial conditions, strength in the global outlook, con-
quarter percentage change in the price index for personal tinued momentum in the labor market, or positive read-
consumption expenditures (PCE), would run at or ings on business and consumer sentiment as important
slightly above the Committee’s 2 percent objective by factors shaping the economic outlook. Compared with
the end of 2018 and remain roughly flat through 2020. the March SEP, the median of participants’ projections
Compared with the Summary of Economic Projections for the rate of real GDP growth was 0.1 percentage
(SEP) from March, most participants slightly marked up point higher for this year and unchanged for the next
their projections of real GDP growth in 2018 and some- two years.
what lowered their projections for the unemployment
Almost all participants expected the unemployment rate
rate from 2018 through 2020; participants indicated that
to decline somewhat further over the projection period.
these revisions reflected, in large part, strength in incom-
The median of participants’ projections for the unem-
ing data. A large majority of participants made slight up-
ployment rate was 3.6 percent for the final quarter of
ward adjustments to their projections of inflation in
this year and 3.5 percent for the final quarters of 2019
1 Three members of the Board of Governors were in office at 2 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for
the time of the June 2018 meeting. real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds
rate.

--- Page 12 ---

,stnediserp
knaB
evreseR
laredeF
dna
srebmem
draoB
evreseR
laredeF
fo
snoitcejorp
cimonocE
.1
elbaT
8102
enuJ
,ycilop
yratenom
etairporppa
detcejorp
fo
stnemssessa
laudividni
rieht
rednu
tnecreP
3egnaR
2ycnednetlartneC
1naideM
regnoL
0202
9102
8102
regnoL
0202
9102
8102
regnoL
0202
9102
8102
elbairaV
nur
nur
nur
1.2–7.1
2.2–5.1
7.2–1.2
0.3–5.2
0.2–8.1
0.2–8.1
6.2–2.2
0.3–7.2
8.1
0.2
4.2
8.2
PDGlaerniegnahC
2.2–7.1
3.2–5.1
8.2–0.2
0.3–5.2
0.2–8.1
1.2–8.1
6.2–2.2
0.3–6.2
8.1
0.2
4.2
7.2
noitcejorphcraM
7.4–1.4
0.4–3.3
8.3–3.3
8.3–5.3
6.4–3.4
7.3–4.3
5.3–4.3
7.3–6.3
5.4
5.3
5.3
6.3
etartnemyolpmenU
8.4–2.4
4.4–3.3
2.4–3.3
0.4–6.3
7.4–3.4
8.3–5.3
7.3–4.3
8.3–6.3
5.4
6.3
6.3
8.3
noitcejorphcraM
0.2
3.2–0.2
3.2–9.1
2.2–0.2
0.2
2.2–1.2
2.2–0.2
1.2–0.2
0.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
noitaflniECP
0.2
3.2–0.2
3.2–9.1
1.2–8.1
0.2
2.2–1.2
2.2–0.2
0.2–8.1
0.2
1.2
0.2
9.1
noitcejorphcraM
3.2–0.2
3.2–0.2
1.2–9.1
2.2–1.2
2.2–0.2
0.2–9.1
1.2
1.2
0.2
4noitaflniECPeroC
3.2–0.2
3.2–9.1
1.2–8.1
2.2–1.2
2.2–0.2
0.2–8.1
1.2
1.2
9.1
noitcejorphcraM
detcejorP:omeM
htapycilopetairporppa
5.3–3.2
1.4–9.1
6.3–9.1
6.2–9.1
0.3–8.2
6.3–1.3
4.3–9.2
4.2–1.2
9.2
4.3
1.3
4.2
etarsdnuflaredeF
5.3–3.2
9.4–6.1
9.3–6.1
6.2–6.1
0.3–8.2
6.3–1.3
4.3–8.2
4.2–1.2
9.2
4.3
9.2
1.2
noitcejorphcraM
eht
morf
segnahc
tnecrep
era
noitaflni
fo
serusaem
htob
rof
snoitcejorp
dna
)PDG(
tcudorp
citsemod
ssorg
laer
ni
egnahc
fo
snoitcejorP
:etoN
egnahcfosetaregatnecrepehteranoitaflniECPerocdnanoitaflniECP
.detacidniraeyehtforetrauqhtruofehtotraeysuoiverpehtforetrauqhtruof
rofsnoitcejorP
.ygrenednadoofgnidulcxeECProfxedniecirpehtdna)ECP(serutidnepxenoitpmusnoclanosreprofxedniecirpeht,ylevitcepser,ni
era
snoitcejorp
s’tnapicitrap
hcaE
.detacidni
raey
eht
fo
retrauq
htruof
eht
ni
etar
tnemyolpmenu
nailivic
egareva
eht
rof
era
etar
tnemyolpmenu
eht
hcaehcihwotetarehtfotnemssessas’tnapicitraphcaetneserpersnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.ycilopyratenometairporppafotnemssessarehrosihnodesab
ehtrofsnoitcejorpehT
.ymonoceehtotskcohsrehtruffoecnesbaehtnidnaycilopyratenometairporpparednuegrevnocotdetcepxeebdluowelbairav
tegratetairporppadetcejorpehtroetarsdnuflaredefehtrofegnartegratetairporppadetcejorpehtfotniopdimehtfoeulavehteraetarsdnuflaredef htiwnoitcnujnocniedamerewsnoitcejorphcraMehT
.nurregnolehtrevororaeyradnelacdefiicepsehtfodneehttaetarsdnuflaredefehtroflevel
laerniegnahcehtrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoltimbustondidtnapicitrapenO
.8102,12–02hcraMnoeettimmoCtekraMnepOlaredeFehtfogniteemeht
hcustimbustondidtnapicitrapenodna,gniteem
,8102
,12–02hcraMehthtiwnoitcnujnocnietarsdnuflaredefehtro
,etartnemyolpmenueht,PDG
.gniteem,8102,31–21enuJehthtiwnoitcnujnocnisnoitcejorp
snoitcejorpforebmunehtnehW
.tsehgihottsewolmorfdegnarraerasnoitcejorpehtnehwnoitcejorpelddimehtsinaidemeht,doirephcaeroF
.1
.snoitcejorpelddimowtehtfoegarevaehtsinaidemeht,nevesi
.raeyhcaenielbairavhcaerofsnoitcejorptsewoleerhtdnatsehgiheerhtehtsedulcxeycnednetlartnecehT
.2
.raeytahtnielbairavtahtrof,tsehgihottsewolmorf,snoitcejorp’stnapicitrapllasedulcniraeyneviganielbairavarofegnarehT
.3
.detcelloctoneranoitaflniECPerocrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.4
_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________

--- Page 13 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_2_–_1_3_, _2_0_1_8______________P_a_g_e_ _3
Figure1. Medians,centraltendencies,andrangesofeconomicprojections,2018–20andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections 3
Actual
2
1
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
7
6
5
4
3
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesof
thevariablesareannual.

--- Page 14 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure2. FOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy: Midpointoftargetrangeortargetlevelfor
thefederalfundsrate
Percent
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
2018 2019 2020 Longer run
Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual par-
ticipant’sjudgmentofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfundsrateortheappropriatetarget
levelforthefederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun. Oneparticipantdidnot
submitlonger-runprojectionsforthefederalfundsrate.

--- Page 15 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_2_–_1_3_, _2_0_1_8______________P_a_g_e_ _5
and 2020. The median of participants’ estimates of the the federal funds rate over 2018. There was a slight re-
longer-run unemployment rate was unchanged at duction in the dispersion of participants’ views, with no
4.5 percent. participant regarding the appropriate target at the end of
the year to be below 1.88 percent. For each subsequent
Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of partici-
year, the dispersion of participants’ year-end projections
pants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unem-
was somewhat smaller than that in the March SEP.
ployment rate from 2018 to 2020 and over the longer
run. The distribution of individual projections for real The medians of participants’ projections of the federal
GDP growth this year shifted up noticeably from that in funds rate rose gradually to 2.4 percent at the end of this
the March SEP. By contrast, the distributions of pro- year, 3.1 percent at the end of 2019, and 3.4 percent at
jected real GDP growth in 2019 and 2020 and over the the end of 2020. The median of participants’ longer-run
longer run were little changed. The distributions of in- estimates, at 2.9 percent, was unchanged relative to the
dividual projections for the unemployment rate in 2018 March SEP.
to 2020 shifted down relative to the distributions in
In discussing their projections, many participants con-
March, while the downward shift in the distribution of
tinued to express the view that the appropriate trajectory
longer-run projections was very modest.
of the federal funds rate over the next few years would
The Outlook for Inflation likely involve gradual increases. This view was predi-
The medians of participants’ projections for total and cated on several factors, including a judgment that a
core PCE price inflation in 2018 were 2.1 percent and gradual path of policy firming likely would appropriately
2.0 percent, respectively, and the median for each meas- balance the risks associated with, among other consider-
ure was 2.1 percent in 2019 and 2020. Compared with ations, the possibilities that U.S. fiscal policy could have
the March SEP, the medians of participants’ projections larger or more persistent positive effects on real activity
for total PCE price inflation for this year and next were and that shifts in trade policy or developments abroad
revised up slightly. Some participants pointed to incom- could weigh on the expansion. As always, the appropri-
ing data on energy prices as a reason for their upward ate path of the federal funds rate would depend on
revisions. The median of participants’ forecasts for core evolving economic conditions and their implications for
PCE price inflation was up a touch for this year and un- participants’ economic outlooks and assessments of
changed for subsequent years. risks.
Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri- Uncertainty and Risks
butions of participants’ views about the outlook for in- In assessing the path for the federal funds rate that, in
flation. The distributions of both total and core PCE their view, is likely to be appropriate, FOMC participants
price inflation for 2018 shifted to the right relative to the take account of the range of possible economic out-
distributions in March. The distributions of projected comes, the likelihood of those outcomes, and the poten-
inflation in 2019, 2020, and over the longer run were tial benefits and costs should they occur. As a reference,
roughly unchanged. Participants generally expected table 2 provides measures of forecast uncertainty, based
each measure to be at or slightly above 2 percent in 2019 on the forecast errors of various private and government
and 2020. forecasts over the past 20 years, for real GDP growth,
the unemployment rate, and total PCE price inflation.
Appropriate Monetary Policy
Those measures are represented graphically in the “fan
Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’
charts” shown in the top panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and
judgments regarding the appropriate target—or mid-
4.C. The fan charts display the median SEP projections
point of the target range—for the federal funds rate at
for the three variables surrounded by symmetric confi-
the end of each year from 2018 to 2020 and over the
dence intervals derived from the forecast errors reported
longer run. The distributions of projected policy rates
in table 2. If the degree of uncertainty attending these
through 2020 shifted modestly higher, consistent with
projections is similar to the typical magnitude of past
the revisions to participants’ projections of real GDP
forecast errors and the risks around the projections are
growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation. As in
broadly balanced, then future outcomes of these varia-
their March projections, a large majority of participants
bles would have about a 70 percent probability of being
anticipated that evolving economic conditions would
within these confidence intervals. For all three variables,
likely warrant the equivalent of a total of either three or
this measure of uncertainty is substantial and generally
four increases of 25 basis points in the target range for
increases as the forecast horizon lengthens.

--- Page 16 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2018–20andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2018
June projections 18
March projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 17 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_2_–_1_3_, _2_0_1_8______________P_a_g_e_ _7
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2018–20andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2018
June projections 18
March projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 18 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2018–20andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2018
June projections 18
March projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 19 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_2_–_1_3_, _2_0_1_8______________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2018–20
Number of participants
2018
June projections
18
March projections
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’judgmentsofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfunds
rateortheappropriatetargetlevelforthefederalfundsrate,2018–20andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2018
June projections 18
March projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8 4.6 3 4.8 8
1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62 4.87 5.12
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8 4.6 3 4.8 8
1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62 4.87 5.12
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8 4.6 3 4.8 8
1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62 4.87 5.12
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8 4.6 3 4.8 8
1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62 4.87 5.12
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_2_–_1_3_, _2_0_1_8_____________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges broadly balanced—in other words, as broadly consistent
Percentage points with a symmetric fan chart. Compared with March, even
Variable 2018 2019 2020
more participants saw the risks to their projections as
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . ±1.3 ±2.0 ±2.1
broadly balanced. Specifically, for GDP growth, only
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . ±0.4 ±1.2 ±1.8 one participant viewed the risks as tilted to the downside,
and the number of participants who viewed the risks as
Total consumer prices2 . . . . . ±0.7 ±1.0 ±1.0
tilted to the upside dropped from four to two. For the
Short-term interest rates3 . . . . ±0.7 ±2.0 ±2.2
unemployment rate, the number of participants who saw
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root
the risks as tilted toward low readings dropped from four
mean squared error of projections for 1998 through 2017 that were re-
leased in the summer by various private and government forecasters. As to two. For inflation, all but one participant judged the
described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, risks to either total or core PCE price inflation as broadly
there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real
balanced.
GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will
be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the
In discussing the uncertainty and risks surrounding their
past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip
(2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using His- projections, several participants continued to point to
torical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance
fiscal developments as a source of upside risk, many par-
and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), www.federal ticipants cited developments related to trade policy as
reserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2017/files/2017020pap.pdf. posing downside risks to their growth forecasts, and a
1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
few participants also pointed to political developments
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
that has been most widely used in government and private economic in Europe or the global outlook more generally as down-
forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth side-risk factors. A few participants noted that the ap-
quarter basis.
preciation of the dollar posed downside risks to the in-
3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds
rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. flation outlook. A few participants also noted the risk
Projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent, in the
of inflation moving higher than anticipated as the unem-
fourth quarter.
ployment rate falls.
Participants’ assessments of the level of uncertainty sur- Participants’ assessments of the appropriate future path
rounding their individual economic projections are of the federal funds rate were also subject to considera-
shown in the bottom-left panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and ble uncertainty. Because the Committee adjusts the fed-
4.C. Nearly all participants viewed the degree of uncer- eral funds rate in response to actual and prospective de-
tainty attached to their economic projections for real velopments over time in real GDP growth, the unem-
GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation as ployment rate, and inflation, uncertainty surrounding the
broadly similar to the average of the past 20 years, a view projected path for the federal funds rate importantly re-
that was essentially unchanged from March.3 flects the uncertainties about the paths for those key eco-
nomic variables. Figure 5 provides a graphical represen-
Because the fan charts are constructed to be symmetric
tation of this uncertainty, plotting the median SEP pro-
around the median projections, they do not reflect any
jection for the federal funds rate surrounded by confi-
asymmetries in the balance of risks that participants may
dence intervals derived from the results presented in ta-
see in their economic projections. Participants’ assess-
ble 2. As with the macroeconomic variables, forecast
ments of the balance of risks to their economic projec-
uncertainty surrounding the appropriate path of the fed-
tions are shown in the bottom-right panels of fig-
eral funds rate is substantial and increases for longer ho-
ures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. Most participants judged the
rizons.
risks to their projections of real GDP growth, the
unemployment rate, total inflation, and core inflation as
3 At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the partici-
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty sur- pants’ projections.
rounding the economic forecasts and explains the approach

--- Page 22 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4.A.UncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsofGDPgrowth
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections
70% confidence interval 4
3
Actual 2
1
0
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth Risks to GDP growth
June projections June projections
18 18
March projections March projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Theblueandredlinesinthetoppanelshowactualvaluesandmedianprojectedvalues,respectively,ofthe
percentchangeinrealgrossdomesticproduct(GDP)fromthefourthquarterofthepreviousyeartothefourthquarter
of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is
basedonrootmeansquarederrorsofvariousprivateandgovernmentforecastsmadeovertheprevious20years;more
information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed,
on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the
historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around
theirprojections;thesecurrentassessmentsaresummarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,participantswho
judgetheuncertaintyabouttheirprojectionsas“broadlysimilar”totheaveragelevelsofthepast20yearswouldview
the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of
the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as“broadly
balanced”would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of
uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 23 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_2_–_1_3_, _2_0_1_8_____________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Figure4.B.Uncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsoftheunemploymentrate
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Unemployment rate
Median of projections 10
70% confidence interval
9
8
7
6
Actual
5
4
3
2
1
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate
June projections June projections
18 18
March projections March projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of
the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around
the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private
and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2.
Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width
and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC
participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are
summarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,participantswhojudgetheuncertaintyabouttheirprojectionsas
“broadlysimilar”totheaveragelevelsofthepast20yearswouldviewthewidthoftheconfidenceintervalshowninthe
historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise,
participants who judge the risks to their projections as“broadly balanced”would view the confidence interval around
theirprojectionsasapproximatelysymmetric. Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethe
box“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 24 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_4____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4.C.UncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsofPCEinflation
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
PCE inflation
Median of projections
70% confidence interval
3
2
1
Actual
0
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation Risks to PCE inflation
June projections June projections
18 18
March projections March projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation Risks to core PCE inflation
June projections June projections
18 18
March projections March projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Theblueandredlinesinthetoppanelshowactualvaluesandmedianprojectedvalues,respectively,ofthe
percentchangeinthepriceindexforpersonalconsumptionexpenditures(PCE)fromthefourthquarteroftheprevious
yeartothefourthquarteroftheyearindicated. Theconfidenceintervalaroundthemedianprojectedvaluesisassumed
to be symmetricand is based on root mean squarederrorsof variousprivateand governmentforecastsmade over the
previous20years;moreinformationaboutthesedataisavailableintable2. Becausecurrentconditionsmaydifferfrom
those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated
onthebasisofthehistoricalforecasterrorsmaynotreflectFOMCparticipants’currentassessmentsoftheuncertainty
andrisksaroundtheirprojections;thesecurrentassessmentsaresummarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,
participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as“broadly similar”to the average levels of the past
20yearswouldviewthewidthoftheconfidenceintervalshowninthehistoricalfanchartaslargelyconsistentwiththeir
assessments of the uncertaintyabout their projections. Likewise, participantswho judgethe risks to their projections
as“broadly balanced”would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For
definitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 25 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_2_–_1_3_, _2_0_1_8_____________P__ag_e_ _1_5
Figure5. Uncertaintyinprojectionsofthefederalfundsrate
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Federal funds rate
Midpoint of target range
6
Median of projections
70% confidence interval*
5
4
3
2
1
Actual
0
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Com-
mittee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the
target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level.
The confidence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private
and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The confidence interval is not strictly consistent with the
projectionsforthefederalfundsrate,primarilybecausetheseprojectionsarenotforecastsofthelikeliestoutcomesfor
the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy.
Still,historicalforecasterrorsprovideabroadsenseoftheuncertaintyaroundthefuturepathofthefederalfundsrate
generatedbytheuncertaintyaboutthemacroeconomicvariablesaswellasadditionaladjustmentstomonetarypolicy
thatmaybeappropriatetooffsettheeffectsofshockstotheeconomy.
Theconfidenceintervalisassumedtobesymmetricexceptwhenitistruncatedatzero—thebottomofthelowest
target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would
not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy
accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools,
including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current
conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the
confidenceintervalestimatedonthebasisofthehistoricalforecasterrorsmaynotreflectFOMCparticipants’current
assessmentsoftheuncertaintyandrisksaroundtheirprojections.
* The confidence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth
quarteroftheyearindicated;moreinformationaboutthesedataisavailableintable2. Theshadedareaencompasses
lessthana70percentconfidenceintervaliftheconfidenceintervalhasbeentruncatedatzero.

--- Page 26 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_6____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the members of tions are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those fig-
the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal ures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the
Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are
policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top
projections, however. The economic and statistical models panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to par-
and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts ticipants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that
are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather
the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad than below their projections. These judgments are summa-
unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the rized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C.
stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the
what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as em- future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable
bodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each
possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the poten- participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of mone-
tial costs to the economy should they occur. tary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real ac-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a tivity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve
range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropri-
Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve ate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges
Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges for forecasts of short-term interest rates. They suggest that
shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty as- the historical confidence intervals associated with projections
sociated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted,
participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly con-
and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, sistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these
respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly out-
tending those projections is similar to that experienced in the comes but rather are projections of participants’ individual as-
past and the risks around the projections are broadly bal- sessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-
anced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a prob- of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a
ability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal
within a range of 1.7 to 4.3 percent in the current year, 1.0 to funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeco-
5.0 percent in the second year, and 0.9 to 5.1 percent in the nomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary
third year. The corresponding 70 percent confidence inter- policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of
vals for overall inflation would be 1.3 to 2.7 percent in the shocks to the economy.
current year and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second and third If at some point in the future the confidence interval
years. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these confidence around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it
bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and centered on would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart
the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for GDP shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target
growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation. However, in range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the
some instances, the risks around the projections may not be Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of
symmetric. In particular, the unemployment rate cannot be the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention;
negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular projec- it would not have any implications for possible future policy
tion might be tilted to either the upside or the downside, in decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to pro-
which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmet- vide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so
rically positioned around the median projection. were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could
Because current conditions may differ from those that also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset
prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide purchases, to provide additional accommodation.
judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on
projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1
than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncer- provides information on the range of views across FOMC
tainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A
reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections
the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ cur- across participants is much smaller than the average forecast
rent assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projec- errors over the past 20 years.

# Tables

## Page_12_Table_1


|                  | 0202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|------------------|------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
| 2ycnednetlartneC | regnoL
nur | 0.2–8.1 0.2–8.1 6.4–3.4 7.4–3.4
0.2 0.2
0.2–8.1 1.2–8.1 7.3–4.3 8.3–5.3 2.2–1.2 2.2–1.2 2.2–1.2 2.2–1.2
6.2–2.2 6.2–2.2 5.3–4.3 7.3–4.3 2.2–0.2 2.2–0.2 2.2–0.2 2.2–0.2
0.3–7.2 0.3–6.2 7.3–6.3 8.3–6.3 1.2–0.2 0.2–8.1 0.2–9.1 0.2–8.1 | 0.3–8.2 0.3–8.2
6.3–1.3 6.3–1.3
4.3–9.2 4.3–8.2
4.2–1.2 4.2–1.2 |
|                  | 0202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
| 1naideM          | regnoL
nur | 8.1 8.1 5.4 5.4 0.2 0.2
0.2 0.2 5.3 6.3 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2
4.2 4.2 5.3 6.3 1.2 0.2 1.2 1.2
8.2 7.2 6.3 8.3 1.2 9.1 0.2 9.1                                                                                                                 | 9.2 9.2
4.3 4.3
1.3 9.2
4.2 1.2                                 |
|                  | 0202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |