# 20181108_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:38:53*
*Pages: 12, Tables: 0*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
November 7–8, 2018
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of Market Account
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Wednesday, Novem- Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,
ber 7, 2018, at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Thursday, Board of Governors
November 8, 2018, at 9:00 a.m.1
Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve
PRESENT: Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of
Jerome H. Powell, Chairman Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division
John C. Williams, Vice Chairman of Supervision and Regulation, Board of
Thomas I. Barkin Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of
Raphael W. Bostic Financial Stability, Board of Governors
Lael Brainard
Richard H. Clarida Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of
Mary C. Daly Research and Statistics, Board of Governors;
Loretta J. Mester Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of
Randal K. Quarles Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Michael T.
Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial
James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George, Stability, Board of Governors
Eric Rosengren, and Michael Strine, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chairman,
Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari,
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Antulio N. Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Chairman,
Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
James A. Clouse, Secretary Brian M. Doyle, Joseph W. Gruber, Ellen E. Meade,
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary and John M. Roberts, Special Advisers to the
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Governors
Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Steven B. Kamin, Economist Board Members, Board of Governors
Thomas Laubach, Economist
David W. Wilcox, Economist Eric M. Engen, Senior Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors;
David Altig, Thomas A. Connors, Trevor A. Reeve, Christopher J. Erceg, Senior Associate Director,
Ellis W. Tallman, William Wascher, and Beth Anne Division of International Finance, Board of
Wilson, Associate Economists Governors
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Edward Nelson, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors; S. Wayne Passmore,
1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes.
2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan-
cial markets and open market operations.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics, Andre Anderson, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Board of Governors Bank of Atlanta
William F. Bassett, Associate Director, Division of Jeff Fuhrer, Sylvain Leduc, Kevin Stiroh,4 Daniel G.
Financial Stability, Board of Governors; Marnie Sullivan, and Christopher J. Waller, Executive Vice
Gillis DeBoer3 and David López-Salido, Associate Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, San
Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Francisco, New York, Chicago, and St. Louis,
Governors; Molly E. Mahar,3 Associate Director, respectively
Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board of
Governors; Stacey Tevlin, Associate Director, Paolo A. Pesenti, Paula Tkac,3 Luke Woodward, Mark
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of L.J. Wright, and Nathaniel Wuerffel,3 Senior Vice
Governors Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York,
Atlanta, Kansas City, Minneapolis, and New York,
Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Deputy Associate Director, respectively
Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment
Systems, Board of Governors; Min Wei, Deputy Roc Armenter,3 Satyajit Chatterjee, Deborah L.
Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Leonard,3 Pia Orrenius, Matthew D. Raskin,3 and
Board of Governors Patricia Zobel,3 Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, New York,
Christopher J. Gust, Laura Lipscomb,3 and Zeynep Dallas, New York, New York, respectively
Senyuz,3 Assistant Directors, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors; Patrick E. McCabe, John P. McGowan,3 Assistant Vice President, Federal
Assistant Director, Division of Research and Reserve Bank of New York
Statistics, Board of Governors
Andreas L. Hornstein, Senior Advisor, Federal Reserve
Penelope A. Beattie,4 Assistant to the Secretary, Office Bank of Richmond
of the Secretary, Board of Governors
Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl, Senior Economist and
Michiel De Pooter, Section Chief, Division of Research Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Chicago
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of Gara Afonso,3 Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors of New York
Alyssa G. Anderson3 and Kurt F. Lewis, Principal Long-Run Monetary Policy Implementation
Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board Frameworks
of Governors Committee participants resumed their discussion of po-
tential long-run frameworks for monetary policy imple-
Joshua S. Louria,3 Lead Financial Institution and Policy mentation, a topic last discussed at the November 2016
Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of FOMC meeting. The staff provided briefings that de-
Governors scribed changes in recent years in banks’ uses of re-
serves, outlined tradeoffs associated with potential
Sriya Anbil,3 Senior Economist, Division of Monetary choices of operating regimes to implement monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors policy and control short-term interest rates, reviewed
potential choices of the policy target rate, and summa-
Randall A. Williams, Senior Information Manager, rized developments in the policy implementation frame-
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors works of other central banks.
3 Attended through the discussion of the long-run monetary 4 Attended Wednesday session only.
policy implementation frameworks.

--- Page 3 ---

____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g _o_f_ N__o_v_em__b_e_r_ 7_–_8_, _2_0_1_8_______________________P_a_g_e_ _3
The staff noted that banks’ liquidity management prac- affect overnight unsecured rates paid by banks, such as
tices had changed markedly since the financial crisis, the effective federal funds rate (EFFR) and the over-
with large banks now maintaining substantial buffers of night bank funding rate (OBFR). These rates could also
reserves, among other high-quality liquid assets, to meet be targeted with abundant excess reserves, as could in-
potential outflows and to comply with regulatory re- terest rates on secured funding or a mixture of secured
quirements. Information from bank contacts as well as and unsecured rates.
a survey of banks indicated that, in an environment in
Participants commented on the advantages of a regime
which money market interest rates were very close to the
of policy implementation with abundant excess reserves.
interest rate paid on excess reserve balances, banks
Based on experience over recent years, such a regime
would likely be comfortable operating with much lower
was seen as providing good control of short-term money
levels of reserve balances than at present but would wish
market rates in a variety of market conditions and effec-
to maintain substantially higher levels of balances than
tive transmission of those rates to broader financial con-
before the crisis. On average, survey responses sug-
ditions. Participants commented that, by contrast, inter-
gested that banks might reduce their reserve holdings
est rate control might be difficult to achieve in an oper-
only modestly from those “lowest comfortable” levels if
ating regime of limited excess reserves in view of the po-
money market interest rates were somewhat above the
tentially greater unpredictability of reserve demand re-
interest on excess reserves (IOER) rate. Across banks,
sulting from liquidity regulations or changes in risk ap-
however, individual survey responses on this issue varied
petite, or the increased variability of factors affecting re-
substantially.
serve supply. Participants also observed that regimes
The staff highlighted how changes in the determinants with abundant excess reserves could provide effective
of reserve demand since the crisis could affect the control of short-term rates even if large amounts of li-
tradeoffs between two types of operating regimes: quidity needed to be added to address liquidity strains or
(1) one in which aggregate excess reserves are suffi- if large-scale asset purchases needed to be undertaken to
ciently limited that money market interest rates are sen- provide macroeconomic stimulus in situations where
sitive to small changes in the supply of reserves and short-term rates are at their effective lower bound.
(2) one in which aggregate excess reserves are suffi- Monetary policy operations in this regime would also not
ciently abundant that money market interest rates are not require active management of reserve supply. In addi-
sensitive to small changes in reserve supply. In the for- tion, the provision of sizable quantities of reserves could
mer type of regime, the Federal Reserve actively adjusts enhance financial stability and reduce operational risks
reserve supply in order to keep its policy rate close to in the payment system by maintaining a high level of li-
target. This technique worked well before the financial quidity in the banking system.
crisis, when reserve demand was fairly stable in the ag-
A number of participants commented that the attractive
gregate and largely influenced by payment needs and re-
features of a regime of abundant excess reserves should
serve requirements. However, with the increased use of
be weighed against the potential drawbacks of such a re-
reserves for precautionary liquidity purposes following
gime as well as the potential benefits of returning to a
the crisis, there was some uncertainty about whether
regime similar to that employed before the financial cri-
banks’ demand for reserves would now be sufficiently
sis. Potential drawbacks of an abundant reserves regime
predictable for the Federal Reserve to be able to pre-
included challenges in precisely determining the quantity
cisely target an interest rate in this way. In the latter type
of reserves necessary in such systems, the need to main-
of regime, money market interest rates are not sensitive
tain relatively sizable quantities of reserves and holdings
to small fluctuations in the demand for and supply of
of securities, and relatively large ongoing interest ex-
reserves, and the stance of monetary policy is instead
penses associated with the remuneration of reserves.
transmitted from the Federal Reserve’s administered
Some noted that returning to a regime of limited excess
rates to market rates—an approach that has been effec-
reserves could demonstrate the Federal Reserve’s ability
tive in controlling short-term interest rates in the United
to fully unwind the policies used to respond to the crisis
States since the financial crisis, as well as in other coun-
and might thereby increase public acceptance or effec-
tries where central banks have used this approach.
tiveness of such policies in the future. Participants noted
The staff briefings also examined the tradeoffs between that the level of reserve balances required to remain in a
alternative policy rates that the Committee could choose regime where rate control does not entail active manage-
in each of the regimes. In a regime of limited excess ment of the supply of reserves was quite uncertain, but
reserves, the Federal Reserve’s policy tools most directly

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
they thought that reserve supply could be reduced sub- markets and institutions, and some worries about the
stantially below its current level while remaining in such outcome of the Brexit negotiations. Market contacts
a regime. They expected to learn more about the de- also noted some nervousness about corporate earnings
mand for reserves as the balance sheet continued to growth and an increase in longer-term Treasury yields
shrink in a gradual and predictable manner. They also over recent weeks as factors contributing to downward
observed that it might be possible to adopt strategies pressure on equity prices. The volatility in equity mar-
that provide incentives for banks to reduce their demand kets was accompanied by a rise in risk spreads on corpo-
for reserves. Participants judged that if the level of re- rate debt, although the widening in risk spreads was not
serves needed for a regime with abundant excess re- as notable as in some past stock market downturns.
serves turned out to be considerably higher than antici-
On balance, the turbulence in equity markets did not
pated, the possibility of returning to a regime in which
leave much imprint on near-term U.S. monetary policy
excess reserves were limited and adjustments in reserve
expectations. Respondents to the Open Market Desk’s
supply were used to influence money market rates would
recent Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market
warrant further consideration.
Participants indicated that respondents placed high odds
Participants noted that lending in the federal funds mar- on a further quarter-point increase in the target range for
ket was currently dominated by the Federal Home Loan the federal funds rate at the December FOMC meeting;
Banks (FHLBs). Participants cited several potential ben- that expectation also seemed to be embedded in federal
efits of targeting the OBFR rather than the EFFR: The funds futures quotes. Further out, the median of survey
larger volume of transactions and greater variety of lend- respondents’ modal expectations for the path of the fed-
ers underlying the OBFR could make that rate a broader eral funds rate pointed to about three additional policy
and more robust indicator of banks’ overnight funding firmings next year while futures quotes appeared to be
costs, the OBFR could become an even better indicator pricing in a somewhat flatter trajectory.
after the potential incorporation of data on onshore
The manager also reviewed recent developments in
wholesale deposits, and the similarity of the OBFR and
global markets. In China, investors were concerned
the EFFR suggested that transitioning to the OBFR
about the apparent slowing of economic expansion and
would not require significant changes in the way the
the implications of continued trade tensions with the
Committee conducted and communicated monetary
United States. Chinese stock price indexes declined fur-
policy. Some participants saw it as desirable to explore
ther over the intermeeting period and were off nearly
the possibility of targeting a secured interest rate. Some
20 percent on the year to date. The renminbi continued
also expressed interest in studying, over the longer term,
to depreciate, moving closer to 7.0 renminbi per dol-
approaches in which the Committee would target a mix-
lar—a level that some market participants viewed as a
ture of secured and unsecured rates.
possible trigger for intensifying depreciation pressures.
Participants expected to continue their discussion of Anecdotal reports suggested that Chinese authorities
long-run implementation frameworks and related issues had intervened to support the renminbi.
at upcoming meetings. They emphasized that it would
The deputy manager followed with a discussion of re-
be important to communicate clearly the rationale for
cent developments in money markets and Desk opera-
any choice of operating regime and target interest rate.
tions. The EFFR along with other overnight rates edged
Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- higher over the weeks following the increase in the target
ket Operations range at the previous meeting. Most recently, the EFFR
The manager of the System Open Market Account had risen to the level of the IOER rate, placing it 5 basis
(SOMA) reviewed recent developments in domestic and points below the top of the target range. The upward
global financial markets. The equity market was quite pressure on the EFFR and other money market rates re-
volatile over the intermeeting period, with U.S. stock portedly stemmed partly from a sizable increase in
prices down as much as 10 percent at one point before Treasury bill supply and a corresponding increase in
recovering somewhat. Investors pointed to a number of Treasury bill yields. In part reflecting that development,
uncertainties in the global outlook that may have con- FHLBs shifted the composition of their liquidity portfo-
tributed to the decline in stock prices, including ongoing lios away from overnight lending in the federal funds
trade tensions between the United States and China, market in favor of the higher returns on overnight re-
growing concerns about the fiscal position of the Italian purchase agreements and on interest-bearing deposit ac-
government and its broader implications for financial counts at banks; these reallocations in their liquidity

--- Page 5 ---

____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g _o_f_ N__o_v_em__b_e_r_ 7_–_8_, _2_0_1_8_______________________P_a_g_e_ _5
portfolios in turn contributed to upward pressure on the There were no intervention operations in foreign curren-
EFFR. At the same time, anecdotal reports suggested cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe-
that some depositories were seeking to increase their riod.
borrowing in federal funds from FHLBs, partly because
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
of the favorable treatment of such borrowing under li-
The information reviewed for the November 7–8 meet-
quidity regulations. In addition, rates on term borrowing
ing indicated that labor market conditions continued to
had moved higher over recent weeks, perhaps encourag-
strengthen in recent months and that real gross domestic
ing some depositories to bid up rates on overnight fed-
product (GDP) rose at a strong rate in the third quarter,
eral funds loans. To date, there were no clear signs that
similar to its pace in the first half of the year. Consumer
the ongoing decline in reserve balances in the banking
price inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage
system associated with the gradual normalization of the
change in the price index for personal consumption ex-
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet had contributed mean-
penditures (PCE), was 2.0 percent in September. Sur-
ingfully to the upward pressure on money market rates.
vey-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations
Indeed, banks reportedly were willing to reduce reserve
were little changed on balance.
holdings in order to lend in overnight repurchase agree-
ment (repo) markets at rates just a few basis points above Total nonfarm payroll employment increased at a strong
the IOER rate. pace, on average, in September and October. The na-
tional unemployment rate decreased to 3.7 percent in
However, respondents to the Desk’s recent Survey of
September and remained at that level in October, while
Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants indi-
the labor force participation rate and the employment-
cated that they anticipated the reduction in the supply of
to-population ratio moved up somewhat over those two
reserves in the banking system could become a very im-
months. The unemployment rates for African Ameri-
portant factor influencing the spread between the IOER
cans, Asians, and Hispanics in October were below their
rate and the EFFR over the last three quarters of next
levels at the end of the previous expansion. The share
year. The deputy manager also provided an update on
of workers employed part time for economic reasons
plans to incorporate additional data on overnight depos-
continued to be close to the lows reached in late 2007.
its in the OBFR. Banks had begun reporting new data
The rates of private-sector job openings and quits both
on onshore overnight deposits in October. In aggregate,
remained at high levels in September; initial claims for
the volumes reported in onshore overnight deposits
unemployment insurance benefits in late October were
were substantial and the rates reported for these instru-
close to historically low levels. Total labor compensa-
ments were very close to rates reported on overnight Eu-
tion per hour in the nonfarm business sector increased
rodollar transactions. The new data were expected to be
2.8 percent over the four quarters ending in the third
incorporated in the calculation of the OBFR later next
quarter, the employment cost index for private workers
year.
increased 2.9 percent over the 12 months ending in Sep-
Following the Desk briefings, the Chairman noted the tember, and average hourly earnings for all employees
upward trend in the EFFR relative to the IOER rate rose 3.1 percent over the 12 months ending in October.
over the intermeeting period and suggested that it might
Industrial production expanded at a solid pace again in
be appropriate to implement another technical adjust-
September, and indicators for output in the fourth quar-
ment in the IOER rate relative to the top of the target
ter were generally positive. Production worker hours in
range for the federal funds rate fairly soon. While the
the manufacturing sector increased in October, au-
funds rate seemed to have stabilized recently, there re-
tomakers’ assembly schedules suggested that light motor
mained some risk that it could continue to drift higher
vehicle production would rise in the fourth quarter, and
before the Committee’s next meeting. As a contingency
new orders indexes from national and regional manufac-
plan, participants agreed that it would be appropriate for
turing surveys pointed to solid gains in factory output in
the Board to implement such a technical adjustment in
the near term.
the IOER rate before the December meeting if neces-
sary to keep the federal funds rate well within the target Real PCE continued to grow strongly in the third quar-
range established by the FOMC. ter. Overall consumer spending rose steadily in recent
months, and light motor vehicle sales stepped up to a
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
robust pace in September and edged higher in October.
domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Key factors that influence consumer spending—includ- excludes changes in consumer food and energy prices,
ing solid gains in real disposable personal income and also was 2.0 percent over that same period. The con-
the effects of earlier increases in equity prices and home sumer price index (CPI) rose 2.3 percent over the
values on households’ net worth—continued to be sup- 12 months ending in September, while core CPI infla-
portive of solid real PCE growth in the near term. Con- tion was 2.2 percent. Recent readings on survey-based
sumer sentiment, as measured by the University of measures of longer-run inflation expectations—includ-
Michigan Surveys of Consumers, remained upbeat in ing those from the Michigan survey, the Blue Chip Eco-
October. nomic Indicators, and the Desk’s Survey of Primary
Dealers and Survey of Market Participants—were little
Real residential investment declined further in the third
changed on balance.
quarter, likely reflecting a range of factors including the
continued effects of rising mortgage interest rates on the Foreign economic growth appeared to pick up in the
affordability of housing. Starts of both new single- third quarter, as a strong rebound in economic activity
family homes and multifamily units decreased last quar- in several emerging market economies (EMEs) more
ter, but building permit issuance for new single-family than offset a slowdown in China and most advanced for-
homes—which tends to be a good indicator of the un- eign economies (AFEs). Preliminary GDP data showed
derlying trend in construction of such homes—was little that Mexico’s economy grew briskly, reversing its sec-
changed on net. Sales of both new and existing homes ond-quarter contraction, while indicators suggested that
declined again in the third quarter, while pending home Brazil’s economy rebounded from a nationwide truck-
sales edged up in September. ers’ strike. In contrast, GDP growth slowed in China
and the euro area, and indicators pointed to a step-down
Growth in real private expenditures for business equip-
in Japanese growth. Foreign inflation picked up in the
ment and intellectual property moderated in the third
third quarter, boosted by higher oil prices and, in China,
quarter following strong gains in these expenditures in
by higher food prices. However, underlying inflation
the first half of the year. Nominal orders and shipments
pressures remained muted, especially in some AFEs.
of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft edged
down over the two months ending in September after Staff Review of the Financial Situation
brisk increases in July, while readings on business senti- Concerns about ongoing international trade tensions,
ment remained upbeat. Real business expenditures for the global growth outlook, and rising interest rates
nonresidential structures declined in the third quarter weighed on global equity market sentiment over the in-
both for the drilling and mining sector and outside that termeeting period. Domestic stock prices declined con-
sector. The number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in siderably, on net, and equity market implied volatility
operation—an indicator of business spending for struc- rose. Nominal Treasury yields ended the period higher
tures in the drilling and mining sector—held about amid some moderate volatility, and the broad dollar in-
steady from late May through late October. dex moved up. Financing conditions for nonfinancial
businesses and households remained supportive of eco-
Total real government purchases rose in the third quar-
nomic activity on balance.
ter. Real federal purchases increased, mostly reflecting
higher defense expenditures. Real purchases by state During the intermeeting period, broad U.S. equity price
and local governments also increased, as real construc- indexes declined considerably, on net, amid somewhat
tion spending by these governments rose and payrolls elevated day-to-day volatility. Various factors appeared
expanded. to weigh on investor sentiment including news related to
ongoing international trade tensions and investors’ con-
The nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened in
cerns about the sustainability of strong corporate earn-
August and September. Exports decreased in August
ings growth. Stock prices in the basic materials and in-
but more than recovered in September, reflecting the
dustrial sectors underperformed the broader market, re-
pattern of industrial supplies exports. Imports of con-
portedly reflecting an increase in trade tensions with
sumer goods led imports higher in both months. The
China. More broadly, investors seemed to reassess eq-
change in net exports was estimated to have been a siz-
uity valuations that appeared elevated. Investors also re-
able drag on real GDP growth in the third quarter.
acted to some large firms raising concerns about the ef-
fect of rising costs on their future profitability in their
Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE
latest earnings reports. Option-implied volatility on the
price index, increased 2.0 percent over the 12 months
S&P 500 index at the one-month horizon—the VIX—
ending in September. Core PCE price inflation, which

--- Page 7 ---

____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g _o_f_ N__o_v_em__b_e_r_ 7_–_8_, _2_0_1_8_______________________P_a_g_e_ _7
increased, though it remained below the levels seen in against most advanced and emerging market currencies,
early February. Despite the considerable declines in do- and EME-dedicated funds experienced small outflows.
mestic stock prices, spreads of investment- and specula-
Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms continued
tive-grade corporate bonds over comparable-maturity
to be supportive of borrowing and spending over the in-
Treasury yields widened only modestly.
termeeting period. Net debt financing of nonfinancial
FOMC communications over the intermeeting period firms was robust in the third quarter, as weak specula-
were viewed by market participants as consistent with a tive-grade bond issuance was largely offset by rapid lev-
continued gradual removal of monetary policy accom- eraged loan issuance. The pace of equity issuance was
modation. Market-implied measures of monetary policy solid in September but slowed somewhat in October.
expectations were generally little changed. Investors The outlook for corporate earnings remained favorable
continued to see virtually no odds of a further quarter- on balance.
point firming in the target range for the federal funds
Respondents to the October Senior Loan Officer Opin-
rate at the November FOMC meeting and high odds of
ion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS) re-
a further firming at the December FOMC meeting. The
ported, on net, that their institutions had eased standards
market-implied path for the federal funds rate beyond
and terms for commercial and industrial loans to large
2018 increased a bit.
and middle-market firms over the past three months. All
Medium- and longer-term nominal Treasury yields respondents that had done so cited increased competi-
ended the period higher amid some moderate volatility tion from other lenders as an important reason. The
over the intermeeting period. Meanwhile, measures of credit quality of nonfinancial corporations remained
inflation compensation derived from Treasury Inflation- solid, though there were some signs of modest deterio-
Protected Securities declined somewhat, with some of ration. Gross issuance of municipal bonds in September
the decline occurring following the weaker-than-ex- and October was strong, much of which raised new cap-
pected September CPI release. ital.
Overnight interest rates in short-term funding markets Financing conditions in the commercial real estate
rose in line with the increase in the target range for the (CRE) sector remained accommodative. Banks in the
federal funds rate announced at the September FOMC October SLOOS reported, on a portfolio-weighted ba-
meeting. Over the intermeeting period, the spread be- sis, an easing of standards on CRE loans over the third
tween the EFFR and the IOER rate narrowed from quarter on net. Interest rate spreads on commercial
2 basis points to 0 basis points. Take-up at the Federal mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) remained near their
Reserve’s overnight reverse repo facility remained low. post-crisis lows, while issuance of non-agency and
agency CMBS was stable in recent months and similar to
Over the intermeeting period, global investors focused
year-earlier levels.
on changes in U.S. equity prices and interest rates, ongo-
ing trade tensions between the United States and China, Most borrowers in the residential mortgage market con-
and uncertainty regarding budget negotiations between tinued to experience accommodative financing condi-
the Italian government and the European Union. For- tions, although the increase in mortgage rates since 2016
eign equity prices posted notable net declines; option- appeared to have reduced housing demand, and financ-
implied measures of foreign equity volatility spiked in ing conditions remained somewhat tight for borrowers
October but remained well below levels seen in February with low credit scores. Growth in home-purchase mort-
and subsequently retraced some of those increases. Ten- gage originations slowed over the past year as mortgage
year Italian sovereign bond spreads over German equiv- rates stayed near their highest level since 2011, and refi-
alents widened significantly, and there were moderate nancing activity continued to be very muted.
spillovers to other euro-area peripheral spreads. Bond
Financing conditions in consumer credit markets, on
yields in Germany and the United Kingdom fell, partly
balance, remained supportive of growth in household
reflecting weaker-than-expected inflation data and Eu-
spending, although interest rates for consumer loans
ropean political developments. In contrast, Canadian
continued to rise. Credit card loan growth showed signs
yields increased slightly, bolstered by the announcement
of moderating amid rising interest rates and reported
of the U.S.-Mexico-Canada trade agreement and a policy
tightening of lending standards at the largest credit card
rate hike by the Bank of Canada. The dollar appreciated
banks. Compared with the beginning of this year, re-
spondents to the October 2018 SLOOS reported, on a

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
portfolio-weighted basis, a reduced willingness to issue The staff expected both total and core PCE price infla-
credit card loans to borrowers across the credit spectrum tion to remain close to 2 percent through the medium
and, in particular, to borrowers with lower credit scores; term. The staff’s forecasts for both total and core PCE
meanwhile, banks reported having eased standards on price inflation were little revised on net.
auto loans.
The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections
The staff provided its latest report on potential risks to for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla-
financial stability; the report again characterized the fi- tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years. The
nancial vulnerabilities of the U.S. financial system as staff also saw the risks to the forecasts for real GDP
moderate on balance. This overall assessment incorpo- growth and the unemployment rate as balanced. On the
rated the staff’s judgment that vulnerabilities associated upside, household spending and business investment
with asset valuation pressures continued to be elevated, could expand faster than the staff projected, supported
that vulnerabilities from financial-sector leverage and in part by the tax cuts enacted last year. On the down-
maturity and liquidity transformation remained low, and side, trade policies and foreign economic developments
that vulnerabilities from household leverage were still in could move in directions that have significant negative
the low-to-moderate range. Additionally, the staff effects on U.S. economic growth. Risks to the inflation
judged vulnerabilities from leverage in the nonfinancial projection also were seen as balanced. The upside risk
business sector as elevated and noted a pickup in the is- that inflation could increase more than expected in an
suance of risky debt and the continued deterioration in economy that was projected to move further above its
underwriting standards on leveraged loans. The staff potential was counterbalanced by the downside risk that
also characterized overall vulnerabilities to foreign finan- longer-term inflation expectations may be lower than
cial stability as moderate while highlighting specific is- was assumed in the staff forecast.
sues in some foreign economies, including—depending
Participants’ View on Current Conditions and the
on the country—high private or sovereign debt burdens,
Economic Outlook
external vulnerabilities, and political uncertainties.
In their discussion of the economic situation and the
Staff Economic Outlook outlook, meeting participants agreed that information
In the U.S. economic forecast prepared for the Novem- received since the FOMC met in September indicated
ber FOMC meeting, the staff continued to project that that the labor market had continued to strengthen and
real GDP would increase a little less rapidly in the sec- that economic activity had been rising at a strong rate.
ond half of the year than in the first half. Hurricanes Job gains had been strong, on average, in recent months,
Florence and Michael had devastating effects on many and the unemployment rate had declined. Household
communities, but they appeared likely to leave essentially spending had continued to grow strongly, while growth
no imprint on the national economy in the second half of business fixed investment had moderated from its
of the year as a whole. Relative to the forecast prepared rapid pace earlier in the year. On a 12-month basis, both
for the previous meeting, the projection for real GDP overall inflation and core inflation, which excludes
growth this year was little revised. Over the 2018–20 pe- changes in food and energy prices, had remained near
riod, output was forecast to rise at a rate above or at the 2 percent. Indicators of longer-term inflation expecta-
staff’s estimate of potential growth and then slow to a tions were little changed on balance.
pace below it in 2021. The unemployment rate was pro-
Based on recent readings on spending, prices, and the
jected to decline further below the staff’s estimate of its
labor market, participants generally indicated little
longer-run natural rate but to bottom out in 2020 and
change in their assessment of the economic outlook,
begin to edge up in 2021. The medium-term projection
with above-trend economic growth expected to con-
for real GDP growth was only a bit weaker than in the
tinue before slowing to a pace closer to trend over the
previous forecast, primarily reflecting a lower projected
medium term. Participants pointed to several factors
path for equity prices, leaving the unemployment rate
supporting above-trend growth, including strong em-
forecast little revised. With labor market conditions al-
ployment gains, expansionary federal tax and spending
ready tight, the staff continued to assume that projected
policies, and continued high levels of consumer and
employment gains would manifest in smaller-than-usual
business confidence. Several participants observed that
downward pressure on the unemployment rate and in
the stimulative effects of fiscal policy would likely dimin-
larger-than-usual upward pressure on the labor force
ish over time, while the lagged effects of reductions in
participation rate.
monetary policy accommodation would show through

--- Page 9 ---

____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g _o_f_ N__o_v_em__b_e_r_ 7_–_8_, _2_0_1_8_______________________P_a_g_e_ _9
more fully, with both factors contributing to their expec- In some cases, firms were responding to these difficul-
tation that economic growth would slow to a pace closer ties by increasing training for less-qualified workers, out-
to trend. sourcing work, or automating production, while in other
cases, firms were responding by raising wages. Contacts
In their discussion of the household sector, participants
in a couple of Districts indicated that labor shortages,
generally continued to characterize consumption growth
particularly for skilled labor, might be constraining activ-
as strong. This view was supported by reports from Dis-
ity in certain industries. Participants observed that, at
trict contacts, which were mostly upbeat regarding con-
the national level, measures of nominal wage growth ap-
sumer spending. Although household spending overall
peared to be picking up. Many participants noted that
was seen as strong, most participants noted weakness in
the recent pace of aggregate wage gains was broadly con-
residential investment. This weakness was attributed to
sistent with trends in productivity growth and inflation.
a variety of factors, including increased mortgage rates,
building cost increases, and supply constraints. Participants observed that both overall and core PCE
price inflation remained near 2 percent on a 12-month
Participants observed that growth in business fixed in-
basis. In general, participants viewed recent price devel-
vestment slowed in the third quarter following several
opments as consistent with their expectation that infla-
quarters of rapid growth. Some participants pointed to
tion would remain near the Committee’s symmetric
anecdotal evidence regarding higher tariffs and uncer-
2 percent objective on a sustained basis. Reports from
tainty about trade policy, slowing global demand, rising
business contacts and surveys in a number of Districts
input costs, or higher interest rates as possible factors
were consistent with some firming in inflationary pres-
contributing to the slowdown. A couple of others noted
sure. Contacts in many Districts indicated that input
that business investment growth can be volatile on a
costs had risen and that increased tariffs were raising
quarterly basis and factors such as the recent cuts in cor-
costs, especially for industries relying heavily on steel
porate taxes and high levels of business sentiment were
and aluminum. In a few Districts, transportation costs
expected to support investment going forward.
had reportedly increased. Some contacts indicated that
while input costs were higher, it appeared that the pass-
Reports from District contacts in the manufacturing, en-
through of these higher costs to consumer prices was
ergy, and service sectors were generally favorable,
limited.
though growth in manufacturing activity was reportedly
moderating in a couple of Districts. Business contacts
Participants commented on a number of risks and un-
generally remained optimistic about the outlook, but
certainties associated with their outlook for economic
concerns about trade policy, slowing foreign demand,
activity, the labor market, and inflation over the medium
and labor shortages were reportedly weighing on busi-
term. A few participants indicated that uncertainty had
ness prospects. Contacts in the agricultural sector re-
increased recently, pointing to the high levels of uncer-
ported that conditions remain depressed, in part, due to
tainty regarding the effects of fiscal and trade policies on
the effects of trade policy actions on exports and farm
economic activity and inflation. Some participants
incomes.
viewed economic and financial developments abroad,
including the possibility of further appreciation of the
Participants agreed that labor market conditions had
U.S. dollar, as posing downside risks for domestic eco-
strengthened further over the intermeeting period. Pay-
nomic growth and inflation. A couple of participants
rolls had increased strongly in October, and measures of
expressed the concern that measures of inflation expec-
labor market tightness such as rates of job openings and
tations would remain low, particularly if economic
quits continued to be elevated. The unemployment rate
growth slowed more than expected. Several participants
remained at a historically low level in October, and the
were concerned that the high level of debt in the nonfi-
labor force participation rate moved up. A couple of
nancial business sector, and especially the high level of
participants saw scope for further increases in the labor
leveraged loans, made the economy more vulnerable to
force participation rate as the strong economy pulled
a sharp pullback in credit availability, which could exac-
more workers into the labor market, while a couple of
erbate the effects of a negative shock on economic ac-
other participants judged that there was little scope for
tivity. The potential for an escalation in tariffs or trade
significant further increases.
tensions was also cited as a factor that could slow eco-
Contacts in many Districts continued to report tight la- nomic growth more than expected. With regard to up-
bor markets with difficulties finding qualified workers. side risks, participants noted that greater-than-expected
effects of fiscal stimulus and high consumer confidence

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
could lead to stronger-than-expected economic out- than their current expectations. However, a few partici-
comes. Some participants raised the concern that tight- pants, while viewing further gradual increases in the tar-
ening resource utilization in conjunction with an in- get range of the federal funds rate as likely to be appro-
crease in the ability of firms to pass through increases in priate, expressed uncertainty about the timing of such
tariffs or in other input costs to consumer prices could increases. A couple of participants noted that the federal
generate undesirable upward pressure on inflation. In funds rate might currently be near its neutral level and
general, participants agreed that risks to the outlook ap- that further increases in the federal funds rate could un-
peared roughly balanced. duly slow the expansion of economic activity and put
downward pressure on inflation and inflation expecta-
In their discussion of financial developments, partici-
tions.
pants observed that financial conditions tightened over
the intermeeting period, as equity prices declined, Participants emphasized that the Committee’s approach
longer-term yields and borrowing costs for most sectors to setting the stance of policy should be importantly
increased, and the foreign exchange value of the dollar guided by incoming data and their implications for the
rose. Despite these developments, a number of partici- economic outlook. They noted that their expectations
pants judged that financial conditions remained accom- for the path of the federal funds rate were based on their
modative relative to historical norms. current assessment of the economic outlook. Monetary
policy was not on a preset course; if incoming infor-
Among those who commented on financial stability, a
mation prompted meaningful reassessments of the eco-
number cited possible risks related to elevated CRE
nomic outlook and attendant risks, either to the upside
prices, narrow corporate bond spreads, or strong issu-
or the downside, their policy outlook would change.
ance of leveraged loans. A few participants suggested
Various factors such as the recent tightening in financial
that some of these financial vulnerabilities might not
conditions, risks in the global outlook, and some signs
currently represent risks to financial stability so much as
of slowing in interest-sensitive sectors of the economy
they represent downside risks to the economic outlook;
on the one hand, and further indicators of tightness in
a couple of participants suggested that financial stability
labor markets and possible inflationary pressures, on the
risks and risks to the outlook are interconnected. A cou-
other hand, were noted in this context. Participants also
ple of participants also commented on the upcoming re-
commented on how the Committee’s communications
lease of the Board’s first public Financial Stability Report
in its postmeeting statement might need to be revised at
and noted that the report would increase the transpar-
coming meetings, particularly the language referring to
ency of the Federal Reserve’s financial stability work as
the Committee’s expectations for “further gradual in-
well as enhance communications on this topic.
creases” in the target range for the federal funds rate.
Many participants indicated that it might be appropriate
In their discussion of monetary policy, participants
at some upcoming meetings to begin to transition to
agreed that it would be appropriate to maintain the cur-
statement language that placed greater emphasis on the
rent target range for the federal funds rate at this meet-
evaluation of incoming data in assessing the economic
ing. Participants generally judged that the economy had
and policy outlook; such a change would help to convey
been evolving about as they had anticipated, with eco-
the Committee’s flexible approach in responding to
nomic activity rising at a strong rate, labor market con-
changing economic circumstances.
ditions continuing to strengthen, and inflation running
at or near the Committee’s longer-run objective. Almost
Committee Policy Action
all participants reaffirmed the view that further gradual
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
increases in the target range for the federal funds rate
ahead, members judged that information received since
would likely be consistent with sustaining the Commit-
the Committee met in September indicated that the la-
tee’s objectives of maximum employment and price sta-
bor market had continued to strengthen and that eco-
bility.
nomic activity had been rising at a strong rate. Job gains
had been strong, on average, in recent months, and the
Consistent with their judgment that a gradual approach
unemployment rate had declined. Household spending
to policy normalization remained appropriate, almost all
had continued to grow strongly, while growth of busi-
participants expressed the view that another increase in
ness fixed investment had moderated recently from its
the target range for the federal funds rate was likely to
rapid pace earlier in the year. On a 12-month basis, both
be warranted fairly soon if incoming information on the
overall inflation and inflation for items other than food
labor market and inflation was in line with or stronger
and energy remained near 2 percent. Indicators of long-

--- Page 11 ---

____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g _o_f_ N__o_v_em__b_e_r_ 7_–_8_, _2_0_1_8______________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
term inflation expectations were little changed on bal- weekend, holiday, or similar trading
ance. conventions) at an offering rate of 2.00 percent,
in amounts limited only by the value of Treasury
Members generally judged that the economy had been
securities held outright in the System Open
evolving about as they had anticipated at the previous
Market Account that are available for such
meeting. Financial conditions, although somewhat
operations and by a per-counterparty limit of
tighter than at the time of the September FOMC meet-
$30 billion per day.
ing, had stayed accommodative overall, while the effects
of expansionary fiscal policies enacted over the past year The Committee directs the Desk to continue
were expected to continue through the medium term. rolling over at auction the amount of principal
Consequently, members continued to expect that further payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings
gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds of Treasury securities maturing during each
rate would be consistent with sustained expansion of calendar month that exceeds $30 billion, and to
economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and continue reinvesting in agency mortgage-
inflation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent ob- backed securities the amount of principal
jective over the medium term. Members continued to payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings
judge that the risks to the economic outlook were of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed
roughly balanced. securities received during each calendar month
that exceeds $20 billion. Small deviations from
After assessing current conditions and the outlook for these amounts for operational reasons are
economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, mem- acceptable.
bers decided to maintain the target range for the federal
The Committee also directs the Desk to engage
funds rate at 2 to 2¼ percent. Members agreed that the
in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
timing and size of future adjustments to the target range
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal
for the federal funds rate would depend on their assess-
Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities
ment of realized and expected economic conditions rel-
transactions.”
ative to the Committee’s maximum employment and
symmetric 2 percent inflation objectives. They reiter- The vote also encompassed approval of the statement
ated that this assessment would take into account a wide below to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
range of information, including measures of labor mar-
“Information received since the Federal Open
ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and in-
Market Committee met in September indicates
flation expectations, and readings on financial and inter-
that the labor market has continued to
national developments. More generally, members noted
strengthen and that economic activity has been
that decisions regarding near-term adjustments of the
rising at a strong rate. Job gains have been
stance of monetary policy would appropriately remain
strong, on average, in recent months, and the
dependent on the evolution of the outlook as informed
unemployment rate has declined. Household
by incoming data.
spending has continued to grow strongly, while
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee growth of business fixed investment has
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank moderated from its rapid pace earlier in the year.
of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and
transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol- inflation for items other than food and energy
lowing domestic policy directive, to be released at remain near 2 percent. Indicators of longer-
2:00 p.m.: term inflation expectations are little changed, on
balance.
“Effective November 9, 2018, the Federal
Open Market Committee directs the Desk to Consistent with its statutory mandate, the
undertake open market operations as necessary Committee seeks to foster maximum
to maintain the federal funds rate in a target employment and price stability. The
range of 2 to 2¼ percent, including overnight Committee expects that further gradual
reverse repurchase operations (and reverse increases in the target range for the federal
repurchase operations with maturities of more funds rate will be consistent with sustained
than one day when necessary to accommodate expansion of economic activity, strong labor

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
market conditions, and inflation near the Update from Subcommittee on Communications
Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective Governor Clarida presented a proposal from the sub-
over the medium term. Risks to the economic committee on communications to conduct a review dur-
outlook appear roughly balanced. ing 2019 of the Federal Reserve’s strategic framework
for monetary policy. This assessment would consider
In view of realized and expected labor market
the strategy, tools, and communications that would best
conditions and inflation, the Committee
enable the Federal Reserve to meet its statutory objec-
decided to maintain the target range for the
tives of maximum employment and price stability. With
federal funds rate at 2 to 2¼ percent.
labor market conditions close to maximum employment
In determining the timing and size of future ad- and inflation near the Committee’s 2 percent objective,
justments to the target range for the federal it was an opportune time for the Federal Reserve to un-
funds rate, the Committee will assess realized dertake this review and assess the robustness of its stra-
and expected economic conditions relative to its tegic framework.
maximum employment objective and its sym-
During the review, the Federal Reserve would engage
metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as-
with a broad range of interested stakeholders across the
sessment will take into account a wide range of
country and host a research conference in June 2019.
information, including measures of labor mar-
FOMC participants would discuss the strategic frame-
ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures
work at subsequent FOMC meetings, drawing on the
and inflation expectations, and readings on fi-
lessons from the outreach efforts and on staff analysis.
nancial and international developments.”
The goal of these discussions would be to identify pos-
Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C. sible ways to improve the Committee’s current strategic
Williams, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Lael policy framework in order to ensure that the Federal Re-
Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Mary C. Daly, Loretta J. serve is best positioned going forward to achieve its stat-
Mester, and Randal K. Quarles. utory mandate.
Voting against this action: None.
Notation Vote
Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the By notation vote completed on October 16, 2018, the
target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in- Committee meeting held on September 25–26, 2018.
terest rates on required and excess reserve balances un-
changed at 2.20 percent and voted unanimously to ap-
prove establishment of the primary credit rate at the ex-
isting level of 2.75 percent, effective November 9, 2018.
_______________________
James A. Clouse
Secretary