# 20181219_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:39:09*
*Pages: 28, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
December 18–19, 2018
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of Market Account
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 18, 2018, Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,
at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, Decem- Board of Governors
ber 19, 2018, at 9:00 a.m.1
Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve
PRESENT: Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of
Jerome H. Powell, Chairman Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division
John C. Williams, Vice Chairman of Supervision and Regulation, Board of
Thomas I. Barkin Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of
Raphael W. Bostic Financial Stability, Board of Governors
Michelle W. Bowman
Lael Brainard Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of
Richard H. Clarida Research and Statistics, Board of Governors;
Mary C. Daly Rochelle M. Edge, Deputy Director, Division of
Loretta J. Mester Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Michael T.
Randal K. Quarles Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of Financial
Stability, Board of Governors
James Bullard, Charles L. Evans, Esther L. George,
Eric Rosengren, and Michael Strine, Alternate Jon Faust, Senior Special Adviser to the Chairman,
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Neel Kashkari, Antulio N. Bomfim, Special Adviser to the Chairman,
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively
Brian M. Doyle, Joseph W. Gruber, Ellen E. Meade,
James A. Clouse, Secretary and John M. Roberts, Special Advisers to the
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Governors
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Board Members, Board of Governors
Steven B. Kamin, Economist
Thomas Laubach, Economist Shaghil Ahmed and Christopher J. Erceg, Senior
David W. Wilcox, Economist Associate Directors, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors; Eric M. Engen,
David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Thomas A. Connors, Senior Associate Director, Division of Research
David E. Lebow, Trevor A. Reeve, William and Statistics, Board of Governors; Gretchen C.
Wascher, and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Weinbach,3 Senior Associate Director, Division of
Economists Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account
1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes.
2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan-
cial markets and open market operations.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Edward Nelson, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Michael Dotsey, Sylvain Leduc, Daniel G. Sullivan,
Affairs, Board of Governors Geoffrey Tootell, and Christopher J. Waller,
Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
Marnie Gillis DeBoer,3 David López-Salido, and Min of Philadelphia, San Francisco, Chicago, Boston,
Wei, Associate Directors, Division of Monetary and St. Louis, respectively
Affairs, Board of Governors; John J. Stevens,
Associate Director, Division of Research and Todd E. Clark, Evan F. Koenig, Antoine Martin, and
Statistics, Board of Governors Julie Ann Remache,3 Senior Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Dallas, New
Steven A. Sharpe, Deputy Associate Director, Division York, and New York, respectively
of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors;
Jeffrey D. Walker,2 Deputy Associate Director, Roc Armenter,3 Kathryn B. Chen,3 Jonathan L. Willis,
Division of Reserve Bank Operations and Payment and Patricia Zobel,3 Vice Presidents, Federal
Systems, Board of Governors Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, New York, Kansas
City, and New York, respectively
Andrew Figura and John Sabelhaus, Assistant
Directors, Division of Research and Statistics, Gara Afonso3 and William E. Riordan,3 Assistant Vice
Board of Governors; Christopher J. Gust,4 Laura Presidents, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Lipscomb,3 and Zeynep Senyuz,3 Assistant
Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Suraj Prasanna3 and Lisa Stowe,3 Markets Officers,
Governors Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Don Kim, Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Samuel Schulhofer-Wohl,2 Senior Economist and
Board of Governors Research Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago
Penelope A. Beattie,5 Assistant to the Secretary, Office
of the Secretary, Board of Governors Fabrizio Perri, Monetary Advisor, Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis
Michele Cavallo,5 Section Chief, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors Long-Run Monetary Policy Implementation
Frameworks
Mark A. Carlson,2 Senior Economic Project Manager, Committee participants resumed their discussion from
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors the November 2018 FOMC meeting of potential long-
run frameworks for monetary policy implementation.
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of At the December meeting, the staff provided a set of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors briefings that considered various issues related to the
transition to a long-run operating regime with lower lev-
Andrea Ajello and Alyssa G. Anderson,3 Principal els of excess reserves than at present and to a long-run
Economists, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board composition of the balance sheet.
of Governors
The staff noted that during the transition to a long-run
operating regime with excess reserves below current lev-
Arsenios Skaperdas,3 Economist, Division of Monetary
els, the effective federal funds rate (EFFR) could begin
Affairs, Board of Governors
to rise a little above the interest on excess reserves
(IOER) rate as reserves in the banking system declined
Donielle A. Winford, Information Management
gradually to a level that the Committee judges to be most
Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
appropriate for efficient and effective implementation of
Governors
policy. This upward movement in the federal funds rate
3 Attended through the discussion of the long-run monetary 4 Attended the discussion of financial developments and open
policy implementation frameworks. market operations through the close of the meeting.
5 Attended Tuesday session only.

--- Page 3 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r_ 1_8_–_1_9_, _2_0_18_______________________P_a_g_e_ _3
could be gradual. However, the staff noted that the fed- mand curve begins to slope upward could lead to a sig-
eral funds rate and other money market rates could pos- nificant increase in the volatility in short-term interest
sibly become somewhat volatile at times as banks and rates and require frequent sizable open market opera-
financial markets adjusted to lower levels of reserve bal- tions or new ceiling facilities to maintain effective inter-
ances. Were upward pressures on the federal funds rate est rate control. These considerations suggested that it
to emerge, it could be challenging to distinguish between might be appropriate to instead provide a buffer of re-
pressures that were transitory and likely to abate as fi- serves sufficient to ensure that the Federal Reserve op-
nancial institutions adjust and those that were more per- erates consistently on the flat portion of the reserve de-
sistent and associated with aggregate reserve scarcity. mand curve so as to promote the efficient and effective
The staff reported on the monitoring of conditions in implementation of monetary policy.
money markets as well as various survey and market out-
Participants discussed options for maintaining control of
reach activities that could assist in detecting reserve scar-
interest rates should upward pressures on money market
city. The staff reviewed a number of steps that the Fed-
rates emerge during the transition to a regime with lower
eral Reserve could take to ensure effective monetary pol-
excess reserves. Several participants commented on op-
icy implementation were upward pressures on the fed-
tions that rely on existing or currently used tools, such
eral funds rate and other money market rates to emerge.
as further technical adjustments to the IOER rate to
These steps included lowering the IOER rate further
keep the federal funds rate within the target range or us-
within the target range, using the discount window to
ing the discount window, although such options were
support the efficient distribution of reserves, and slow-
recognized to have limitations in some situations. Some
ing or smoothing the pace of reserve decline through
participants commented on the possibility of slowing the
open market operations or through slowing portfolio re-
pace of the decline in reserves in approaching the longer-
demptions. The staff also discussed new ceiling tools
run level of reserves. Standard temporary open market
that could help keep the EFFR within the Committee’s
operations could be used for this purpose. In addition,
target range, including options that would add new
participants discussed options such as ending portfolio
counterparties for the Open Market Desk’s operations.
redemptions with a relatively high level of reserves still
The staff also provided a review of the liabilities on the
in the system and then either maintaining that level of
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet; the review described the
reserves or allowing growth in nonreserve liabilities to
factors that influence the size of reserve and nonreserve
very gradually reduce reserves further. These ap-
liabilities and discussed the increase in the size of these
proaches could allow markets and banks more time to
liabilities since the financial crisis. Additionally, the staff
adjust to lower reserve levels while maintaining effective
outlined various issues related to the long-run composi-
control of interest rates. Several participants, however,
tion of the System Open Market Account (SOMA) port-
expressed concern that a slowing of redemptions could
folio, including the maturity composition of the portfo-
be misinterpreted as a signal about the stance of mone-
lio’s Treasury securities and the management of residual
tary policy. Some participants expressed an interest in
holdings of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS)
learning more about possible options for new ceiling
after the Committee has normalized the size of the bal-
tools to provide firmer control of the policy rate.
ance sheet.
Participants commented on the role that the Federal Re-
In discussing the transition to a long-run operating re-
serve’s nonreserve liabilities have played in the expan-
gime, participants commented on the advantages and
sion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet since the fi-
disadvantages of allowing reserves to decline to a level
nancial crisis. Many participants noted that the magni-
that could put noticeable upward pressure on the federal
tudes of these nonreserve liabilities—most significantly
funds rate, at least for a time. Reducing reserves close
currency but also liabilities to the Treasury through the
to the lowest level that still corresponded to the flat por-
Treasury General Account and liabilities to foreign offi-
tion of the reserve demand curve would be one ap-
cial institutions through their accounts at the Federal Re-
proach consistent with the Committee’s previously
serve—are not closely related to Federal Reserve mone-
stated intention, in the Policy Normalization Principles
tary policy decisions. They also remarked that the size
and Plans that it issued in 2014, to “hold no more secu-
of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet was expected to
rities than necessary to implement monetary policy effi-
increase over time as the growth of these liabilities
ciently and effectively.” However, reducing reserves to
roughly tracks the growth of nominal gross domestic
a point very close to the level at which the reserve de-
product (GDP). Additionally, participants cited the so-
cial benefits provided by these liabilities to the economy.

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Participants considered it important to present infor- financial condition of companies, particularly for com-
mation on the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet to the panies at the lower end of the investment-grade spec-
public in ways that communicated these facts. In dis- trum. Treasury yields declined significantly, especially at
cussing the long-run level of reserve liabilities, partici- longer maturities, contributing to some flattening of the
pants noted that it might be useful to explore ways to Treasury yield curve. Based on readings from Treasury
encourage banks to reduce their demand for reserves Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS), the decline in
and to provide information to banks and the public nominal Treasury yields was associated with a notable
about the likely long-run level of reserves. drop in inflation compensation. A sizable decline in oil
prices was cited as an important factor contributing to
Participants commented on a number of issues related
the drop in measures of inflation compensation.
to the long-run composition of the SOMA portfolio.
With regard to the portfolio of Treasury securities, par- The deterioration in market sentiment was accompanied
ticipants discussed the advantages of different portfolio by a significant downward revision in the expected path
maturity compositions. Several participants noted that a of the federal funds rate based on federal funds futures
portfolio of holdings weighted toward shorter maturities quotes. In addition, futures-based measures of policy
would provide greater flexibility to lengthen maturity if expectations moved lower in response to speeches by
warranted by an economic downturn, while a couple of Federal Reserve officials. The revision in the expected
others noted that a portfolio with maturities that policy path was less noticeable in the Desk’s survey-
matched the outstanding Treasury market would have a based measures of the expected path of the federal funds
more neutral effect on the market. With regard to the rate. Desk surveys indicated that respondents placed
MBS portfolio, participants noted that the passive run- high odds on a further quarter-point firming in the
off of MBS holdings through principal paydowns would stance of monetary policy at the December meeting, but
continue for many years after the size of the balance lower than the near certainty of a rate increase reported
sheet had been normalized. Several participants com- just before previous policy firmings in 2018; survey re-
mented on the possibility of reducing agency MBS hold- sponses anticipated that the median projected path of
ings somewhat more quickly than the passive approach the federal funds rate in the Summary of Economic Pro-
by implementing a program of very gradual MBS sales jections (SEP) would show only two additional quarter-
sometime after the size of the balance sheet had been point policy firmings next year—down from the three
normalized. policy firmings in the median path in the September SEP
results.
Participants expected to continue their discussion of
long-run implementation frameworks and related issues The deputy manager followed with a discussion of
at upcoming meetings. They reiterated the importance money market developments and open market opera-
of communicating clearly on the rationale for any deci- tions. After a fast narrowing of the spread between the
sion made on the implementation framework. IOER rate and the EFFR before the November meet-
ing, the EFFR had remained stable at, or just 1 basis
Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar-
point below the level of the IOER rate since then. Some
ket Operations
upward pressures on overnight rates were evident in the
The SOMA manager reviewed developments in financial
repurchase agreement (repo) market, apparently from
markets over the intermeeting period. Asset prices were
higher issuance of Treasury bills and an associated ex-
volatile in recent weeks, reportedly reflecting a pullback
pansion of primary dealer inventories over the inter-
from risk-taking by investors. In part, the deterioration
meeting period. Banks expanded their lending in repo
in risk sentiment appeared to stem importantly from un-
markets in light of higher repo rates relative to the IOER
certainty about the state of trade negotiations between
rate; the willingness of banks to lend in repo markets
China and the United States. In addition, investors
suggested that the reserve supply was still ample. The
pointed to concerns about the global growth outlook,
deputy manager noted the results of the recent Desk sur-
the unsettled state of Brexit negotiations, and uncertain-
veys of primary dealers and market participants indicat-
ties about the political situation in Europe.
ing an increase in the median respondent’s estimate of
Against this backdrop, U.S. stock prices were down the long-run level of reserve balances to a level closer to
nearly 8 percent on the period. Risk spreads on corpo- that implied by banks’ responses in the Senior Financial
rate bonds widened appreciably, with market partici- Officer Survey conducted in advance of the November
pants reportedly focusing on the potential implications FOMC meeting. The deputy manager also reported on
of downside risks to the U.S. economic outlook for the paydowns on the SOMA securities holdings. Under the

--- Page 5 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r_ 1_8_–_1_9_, _2_0_18_______________________P_a_g_e_ _5
baseline outlook, prepayments of principal on agency Household spending continued to increase at a strong
MBS would remain below the $20 billion redemption pace in recent months. Real PCE growth was brisk in
cap for the foreseeable future. However, if longer-term October, and the components of the nominal retail sales
interest rates moved substantively lower than assumed used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis to construct
in the baseline, some modest reinvestments in MBS its estimate of PCE rose considerably in November.
could occur for a few months next year concurrent with The pace of light motor vehicle sales edged down in No-
the pickup in seasonal turnover. vember but stayed near its recent elevated level. Key
factors that influence consumer spending—including
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
ongoing gains in real disposable personal income and the
domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.
effects of earlier increases in equity prices and home val-
There were no intervention operations in foreign curren-
ues on households’ net worth—continued to be sup-
cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe-
portive of solid real PCE growth in the near term. Con-
riod.
sumer sentiment, as measured by the University of
Staff Review of the Economic Situation Michigan Surveys of Consumers, remained relatively up-
The information reviewed for the December 18–19 beat through early December.
meeting indicated that labor market conditions contin-
Real residential investment appeared to be declining fur-
ued to strengthen in recent months and that real GDP
ther in the fourth quarter, likely reflecting in part the ef-
growth was strong. Consumer price inflation, as meas-
fects of the rise in mortgage interest rates over the past
ured by the 12-month percentage change in the price in-
year on the affordability of housing. Starts of new sin-
dex for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), was
gle-family homes decreased in October and November,
2 percent in October. Survey-based measures of longer-
although starts of multifamily units rose sharply in No-
run inflation expectations were little changed on balance.
vember. Building permit issuance for new single-family
Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded further in homes, which tends to be a good indicator of the under-
November, and job gains were strong, on average, over lying trend in construction of such homes, moved down
recent months. The national unemployment rate re- modestly over recent months. Sales of new homes de-
mained at a very low level of 3.7 percent, and both the clined markedly in October, although existing home
labor force participation rate and the employment-to- sales increased modestly.
population ratio also stayed flat in November. The un-
Growth in real private expenditures for business equip-
employment rates for African Americans, Asians, and
ment and intellectual property looked to be picking up
Hispanics in November were below their levels at the
solidly in the fourth quarter after moderating in the pre-
end of the previous economic expansion. The share of
vious quarter. Nominal shipments of nondefense capital
workers employed part time for economic reasons was
goods excluding aircraft moved up in October.
still close to the lows reached in late 2007. The rates of
Forward-looking indicators of business equipment
private-sector job openings and quits were both still at
spending—such as a rising backlog of unfilled orders for
high levels in October; initial claims for unemployment
nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft and upbeat
insurance benefits in early December were still close to
readings on business sentiment—pointed to further
historically low levels. Total labor compensation per
spending gains in the near term. Nominal business ex-
hour in the nonfarm business sector—a volatile measure
penditures for nonresidential structures outside of the
even on a four-quarter change basis—increased 2.2 per-
drilling and mining sector declined modestly in October,
cent over the four quarters ending in the third quarter.
while the number of crude oil and natural gas rigs in op-
Average hourly earnings for all employees rose 3.1 per-
eration—an indicator of business spending for struc-
cent over the 12 months ending in November.
tures in the drilling and mining sector—held about
Industrial production expanded, on net, over October steady in November through early December.
and November. Output increased in the mining and util-
Total real government purchases appeared to be rising
ities sectors, while manufacturing production edged
moderately in the fourth quarter. Nominal defense
down on balance. Automakers’ assembly schedules sug-
spending in October and November pointed to solid
gested that production of light motor vehicles would rise
growth in real federal purchases. Real purchases by state
in December, and new orders indexes from national and
and local governments looked to be only edging up, as
regional manufacturing surveys pointed to moderate
nominal construction spending by these governments
gains in total factory output in the coming months.

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
rose solidly in October but their payrolls declined a little the period. Financing conditions for businesses and
in October and November. households tightened a bit but generally remained sup-
portive of economic growth.
The nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened
slightly in October. Exports declined a little, with de- Remarks by Federal Reserve officials over the intermeet-
creases in exports of agricultural products and capital ing period were interpreted by market participants as sig-
goods, although exports of industrial supplies increased. naling a shift in the stance of policy toward a more grad-
Imports rose a bit, with increases in imports of con- ual path of federal funds rate increases. The market-
sumer goods and automotive products, but imports of implied path for the federal funds rate for 2019 and 2020
capital goods declined sharply from September’s ele- shifted down markedly, while the market-implied prob-
vated level. Available trade data suggested that the con- ability for a rate hike at the December FOMC meeting
tribution of the change in net exports to the rate of real declined slightly though remained high.
GDP growth in the fourth quarter would be much less
Nominal Treasury yields fell considerably over the pe-
negative than the drag of nearly 2 percentage points in
riod, with the declines most pronounced in longer-dated
the third quarter.
maturities and contributing to a flattening of the yield
Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE curve. The spread between 10- and 2-year nominal
price index, increased 2 percent over the 12 months end- Treasury yields narrowed to near the 20th percentile of
ing in October. Core PCE price inflation, which ex- its distribution since 1971. Investor perceptions of in-
cludes changes in consumer food and energy prices, was creased downside risks to the outlooks for domestic and
1.8 percent over that same period. The consumer price foreign economic growth, including growing concerns
index (CPI) rose 2.2 percent over the 12 months ending over trade frictions between the United States and
in November, and core CPI inflation was also 2.2 per- China, reportedly weighed on yields. Measures of infla-
cent. Recent readings on survey-based measures of tion compensation derived from TIPS also decreased
longer-run inflation expectations—including those from notably over the period along with the declines in oil
the Michigan survey, the Survey of Professional Fore- prices.
casters, and the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and
Concerns over escalating trade tensions, global growth
Survey of Market Participants—were little changed on
prospects, and the sustainability of corporate earnings
balance.
growth were among the factors that appeared to contrib-
Foreign economic growth continued at a moderate pace ute to a significant drop in U.S. equity prices. The de-
in the third quarter, as a pickup in emerging market clines were largest in the technology and retail sectors.
economies (EMEs) roughly offset slowing growth in ad- One-month option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 in-
vanced foreign economies (AFEs). Among EMEs, dex—the VIX—increased over the period and corpo-
growth in Mexico and Brazil bounced back from transi- rate credit spreads widened, consistent with the selloff in
tory second-quarter weakness, more than offsetting a equities.
slowdown in China and India. The softness in AFE
Over the intermeeting period, foreign financial markets
growth partly reflected temporary factors, including dis-
were affected by perceived increases in downside risks
ruptions from natural disasters in Japan and the adop-
to the global growth outlook and ongoing uncertainty
tion of new car emissions testing in Germany. Indica-
about trade relations between the United States and
tors for economic activity in the fourth quarter were
China. Investors also focused on the state of negotia-
consistent with continued moderate foreign economic
tions over Brexit and the Italian government budget def-
growth. Foreign inflation fell in recent months, largely
icit. Equity markets in AFEs posted notable declines,
reflecting a significant drag from lower oil prices. Un-
and Europe-dedicated bond and equity funds reported
derlying inflation pressures, especially in some AFEs, re-
strong outflows. Equity declines in EMEs were more
mained muted.
modest, and emerging market funds received modest in-
Staff Review of the Financial Situation flows on net.
Investors’ perceptions of downside risks to the domestic
AFE sovereign yields declined significantly, reflecting
and global outlook appeared to increase over the inter-
decreases in U.S. bond yields and weaker-than-expected
meeting period, reportedly driven in part by signs of
euro-area and U.K. economic data. Measures of infla-
slowing in foreign economies and growing concerns
tion compensation generally fell, partly reflecting sharp
over escalating trade frictions. Both nominal U.S. Treas-
decreases in oil prices. Spreads of Italian sovereign
ury yields and U.S. equity prices declined notably over

--- Page 7 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r_ 1_8_–_1_9_, _2_0_18_______________________P_a_g_e_ _7
yields over German counterparts narrowed amid pro- a solid pace through September, though October and
gress on budget negotiations between the Italian govern- November saw credit card growth at banks edge a bit
ment and the European Commission. The U.S. dollar lower on average. Conditions in the consumer asset-
appreciated modestly; although declines in U.S. yields backed securities market remained stable over the inter-
weighed on the dollar, deteriorating global risk senti- meeting period with slightly higher spreads and robust
ment provided support. Ongoing uncertainty about the issuance.
passage of a Brexit withdrawal agreement put downward
Staff Economic Outlook
pressure on the exchange value of the British pound.
With some stronger-than-expected incoming data on
Short-term funding markets functioned smoothly over economic activity and the recent tightening in financial
the intermeeting period. Elevated levels of Treasury bills conditions, particularly the decline in equity prices, the
outstanding have continued to put upward pressure on U.S. economic forecast prepared by the staff for the De-
money market rates. The EFFR held steady at or very cember FOMC meeting was little revised on balance.
close to the level of the IOER rate, while take-up in the The staff continued to expect that real GDP growth
overnight reverse repo facility remained near historically would be strong in the fourth quarter of 2018, although
low levels. In offshore funding markets, the one-month somewhat slower than the rapid pace of growth in the
foreign exchange swap basis for most major currencies previous two quarters. Over the 2018–20 period, real
increased, consistent with typical year-end pressures. GDP was forecast to rise at a rate above the staff’s esti-
mate of potential output growth and then slow to a pace
Financing conditions for nonfinancial firms remained
below it in 2021. The unemployment rate was projected
accommodative, on net, though funding conditions for
to decline further below the staff’s estimate of its longer-
capital markets tightened somewhat as spreads on non-
run natural rate but to bottom out by 2020 and begin to
financial corporate bonds widened to near the middle of
edge up in 2021. With labor market conditions already
their historical distribution. Gross issuance of corporate
tight, the staff continued to assume that projected em-
bonds also moderated in November, driven by a signifi-
ployment gains would manifest in smaller-than-usual
cant step-down in speculative-grade bond issuance,
downward pressure on the unemployment rate and in
while institutional leveraged loan issuance also slowed in
larger-than-usual upward pressure on the labor force
November. Small business credit market conditions
participation rate.
were little changed, and credit conditions in municipal
bond markets stayed accommodative on net. The staff expected both total and core PCE price infla-
tion to be just a touch below 2 percent in 2018, with total
Private-sector analysts revised down their projections
inflation revised down a bit because of recent declines in
for year-ahead corporate earnings a bit. In many cases,
consumer energy prices. Core PCE price inflation was
nonfinancial firms’ earnings reports suggested that tar-
forecast to move up to 2 percent in 2019 and remain at
iffs were a salient concern in the changed outlook for
that level through the medium term; total inflation was
corporate earnings. The pace of gross equity issuance
forecast to be a little below core inflation in 2019, re-
through both seasoned and initial offerings moderated,
flecting projected declines in energy prices, and then to
consistent with the weakness and volatility in the stock
run at the same level as core inflation over the following
market.
two years. The staff’s medium-term projections for both
In the commercial real estate (CRE) sector, financing total and core PCE price inflation were little revised on
conditions remained accommodative. Commercial net.
mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) spreads widened
The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections
slightly over the intermeeting period but remained near
for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla-
post-crisis lows. Issuance of non-agency CMBS was sta-
tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years. The
ble while CRE loan growth remained strong at banks.
staff also saw the risks to the forecasts for real GDP
Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market
growth and the unemployment rate as balanced. On the
also remained accommodative for most borrowers, but
upside, household spending and business investment
the demand for mortgage credit softened. Purchase
could expand faster than the staff projected, supported
mortgage origination activity declined modestly, while
in part by the tax cuts enacted last year. On the down-
refinance activity remained muted.
side, trade policies and foreign economic developments
Financing conditions in consumer credit markets also re- could move in directions that have significant negative
mained accommodative. Broad consumer credit grew at effects on U.S. economic growth. Risks to the inflation

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
projection also were seen as balanced. The upside risk about the global economic outlook. Participants also re-
that inflation could increase more than expected in an ported hearing more frequent concerns about the global
economy that was projected to move further above its economic outlook from business contacts.
potential was counterbalanced by the downside risk that
After taking into account incoming economic data, in-
longer-term inflation expectations may be lower than
formation from business contacts, and the tightening of
was assumed in the staff forecast.
financial conditions, participants generally revised down
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the their individual assessments of the appropriate path for
Economic Outlook monetary policy and indicated either no material change
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of or only a modest downward revision in their assessment
the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank pres- of the economic outlook. Economic growth was ex-
idents submitted their projections of the most likely out- pected to remain above trend in 2019 and then slow to
comes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, a pace closer to trend over the medium term. Partici-
and inflation for each year from 2018 through 2021 and pants who downgraded their assessment of the eco-
over the longer run, based on their individual assess- nomic outlook pointed to a variety of factors underlying
ments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate. their assessment, including recent financial market de-
The longer-run projections represented each partici- velopments, some softening in the foreign economic
pant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable growth outlook, or a more pessimistic outlook for
would be expected to converge, over time, under appro- housing-sector activity.
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further
In their discussion of the household sector, participants
shocks to the economy. These projections and policy
generally characterized real PCE growth as remaining
assessments are described in the SEP, which is an ad-
strong. Participants pointed to a number of factors that
dendum to these minutes.
were supporting consumer spending, including further
In their discussion of the economic situation and the gains in wages and household income reflecting a strong
outlook, meeting participants agreed that information labor market, expansionary federal tax policies, still-
received since the FOMC met in November indicated upbeat readings on consumer sentiment, recent declines
that the labor market had continued to strengthen and in oil prices, and household balance sheets that generally
that economic activity had been rising at a strong rate. remained healthy despite tighter financial conditions.
Job gains had been strong, on average, in recent months, Although household spending overall was seen as
and the unemployment rate had remained low. House- strong, several participants noted continued weakness in
hold spending had continued to grow strongly, while residential investment. This weakness was attributed to
growth of business fixed investment had moderated a variety of factors, including increased mortgage rates
from its rapid pace earlier in the year. On a 12-month and rising home prices. Reports from District contacts
basis, both overall inflation and inflation for items other in the auto sector were mixed.
than food and energy remained near 2 percent. Indica-
Several participants noted that business fixed investment
tors of longer-term inflation expectations were little
remained solid despite a slowdown in the third quarter,
changed on balance.
as more recent data pointed to a rebound in investment
In assessing the economic outlook, participants noted spending. Business contacts in several Districts reported
the contrast between the strength of incoming data on robust activity through the end of 2018 and planned to
economic activity and the concerns about downside follow through or expand on their current capital ex-
risks evident in financial markets and in reports from penditure projects. However, contacts in a number of
business contacts. Recent readings on household and Districts appeared less upbeat than at the time of the
business spending, inflation, and labor market condi- November meeting, as concerns about a variety of fac-
tions were largely in line with participants’ expectations tors—including trade policy, waning fiscal stimulus,
and indicated continued strength of the economy. By slowing global economic growth, or financial market
contrast, financial markets were volatile and conditions volatility—were reportedly beginning to weigh on busi-
had tightened over the intermeeting period, with sizable ness sentiment. A couple of participants commented
declines in equity prices and notably wider corporate that the recent decline in oil prices could be a sign of a
credit spreads coinciding with a continued flattening of weakening in global demand that could weigh on capital
the Treasury yield curve; in part, these changes in finan- spending by oil production companies and affect com-
cial conditions appeared to reflect greater concerns panies providing services to the oil industry. However,

--- Page 9 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r_ 1_8_–_1_9_, _2_0_18_______________________P_a_g_e_ _9
a couple of participants noted that the recent oil price that longer-run inflation expectations may have edged
decline could also be associated with increasing oil sup- lower, while several others cited survey-based measures
ply rather than softening global demand. as suggesting that longer-run expectations likely re-
mained anchored. Participants generally continued to
Contacts in the agricultural sector reported that condi-
view recent price developments as consistent with their
tions remained depressed, in part because of the effects
expectation that inflation would remain near the Com-
of trade policy actions on exports and farm incomes, un-
mittee’s symmetric 2 percent objective on a sustained
certainty about future trade agreements, and continued
basis. Although a few participants pointed to anecdotal
low commodity prices. Banks continued to report a
and survey evidence indicating rising input costs and
gradual increase in agricultural loan delinquencies in re-
pass-through of these higher costs to consumer prices,
cent months. Nonetheless, participants cited a few re-
reports from business contacts and surveys in some
cent favorable developments, including new trade miti-
other Districts suggested some moderation in inflation-
gation payments as well as legislative action to maintain
ary pressure.
crop insurance that was seen as reducing uncertainty.
In their discussion of financial developments, partici-
Participants agreed that labor market conditions had re-
pants agreed that financial markets had been volatile and
mained strong. Payrolls continued to grow at an above-
financial conditions had tightened over the intermeeting
trend rate in November, and measures of labor market
period, as equity prices declined, corporate credit
tightness such as rates of job openings and quits contin-
spreads widened, and the Treasury yield curve continued
ued to be elevated. The unemployment rate remained at
to flatten. Some participants commented that these de-
a historically low level in November, and the labor force
velopments may reflect an increased focus among mar-
participation rate stayed steady, which represented an
ket participants on tail risks such as a sharp escalation of
improvement relative to its gradual downward-sloping
trade tensions or could be a signal of a significant slow-
underlying trend. Several participants observed that la-
down in the pace of economic growth in the future. A
bor force participation had been improving for low-
couple of participants noted that the tightening in finan-
skilled workers and for prime-age workers. A couple of
cial conditions so far did not appear to be restraining real
participants saw scope for further improvements in the
activity, although a more persistent tightening would un-
labor force participation rate relative to its historical
doubtedly weigh on business and household spending.
downward trend, while a couple of others judged that
Participants agreed to continue to monitor financial
there was little scope for significant further improve-
market developments and assess the implications of
ments.
these developments for the economic outlook.
Contacts in many Districts continued to report tight la-
Participants commented on a number of risks associated
bor markets with difficulties finding qualified workers.
with their outlook for economic activity, the labor mar-
In some cases, firms were responding to these difficul-
ket, and inflation over the medium term. Various factors
ties by using various types of nonwage incentives to at-
that could pose downside risks for domestic economic
tract and retain workers, while in other cases, firms were
growth and inflation were mentioned, including the pos-
responding by raising wages. Many participants ob-
sibilities of a sharper-than-expected slowdown in global
served that, at the national level, most measures of nom-
economic growth, a more rapid waning of fiscal stimu-
inal wage growth had risen and were currently at levels
lus, an escalation in trade tensions, a further tightening
that were broadly in line with trends in productivity
of financial conditions, or greater-than-anticipated neg-
growth and inflation.
ative effects from the monetary policy tightening to date.
Participants observed that both overall and core PCE A few participants expressed concern that longer-run in-
price inflation remained near 2 percent on a 12-month flation expectations would remain low, particularly if
basis, but that core inflation had edged lower in recent economic growth slowed more than expected. With re-
months. A few participants noted that the recent de- gard to upside risks, participants noted that the effects
clines in energy prices would likely only temporarily of fiscal stimulus could turn out to be greater than ex-
weigh on headline inflation. Several participants re- pected and the uncertainties surrounding trade tensions
marked that longer-term TIPS-based inflation compen- or the global growth outlook could be resolved favora-
sation had declined notably since November, concurrent bly, leading to stronger-than-expected economic out-
with both falling oil prices and a deterioration in investor comes, while a couple of participants suggested that
risk sentiment. A few participants pointed to the decline tightening resource utilization in conjunction with an in-
in longer-term inflation compensation as an indication crease in the ability of firms to pass through increases in

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
input costs to consumer prices could generate undesira- Participants emphasized that the Committee’s approach
ble upward pressure on inflation. A couple of partici- to setting the stance of policy should be importantly
pants pointed to risks to financial stability stemming guided by the implications of incoming data for the eco-
from high levels of corporate borrowing, especially by nomic outlook. They noted that their expectations for
riskier firms, and elevated CRE prices. In general, par- the path of the federal funds rate were based on their
ticipants agreed that risks to the outlook appeared current assessment of the economic outlook. Monetary
roughly balanced, although some noted that downside policy was not on a preset course; neither the pace nor
risks may have increased of late. the ultimate endpoint of future rate increases was
known. If incoming information prompted meaningful
In their consideration of monetary policy at this meeting,
reassessments of the economic outlook and attendant
participants generally judged that the economy was
risks, either to the upside or the downside, their policy
evolving about as anticipated, with real economic activ-
outlook would change. Various factors, such as the re-
ity rising at a strong rate, labor market conditions con-
cent tightening in financial conditions and risks to the
tinuing to strengthen, and inflation near the Committee’s
global outlook, on the one hand, and further indicators
objective. Based on their current assessments, most par-
of tightness in labor markets and possible risks to finan-
ticipants expressed the view that it would be appropriate
cial stability from a prolonged period of tight resource
for the Committee to raise the target range for the fed-
utilization, on the other hand, were noted in this context.
eral funds rate 25 basis points at this meeting. A few
participants, however, favored no change in the target Participants discussed ideas for effectively communi-
range at this meeting, judging that the absence of signs cating to the public the Committee’s data-dependent ap-
of upward inflation pressure afforded the Committee proach, including options for transitioning away from
some latitude to wait and see how the data would de- forward guidance language in future postmeeting state-
velop amid the recent rise in financial market volatility ments. Several participants expressed the view that it
and increased uncertainty about the global economic might be appropriate over upcoming meetings to re-
growth outlook. move forward guidance entirely and replace it with lan-
guage emphasizing the data-dependent nature of policy
With regard to the outlook for monetary policy beyond
decisions.
this meeting, participants generally judged that some fur-
ther gradual increases in the target range for the federal Participants supported a plan to implement another
funds rate would most likely be consistent with a sus- technical adjustment to the IOER rate that would place
tained economic expansion, strong labor market condi- it 10 basis points below the top of the target range for
tions, and inflation near 2 percent over the medium the federal funds rate. This adjustment would foster
term. With an increase in the target range at this meet- trading in the federal funds market at rates well within
ing, the federal funds rate would be at or close to the the FOMC’s target range.
lower end of the range of estimates of the longer-run
Committee Policy Action
neutral interest rate, and participants expressed that re-
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
cent developments, including the volatility in financial
ahead, members judged that information received since
markets and the increased concerns about global growth,
the Committee met in November indicated that the la-
made the appropriate extent and timing of future policy
bor market had continued to strengthen and that eco-
firming less clear than earlier. Against this backdrop,
nomic activity had been rising at a strong rate. Job gains
many participants expressed the view that, especially in
had been strong, on average, in recent months, and the
an environment of muted inflation pressures, the Com-
unemployment rate had remained low. Household
mittee could afford to be patient about further policy
spending had continued to grow strongly, while growth
firming. A number of participants noted that, before
of business fixed investment had moderated from its
making further changes to the stance of policy, it was
rapid pace earlier in the year. On a 12-month basis, both
important for the Committee to assess factors such as
overall inflation and inflation for items other than food
how the risks that had become more pronounced in re-
and energy remained near 2 percent. Indicators of
cent months might unfold and to what extent they would
longer-term inflation expectations were little changed,
affect economic activity, and the effects of past actions
on balance.
to remove policy accommodation, which were likely still
working their way through the economy. Members generally judged that the economy had been
evolving about as they had anticipated at the previous
meeting. Though financial conditions had tightened and

--- Page 11 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r_ 1_8_–_1_9_, _2_0_18______________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
global growth had moderated, members generally antic- “Effective December 20, 2018, the Federal
ipated that growth would remain above trend and the Open Market Committee directs the Desk to
labor market would remain strong. Members judged undertake open market operations as necessary
that some further gradual increases in the target range to maintain the federal funds rate in a target
for the federal funds rate would be consistent with sus- range of 2¼ to 2½ percent, including overnight
tained expansion of economic activity, strong labor mar- reverse repurchase operations (and reverse re-
ket conditions, and inflation near the Committee’s sym- purchase operations with maturities of more
metric 2 percent objective over the medium term. than one day when necessary to accommodate
weekend, holiday, or similar trading conven-
After assessing current conditions and the outlook for
tions) at an offering rate of 2.25 percent, in
economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, mem-
amounts limited only by the value of Treasury
bers decided to raise the target range for the federal
securities held outright in the System Open
funds rate to 2¼ to 2½ percent. Members agreed that
Market Account that are available for such op-
the timing and size of future adjustments to the target
erations and by a per-counterparty limit of
range for the federal funds rate would depend on their
$30 billion per day.
assessment of realized and expected economic condi-
tions relative to the Committee’s maximum employment The Committee directs the Desk to continue
and symmetric 2 percent inflation objectives. They reit- rolling over at auction the amount of principal
erated that this assessment would take into account a payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings
wide range of information, including measures of labor of Treasury securities maturing during each cal-
market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and endar month that exceeds $30 billion, and to
inflation expectations, and readings on financial and in- continue reinvesting in agency mortgage-
ternational developments. More generally, members backed securities the amount of principal pay-
noted that decisions regarding near-term adjustments of ments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of
the stance of monetary policy would appropriately re- agency debt and agency mortgage-backed secu-
main dependent on the evolution of the outlook as in- rities received during each calendar month that
formed by incoming data. exceeds $20 billion. Small deviations from
these amounts for operational reasons are ac-
With regard to the postmeeting statement, members
ceptable.
agreed to modify the phrase “the Committee expects
that further gradual increases” to read “the Committee The Committee also directs the Desk to engage
judges that some further gradual increases.” The use of in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
the word “judges” in the revised phrase was intended to necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal
better convey the data-dependency of the Committee’s Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities
decisions regarding the future stance of policy; the ref- transactions.”
erence to “some” further gradual increases was viewed
The vote also encompassed approval of the statement
as helping indicate that, based on current information,
below to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
the Committee judged that a relatively limited amount of
additional tightening likely would be appropriate. While “Information received since the Federal Open
members judged that the risks to the economic outlook Market Committee met in November indicates
were roughly balanced, they decided that recent devel- that the labor market has continued to
opments warranted emphasizing that the Committee strengthen and that economic activity has been
would “continue to monitor global economic and finan- rising at a strong rate. Job gains have been
cial developments and assess their implications for the strong, on average, in recent months, and the
economic outlook.” unemployment rate has remained low. House-
hold spending has continued to grow strongly,
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
while growth of business fixed investment has
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
moderated from its rapid pace earlier in the year.
of New York, until instructed otherwise, to execute
On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and
transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the fol-
inflation for items other than food and energy
lowing domestic policy directive, to be released at
remain near 2 percent. Indicators of longer-
2:00 p.m.:
term inflation expectations are little changed, on
balance.

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com- Voting for this action: Jerome H. Powell, John C.
mittee seeks to foster maximum employment Williams, Thomas I. Barkin, Raphael W. Bostic, Michelle
and price stability. The Committee judges that W. Bowman, Lael Brainard, Richard H. Clarida, Mary C.
some further gradual increases in the target Daly, Loretta J. Mester, and Randal K. Quarles.
range for the federal funds rate will be con-
Voting against this action: None.
sistent with sustained expansion of economic
activity, strong labor market conditions, and in- To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target
flation near the Committee’s symmetric 2 per- range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors
cent objective over the medium term. The voted unanimously to raise the interest rates on required
Committee judges that risks to the economic and excess reserve balances to 2.40 percent, effective
outlook are roughly balanced, but will continue December 20, 2018. The Board of Governors also
to monitor global economic and financial devel- voted unanimously to approve a ¼ percentage point in-
opments and assess their implications for the crease in the primary credit rate (discount rate) to
economic outlook. 3.00 percent, effective December 20, 2018.6
In view of realized and expected labor market
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
conditions and inflation, the Committee de-
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, January 29–30,
cided to raise the target range for the federal
2019. The meeting adjourned at 10:50 a.m. on Decem-
funds rate to 2¼ to 2½ percent.
ber 19, 2018.
In determining the timing and size of future ad-
justments to the target range for the federal Notation Vote
funds rate, the Committee will assess realized By notation vote completed on November 28, 2018, the
and expected economic conditions relative to its Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
maximum employment objective and its sym- Committee meeting held on November 7–8, 2018.
metric 2 percent inflation objective. This as-
sessment will take into account a wide range of
information, including measures of labor mar-
ket conditions, indicators of inflation pressures
_______________________
and inflation expectations, and readings on fi-
James A. Clouse
nancial and international developments.”
Secretary
6 In taking this action, the Board approved requests to estab- Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Philadelphia, St. Louis,
lish that rate submitted by the boards of directors of the Fed- Minneapolis, Kansas City, and Dallas were informed by the
eral Reserve Banks of Boston, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Secretary of the Board’s approval of their establishment of a
Chicago, and San Francisco. This vote also encompassed ap- primary credit rate of 3.00 percent, effective December 20,
proval by the Board of Governors of the establishment of a 2018.) The second vote of the Board also encompassed ap-
3.00 percent primary credit rate by the remaining Federal Re- proval of the establishment of the interest rates for secondary
serve Banks, effective on the later of December 20, 2018, and and seasonal credit under the existing formulas for computing
the date such Reserve Banks informed the Secretary of the such rates.
Board of such a request. (Secretary’s note: Subsequently, the

--- Page 13 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- As shown in figure 2, participants generally continued to
tee (FOMC) meeting held on December 18–19, 2018, expect that the evolution of the economy, relative to
meeting participants submitted their projections of the their objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent
most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product inflation, would likely warrant some further gradual in-
(GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for creases in the federal funds rate. Compared with the
each year from 2018 to 2021 and over the longer run.1 September submissions, the median projections for the
Each participant’s projections were based on infor- federal funds rate for the end of 2019 through 2021 and
mation available at the time of the meeting, together with over the longer run were a little lower. Most participants
his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy— expected that the federal funds rate at the end of 2020
including a path for the federal funds rate and its longer- and 2021 would be modestly higher than their estimate
run value—and assumptions about other factors likely of its level over the longer run; however, many marked
to affect economic outcomes. The longer-run projec- down the extent to which it would exceed their estimate
tions represent each participant’s assessment of the of the longer-run level relative to their September pro-
value to which each variable would be expected to con- jections.
verge, over time, under appropriate monetary policy and
On balance, participants continued to view the uncer-
in the absence of further shocks to the economy.2 “Ap-
tainty around their projections as broadly similar to the
propriate monetary policy” is defined as the future path
average of the past 20 years. While most participants
of policy that each participant deems most likely to fos-
viewed the risks to the outlook as balanced, a couple
ter outcomes for economic activity and inflation that
more participants than in September saw risks to real
best satisfy his or her individual interpretation of the
GDP growth as weighted to the downside, and one less
statutory mandate to promote maximum employment
participant viewed the risks to inflation as weighted to
and price stability.
the upside.
All participants who submitted longer-run projections
The Outlook for Economic Activity
expected that, under appropriate monetary policy,
The median of participants’ projections for the growth
growth in real GDP in 2019 would run somewhat above
rate of real GDP for 2019, conditional on their individ-
their individual estimate of its longer-run rate. Most par-
ual assessment of appropriate monetary policy, was
ticipants continued to expect real GDP growth to slow
2.3 percent, slower than the 3.0 percent pace expected
throughout the projection horizon, with a majority of
for 2018. Most participants continued to expect GDP
participants projecting growth in 2021 to be a little be-
growth to slow throughout the projection horizon, with
low their estimate of its longer-run rate. Almost all par-
the median projection at 2.0 percent in 2020 and at
ticipants who submitted longer-run projections contin-
1.8 percent in 2021, a touch lower than the median esti-
ued to expect that the unemployment rate would run be-
mate of its longer-run rate of 1.9 percent. Relative to the
low their estimate of its longer-run level through 2021.
September SEP, the medians of the projections for real
Most participants projected that inflation, as measured
GDP growth for 2018 and 2019 were slightly lower,
by the four-quarter percentage change in the price index
while the median for the longer-run rate of growth was
for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), would
a bit higher. Several participants mentioned tighter fi-
increase slightly over the next two years, and nearly all
nancial conditions or a softer global economic outlook
participants expected that it would be at or slightly above
as factors behind the downward revisions to their near-
the Committee’s 2 percent objective in 2020 and 2021.
term growth estimates.
Compared with the Summary of Economic Projections
(SEP) from September, many participants marked down The median of projections for the unemployment rate in
slightly their projections for real GDP growth and infla- the fourth quarter of 2019 was 3.5 percent, unchanged
tion in 2019. Table 1 and figure 1 provide summary sta- from the September SEP and almost 1 percentage point
tistics for the projections. below the median assessment of its longer-run normal
level. With participants generally continuing to expect
1 Five members of the Board of Governors, one more than in 2 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for
September 2018, were in office at the time of the December real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal funds
2018 meeting and submitted economic projections. rate.

--- Page 14 ---

,stnediserp
knaB
evreseR
laredeF
dna
srebmem
draoB
evreseR
laredeF
fo
snoitcejorp
cimonocE
.1
elbaT
8102
rebmeceD
,ycilop
yratenom
etairporppa
detcejorp
fo
stnemssessa
laudividni
rieht
rednu
tnecreP
3egnaR
2ycnednetlartneC
1naideM
regnoL
1202
0202
9102
8102
regnoL
1202
0202
9102
8102
regnoL
1202
0202
9102
8102
elbairaV
nur
nur
nur
2.2–7.1
1.2–4.1
2.2–5.1
7.2–0.2
1.3–0.3
0.2–8.1
0.2–5.1
0.2–8.1
5.2–3.2
1.3–0.3
9.1
8.1
0.2
3.2
0.3
PDGlaerniegnahC
1.2–7.1
1.2–5.1
4.2–7.1
8.2–1.2
2.3–9.2
0.2–8.1
0.2–6.1
1.2–8.1
7.2–4.2
2.3–0.3
8.1
8.1
0.2
5.2
1.3
noitcejorprebmetpeS
6.4–0.4
2.4–4.3
3.4–4.3
0.4–4.3
7.3
5.4–2.4
9.3–6.3
8.3–5.3
7.3–5.3
7.3
4.4
8.3
6.3
5.3
7.3
etartnemyolpmenU
6.4–0.4
2.4–4.3
0.4–3.3
8.3–4.3
8.3–7.3
6.4–3.4
0.4–5.3
8.3–4.3
6.3–4.3
7.3
5.4
7.3
5.3
5.3
7.3
noitcejorprebmetpeS
0.2
3.2–0.2
2.2–0.2
2.2–8.1
9.1–8.1
0.2
1.2–0.2
1.2–0.2
1.2–8.1
9.1–8.1
0.2
1.2
1.2
9.1
9.1
noitaflniECP
0.2
3.2–0.2
2.2–0.2
3.2–0.2
2.2–9.1
0.2
2.2–0.2
2.2–1.2
1.2–0.2
1.2–0.2
0.2
1.2
1.2
0.2
1.2
noitcejorprebmetpeS
3.2–0.2
2.2–0.2
2.2–9.1
9.1–8.1
1.2–0.2
1.2–0.2
1.2–0.2
9.1–8.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
9.1
4noitaflniECPeroC
3.2–0.2
2.2–0.2
3.2–0.2
0.2–9.1
2.2–0.2
2.2–1.2
1.2–0.2
0.2–9.1
1.2
1.2
1.2
0.2
noitcejorprebmetpeS
detcejorP:omeM
htapycilopetairporppa
5.3–5.2
6.3–4.2
6.3–4.2
1.3–4.2
4.2–1.2
0.3–5.2
1.3–6.2
4.3–9.2
1.3–6.2
4.2
8.2
1.3
1.3
9.2
4.2
etarsdnuflaredeF
5.3–5.2
1.4–1.2
9.3–1.2
6.3–1.2
4.2–1.2
0.3–8.2
6.3–9.2
6.3–1.3
4.3–9.2
4.2–1.2
0.3
4.3
4.3
1.3
4.2
noitcejorprebmetpeS
suoiverp
eht
fo
retrauq
htruof
eht
morf
segnahc
tnecrep
era
noitaflni
fo
serusaem
htob
rof
snoitcejorp
dna
)PDG(
tcudorp
citsemod
ssorg
laer
ni
egnahc
fo
snoitcejorP
:etoN
noitpmusnoclanosreprofxedniecirpeht,ylevitcepser
,niegnahcfosetaregatnecrepehteranoitaflniECPerocdnanoitaflniECP
.detacidniraeyehtforetrauqhtruofehtotraey
htruof
eht
ni
etar
tnemyolpmenu
nailivic
egareva
eht
rof
era
etar
tnemyolpmenu
eht
rof
snoitcejorP
.ygrene
dna
doof
gnidulcxe
ECP
rof
xedni
ecirp
eht
dna
)ECP(
serutidnepxe
s’tnapicitraphcaetneserpersnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.ycilopyratenometairporppafotnemssessarehrosihnodesaberasnoitcejorps’tnapicitraphcaE
.detacidniraeyehtforetrauq
snoitcejorpehT
.ymonoceehtotskcohsrehtruffoecnesbaehtnidnaycilopyratenometairporpparednuegrevnocotdetcepxeebdluowelbairavhcaehcihwotetarehtfotnemssessa
sdnuflaredefehtrofleveltegratetairporppadetcejorpehtroetarsdnuflaredefehtrofegnartegratetairporppadetcejorpehtfotniopdimehtfoeulavehteraetarsdnuflaredefehtrof eettimmoCtekraMnepOlaredeFehtfogniteemehthtiwnoitcnujnocniedamerewsnoitcejorprebmetpeSehT
.nurregnolehtrevororaeyradnelacdefiicepsehtfodneehttaetar
htiwnoitcnujnocnietarsdnuflaredefehtro,etartnemyolpmenueht,PDGlaerniegnahcehtrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoltimbustondidtnapicitrapenO
.8102,62–52rebmetpeSno
.gniteem,8102,91–81rebmeceDehthtiwnoitcnujnocnisnoitcejorphcustimbustondidtnapicitrapenodna,gniteem,8102,62–52rebmetpeSeht
eht
si
naidem
eht
,neve
si
snoitcejorp
fo
rebmun
eht
nehW
.tsehgih
ot
tsewol
morf
degnarra
era
snoitcejorp
eht
nehw
noitcejorp
elddim
eht
si
naidem
eht
,doirep
hcae
roF
.1
.snoitcejorpelddimowtehtfoegareva
.raeyhcaenielbairavhcaerofsnoitcejorptsewoleerhtdnatsehgiheerhtehtsedulcxeycnednetlartnecehT
.2
.raeytahtnielbairavtahtrof,tsehgihottsewolmorf,snoitcejorp’stnapicitrapllasedulcniraeyneviganielbairavarofegnarehT
.3
.detcelloctoneranoitaflniECPerocrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.4
_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________

--- Page 15 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _18_–_1_9_,_ 2_0_1_8____________P_a_g_e_ _3
Figure1. Medians,centraltendencies,andrangesofeconomicprojections,2018–21andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections 3
Actual
2
1
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
7
6
5
4
3
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesof
thevariablesareannual.

--- Page 16 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure2. FOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy: Midpointoftargetrangeortargetlevelfor
thefederalfundsrate
Percent
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
2018 2019 2020 2021 Longer run
Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual par-
ticipant’sjudgmentofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfundsrateortheappropriatetarget
levelforthefederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun. Oneparticipantdidnot
submitlonger-runprojectionsforthefederalfundsrate.

--- Page 17 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _18_–_1_9_,_ 2_0_1_8____________P_a_g_e_ _5
the unemployment rate to bottom out in 2019 or 2020, persed and shifted slightly toward lower values. Com-
the median projections for 2020 and 2021 edged back up pared with the projections prepared for the September
to 3.6 percent and 3.8 percent, respectively. Neverthe- SEP, the median federal funds rate was 25 basis points
less, most participants continued to project that the un- lower over the 2019–21 period. For the end of 2019, the
employment rate in 2021 would still be well below their median of federal funds rate projections was 2.88 per-
estimates of its longer-run level. The median estimate of cent, consistent with two 25 basis point rate increases
the longer-run normal rate of unemployment was over the course of 2019. Thereafter, the medians of the
slightly lower than in September. projections were 3.13 percent at the end of 2020 and
2021. Most participants expected that the federal funds
Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of partici-
rate at the end of 2020 and 2021 would be modestly
pants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unem-
higher than their estimate of its level over the longer run;
ployment rate from 2018 to 2021 and in the longer run.
however, many marked down the extent to which it
The distributions of individual projections for real GDP
would exceed their estimate of the longer-run level rela-
growth for 2019 and 2020 shifted down relative to those
tive to their September projections. The median of the
in the September SEP, while the distributions for 2021
longer-run projections of the federal funds rate was
and for the longer-run rate of GDP growth were little
2.75 percent, 25 basis points lower than in September.
changed. The distribution of individual projections for
the unemployment rate in 2019 was a touch more dis- In discussing their projections, many participants con-
persed relative to the distribution of the September pro- tinued to express the view that any further increases in
jections; the distribution moved slightly higher for 2020, the federal funds rate over the next few years would
while the distribution for the longer-run normal rate likely be gradual. That anticipated pace reflected a few
shifted toward the lower end of its range. factors, such as a short-term neutral real interest rate that
is currently low and an inflation rate that has been rising
The Outlook for Inflation
only gradually to the Committee’s 2 percent objective.
The median of projections for total PCE price inflation
Some participants cited a weaker near-term trajectory for
was 1.9 percent in 2019, a bit lower than in the Septem-
economic growth or a muted response of inflation to
ber SEP, while the medians for 2020 and 2021 were
tight labor market conditions as factors contributing to
2.1 percent, the same as in the previous projections. The
the downward revisions in their assessments of the ap-
medians of projections for core PCE price inflation over
propriate path for the policy rate.
the 2019–21 period were 2.0 percent, a touch lower than
in September. Some participants pointed to softer in- Uncertainty and Risks
coming data or recent declines in oil prices as reasons In assessing the appropriate path of the federal funds
for shaving their projections for inflation. rate, FOMC participants take account of the range of
possible economic outcomes, the likelihood of those
Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri-
outcomes, and the potential benefits and costs should
butions of participants’ views about the outlook for in-
they occur. As a reference, table 2 provides measures of
flation. On the whole, the distributions of projections
forecast uncertainty—based on the forecast errors of
for total PCE price inflation and core PCE price infla-
various private and government forecasts over the past
tion beyond this year either shifted slightly to the left or
20 years—for real GDP growth, the unemployment
were unchanged relative to the September SEP. Most
rate, and total PCE price inflation. Those measures are
participants revised down slightly their projections of to-
represented graphically in the “fan charts” shown in the
tal PCE price inflation for 2019. All participants ex-
top panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. The fan charts
pected that total PCE price inflation would be in a range
display the median SEP projections for the three varia-
from 2.0 to 2.3 percent in 2020 and 2021. Most partici-
bles surrounded by symmetric confidence intervals de-
pants projected that core PCE inflation would run at
rived from the forecast errors reported in table 2. If the
2.0 to 2.1 percent throughout the projection horizon.
degree of uncertainty attending these projections is sim-
Appropriate Monetary Policy ilar to the typical magnitude of past forecast errors and
Figure 3.E shows distributions of participants’ judg- the risks around the projections are broadly balanced,
ments regarding the appropriate target—or midpoint of then future outcomes of these variables would have
the target range—for the federal funds rate at the end of about a 70 percent probability of being within these con-
each year from 2018 to 2021 and over the longer run. fidence intervals. For all three variables, this measure of
The distributions for 2019 through 2021 were less dis-

--- Page 18 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2018–21andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2018
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3
Percent range
Number of participants
2021
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 3.3
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 19 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _18_–_1_9_,_ 2_0_1_8____________P_a_g_e_ _7
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2018–21andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2018
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2021
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2018–21andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2018
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2021
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _18_–_1_9_,_ 2_0_1_8____________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2018–21
Number of participants
2018
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2021
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 22 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’judgmentsofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfunds
rateortheappropriatetargetlevelforthefederalfundsrate,2018–21andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2018
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8 4.6 3 4.8 8
2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62 4.87 5.12
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8 4.6 3 4.8 8
2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62 4.87 5.12
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8 4.6 3 4.8 8
2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62 4.87 5.12
Percent range
Number of participants
2021
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8 4.6 3 4.8 8
2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62 4.87 5.12
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3 4.3 8 4.6 3 4.8 8
2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37 4.62 4.87 5.12
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 23 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _18_–_1_9_,_ 2_0_1_8___________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges consistent with a symmetric fan chart. Two more par-
Percentage points ticipants than in September saw the risks to real GDP
Variable 2018 2019 2020 2021
growth as weighted to the downside, and one less judged
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . ±0.8 ±1.6 ±2.1 ±2.1
the risks as weighted to the upside. The balance of risks
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . ±0.1 ±0.8 ±1.5 ±1.9 to the projection for the unemployment rate was un-
changed, with three participants judging the risks to the
Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.2 ±1.0 ±1.0 ±1.0
unemployment rate as weighted to the downside and
Short-term interest rates3 . . . ±0.1 ±1.4 ±2.0 ±2.4
two participants viewing the risks as weighted to the up-
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the
side. In addition, the balance of risks to the inflation
root mean squared error of projections for 1998 through 2017 that
were released in the winter by various private and government fore- projections shifted down slightly relative to September,
casters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain as one less participant judged the risks to both total and
assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual out-
core inflation as weighted to the upside and one more
comes for real GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal
funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection participant viewed the risks as weighted to the downside.
errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschnei-
der and Peter Tulip (2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic In discussing the uncertainty and risks surrounding their
Outlook Using Historical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s
economic projections, participants mentioned trade ten-
Approach,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020
(Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, sions as well as financial and foreign economic develop-
February), https://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2017.020. ments as sources of uncertainty or downside risk to the
1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
growth outlook. For the inflation outlook, the effects of
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
that has been most widely used in government and private economic trade restrictions were cited as upside risks and lower en-
forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to ergy prices and the stronger dollar as downside risks.
fourth quarter basis.
Those who commented on U.S. fiscal policy viewed it as
3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds
rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury an additional source of uncertainty and noted that it
bills. Projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent,
might present two-sided risks to the outlook, as its ef-
in the fourth quarter.
fects could be waning faster than expected or turn out
to be more stimulative than anticipated.
uncertainty is substantial and generally increases as the
forecast horizon lengthens. Participants’ assessments of the appropriate future path
of the federal funds rate were also subject to considera-
Participants’ assessments of the level of uncertainty sur-
ble uncertainty. Because the Committee adjusts the fed-
rounding their individual economic projections are
eral funds rate in response to actual and prospective de-
shown in the bottom-left panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and
velopments over time in real GDP growth, the unem-
4.C. Participants generally continued to view the degree
ployment rate, and inflation, uncertainty surrounding the
of uncertainty attached to their economic projections for
projected path for the federal funds rate importantly re-
real GDP growth and inflation as broadly similar to the
flects the uncertainties about the paths for those key eco-
average of the past 20 years.3 A couple more partici-
nomic variables along with other factors. Figure 5 pro-
pants than in September viewed the uncertainty around
vides a graphical representation of this uncertainty, plot-
the unemployment rate as higher than average.
ting the median SEP projection for the federal funds rate
Because the fan charts are constructed to be symmetric
surrounded by confidence intervals derived from the re-
around the median projections, they do not reflect any
sults presented in table 2. As with the macroeconomic
asymmetries in the balance of risks that participants may
variables, the forecast uncertainty surrounding the ap-
see in their economic projections. Participants’ assess-
propriate path of the federal funds rate is substantial and
ments of the balance of risks to their economic projec-
increases for longer horizons.
tions are shown in the bottom-right panels of fig-
ures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. Most participants generally
judged the risks to the outlook for real GDP growth, the
unemployment rate, headline inflation, and core infla-
tion as broadly balanced—in other words, as broadly
3 At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” used to assess the uncertainty and risks attending the partici-
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty sur- pants’ projections.
rounding the economic forecasts and explains the approach

--- Page 24 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4.A.UncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsofGDPgrowth
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections
70% confidence interval 4
3
Actual 2
1
0
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth Risks to GDP growth
December projections December projections
18 18
September projections September projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Theblueandredlinesinthetoppanelshowactualvaluesandmedianprojectedvalues,respectively,ofthe
percentchangeinrealgrossdomesticproduct(GDP)fromthefourthquarterofthepreviousyeartothefourthquarter
of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is
basedonrootmeansquarederrorsofvariousprivateandgovernmentforecastsmadeovertheprevious20years;more
information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed,
on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the
historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around
theirprojections;thesecurrentassessmentsaresummarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,participantswho
judgetheuncertaintyabouttheirprojectionsas“broadlysimilar”totheaveragelevelsofthepast20yearswouldview
the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of
the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as“broadly
balanced”would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of
uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 25 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _18_–_1_9_,_ 2_0_1_8___________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Figure4.B.Uncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsoftheunemploymentrate
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Unemployment rate
Median of projections 10
70% confidence interval
9
8
7
6
Actual
5
4
3
2
1
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate
December projections December projections
18 18
September projections September projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of
the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around
the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private
and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2.
Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width
and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC
participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are
summarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,participantswhojudgetheuncertaintyabouttheirprojectionsas
“broadlysimilar”totheaveragelevelsofthepast20yearswouldviewthewidthoftheconfidenceintervalshowninthe
historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise,
participants who judge the risks to their projections as“broadly balanced”would view the confidence interval around
theirprojectionsasapproximatelysymmetric. Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethe
box“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 26 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_4____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4.C.UncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsofPCEinflation
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
PCE inflation
Median of projections
70% confidence interval
3
2
1
Actual
0
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation Risks to PCE inflation
December projections December projections
18 18
September projections September projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation Risks to core PCE inflation
December projections December projections
18 18
September projections September projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Theblueandredlinesinthetoppanelshowactualvaluesandmedianprojectedvalues,respectively,ofthe
percentchangeinthepriceindexforpersonalconsumptionexpenditures(PCE)fromthefourthquarteroftheprevious
yeartothefourthquarteroftheyearindicated. Theconfidenceintervalaroundthemedianprojectedvaluesisassumed
to be symmetricand is based on root mean squarederrorsof variousprivateand governmentforecastsmade over the
previous20years;moreinformationaboutthesedataisavailableintable2. Becausecurrentconditionsmaydifferfrom
those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated
onthebasisofthehistoricalforecasterrorsmaynotreflectFOMCparticipants’currentassessmentsoftheuncertainty
andrisksaroundtheirprojections;thesecurrentassessmentsaresummarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,
participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as“broadly similar”to the average levels of the past
20yearswouldviewthewidthoftheconfidenceintervalshowninthehistoricalfanchartaslargelyconsistentwiththeir
assessments of the uncertaintyabout their projections. Likewise, participantswho judgethe risks to their projections
as“broadly balanced”would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For
definitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 27 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _18_–_1_9_,_ 2_0_1_8___________P__ag_e_ _1_5
Figure5. Uncertaintyinprojectionsofthefederalfundsrate
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Federal funds rate
Midpoint of target range
6
Median of projections
70% confidence interval*
5
4
3
2
1
Actual
0
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Com-
mittee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the
target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level.
The confidence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private
and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The confidence interval is not strictly consistent with the
projectionsforthefederalfundsrate,primarilybecausetheseprojectionsarenotforecastsofthelikeliestoutcomesfor
the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy.
Still,historicalforecasterrorsprovideabroadsenseoftheuncertaintyaroundthefuturepathofthefederalfundsrate
generatedbytheuncertaintyaboutthemacroeconomicvariablesaswellasadditionaladjustmentstomonetarypolicy
thatmaybeappropriatetooffsettheeffectsofshockstotheeconomy.
Theconfidenceintervalisassumedtobesymmetricexceptwhenitistruncatedatzero—thebottomofthelowest
target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would
not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy
accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools,
including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current
conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the
confidenceintervalestimatedonthebasisofthehistoricalforecasterrorsmaynotreflectFOMCparticipants’current
assessmentsoftheuncertaintyandrisksaroundtheirprojections.
* The confidence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth
quarteroftheyearindicated;moreinformationaboutthesedataisavailableintable2. Theshadedareaencompasses
lessthana70percentconfidenceintervaliftheconfidenceintervalhasbeentruncatedatzero.

--- Page 28 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_6____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the members of tions are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those fig-
the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal ures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the
Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are
policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top
projections, however. The economic and statistical models panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to par-
and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts ticipants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that
are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather
the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad than below their projections. These judgments are summa-
unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the rized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C.
stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the
what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as em- future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable
bodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each
possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the poten- participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of mone-
tial costs to the economy should they occur. tary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real ac-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a tivity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve
range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropri-
Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve ate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges
Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges for forecasts of short-term interest rates. They suggest that
shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty as- the historical confidence intervals associated with projections
sociated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted,
participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly con-
and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, sistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these
respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly out-
tending those projections is similar to that experienced in the comes but rather are projections of participants’ individual as-
past and the risks around the projections are broadly bal- sessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-
anced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a prob- of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a
ability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal
within a range of 2.2 to 3.8 percent in the current year, 1.4 to funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeco-
4.6 percent in the second year, and 0.9 to 5.1 percent in the nomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary
third and fourth years. The corresponding 70 percent con- policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of
fidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.8 to 2.2 per- shocks to the economy.
cent in the current year and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second, If at some point in the future the confidence interval
third, and fourth years. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it
these confidence bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart
and centered on the medians of FOMC participants’ projec- shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target
tions for GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the
tion. However, in some instances, the risks around the pro- Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of
jections may not be symmetric. In particular, the unemploy- the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention;
ment rate cannot be negative; furthermore, the risks around it would not have any implications for possible future policy
a particular projection might be tilted to either the upside or decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to pro-
the downside, in which case the corresponding fan chart vide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so
would be asymmetrically positioned around the median pro- were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could
jection. also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset
Because current conditions may differ from those that purchases, to provide additional accommodation.
prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on
judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1
projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller provides information on the range of views across FOMC
than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncer- participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A
tainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections
reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in across participants is much smaller than the average forecast
the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ cur- errors over the past 20 years.
rent assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projec-

# Tables

## Page_14_Table_1


|                  | 1202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
|------------------|------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                  | 0202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
| 2ycnednetlartneC | regnoL
nur | 0.2–8.1 0.2–8.1 5.4–2.4 6.4–3.4
0.2 0.2
0.2–5.1 0.2–6.1 9.3–6.3 0.4–5.3 1.2–0.2 2.2–0.2 1.2–0.2 2.2–0.2
0.2–8.1 1.2–8.1 8.3–5.3 8.3–4.3 1.2–0.2 2.2–1.2 1.2–0.2 2.2–1.2
5.2–3.2 7.2–4.2 7.3–5.3 6.3–4.3 1.2–8.1 1.2–0.2 1.2–0.2 1.2–0.2
1.3–0.3 2.3–0.3 9.1–8.1 1.2–0.2 9.1–8.1 0.2–9.1
7.3 7.3 | 0.3–5.2 0.3–8.2
1.3–6.2 6.3–9.2
4.3–9.2 6.3–1.3
1.3–6.2 4.3–9.2
4.2–1.2
4.2 |
|                  | 1202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
|                  | 0202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
| 1naideM          | regnoL
nur | 9.1 8.1 4.4 5.4 0.2 0.2
8.1 8.1 8.3 7.3 1.2 1.2 0.2 1.2
0.2 0.2 6.3 5.3 1.2 1.2 0.2 1.2
3.2 5.2 5.3 5.3 9.1 0.2 0.2 1.2
0.3 1.3 7.3 7.3 9.1 1.2 9.1 0.2                                                                                                                                         | 8.2 0.3
1.3 4.3
1.3 4.3
9.2 1.3
4.2 4.2                                     |
|                  | 1202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
|                  | 0202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |