# 20170315_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:38:42*
*Pages: 30, Tables: 5*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
March 14–15, 2017
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of Market Account
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, March 14, 2017, at Robert deV. Frierson, Secretary, Office of the
10:00 a.m. and continued on Wednesday, March 15, Secretary, Board of Governors
2017, at 9:00 a.m.1
Matthew J. Eichner,3 Director, Division of Reserve
PRESENT: Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of
Janet L. Yellen, Chair Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman of Supervision and Regulation, Board of
Lael Brainard Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of
Charles L. Evans Financial Stability, Board of Governors
Stanley Fischer
Patrick Harker Daniel M. Covitz, Deputy Director, Division of
Robert S. Kaplan Research and Statistics, Board of Governors;
Neel Kashkari Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of
Jerome H. Powell Financial Stability, Board of Governors; Stephen
Daniel K. Tarullo A. Meyer, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Marie Gooding, Jeffrey M. Lacker, Loretta J. Mester,
and John C. Williams, Alternate Members of the Trevor A. Reeve, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair,
Federal Open Market Committee Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, David Bowman, Andrew Figura, Joseph W. Gruber,
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. and David Reifschneider, Special Advisers to the
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
Governors
Brian F. Madigan, Secretary
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Board Members, Board of Governors
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel David E. Lebow and Michael G. Palumbo, Senior
Michael Held,2 Deputy General Counsel Associate Directors, Division of Research and
Steven B. Kamin, Economist Statistics, Board of Governors
Thomas Laubach, Economist
David W. Wilcox, Economist Antulio N. Bomfim and Ellen E. Meade, Senior
Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
James A. Clouse, Michael Dotsey, Evan F. Koenig, Governors
Daniel G. Sullivan, and William Wascher, Associate
Economists Brian M. Doyle, Associate Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors; Jane E.
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Ihrig and David López-Salido, Associate Directors,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors;
1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the 3 Attended through the discussion of System Open Market
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. Account reinvestment policy.
2 Attended Tuesday session only.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Stacey Tevlin, Associate Director, Division of financial markets during the period since the Committee
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors met on January 31 and February 1, 2017. Global equity
prices generally increased further, credit spreads on cor-
Min Wei, Deputy Associate Director, Division of porate debt and emerging market bonds narrowed, and
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors yields on Treasury securities rose somewhat. In survey
responses, market participants again reported elevated
Christopher J. Gust and Jason Wu, Assistant Directors, uncertainty about the outlook for U.S. economic policies
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; and about financial asset prices, but various measures of
Paul R. Wood, Assistant Director, Division of implied volatility nonetheless declined further. The
International Finance, Board of Governors monetary policies of other advanced-economy central
banks remained quite accommodative, and some signs
Penelope A. Beattie,3 Assistant to the Secretary, Office of progress on central banks’ inflation mandates were
of the Secretary, Board of Governors evident. Late in the intermeeting period, market partic-
ipants came to interpret U.S. monetary policy communi-
Michele Cavallo and Jeffrey Huther, Section Chiefs, cations as implying high odds of a firming of monetary
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors policy at this meeting, and changes in market prices sug-
gested a slightly steeper path for the federal funds rate
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of over the next few years than was previously anticipated.
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors Survey results indicated that market participants saw a
change in the FOMC’s policy of reinvesting principal
Andrea Ajello, Principal Economist, Division of payments on its securities holdings as most likely to be
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors announced in late 2017 or the first half of 2018. Most
market participants anticipated that, once a change to re-
Randall A. Williams, Information Manager, Division of investment policy was announced, reinvestments would
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors most likely be phased out rather than stopped all at once.
The deputy manager followed with a briefing on devel-
James M. Lyon and Mark L. Mullinix, First Vice
opments in money markets and open market operations.
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Minneapolis
Over the intermeeting period, federal funds continued
and Richmond, respectively
to trade near the center of the Committee’s ½ to ¾ per-
cent target range except on month-ends. Spreads of
David Altig, Jeff Fuhrer, and Glenn D. Rudebusch,
rates on market repurchase agreements (repos) over the
Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
rate at the System’s overnight reverse repurchase agree-
of Atlanta, Boston, and San Francisco, respectively
ment (ON RRP) facility remained relatively low. Market
participants attributed some of the recent decline in mar-
Paolo A. Pesenti, Julie Ann Remache, and Ellis W.
ket repo rates to a reduction in the supply of Treasury
Tallman, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
bills in advance of the reinstatement of the statutory debt
Banks of New York, New York, and Cleveland,
limit on March 16. The lower market repo rates had led
respectively
to moderately higher take-up at the ON RRP facility in
recent weeks.
George A. Kahn, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
of Kansas City By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Open
Market Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeet-
William Dupor, Assistant Vice President, Federal ing period. There were no intervention operations in
Reserve Bank of St. Louis foreign currencies for the System’s account during the
intermeeting period.
Roy H. Webb, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve
System Open Market Account Reinvestment Policy
Bank of Richmond
The staff provided several briefings that summarized is-
sues related to potential changes to the Committee’s pol-
Developments in Financial Markets and Open
icy of reinvesting principal payments from securities
Market Operations
held in the SOMA. These briefings discussed the mac-
The manager of the System Open Market Account
roeconomic implications of alternative strategies the
(SOMA) reported on developments in U.S. and global

--- Page 3 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 1_4_–_1_5_,_ 2_0_1_7________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
Committee could employ with respect to reinvestments, to the Committee’s reinvestment policy would likely be
including making the timing of an end to reinvestments appropriate later this year. Many participants empha-
either date dependent or dependent on economic condi- sized that reducing the size of the balance sheet should
tions. The briefings also considered the advantages and be conducted in a passive and predictable manner. Some
disadvantages of phasing out reinvestments or ending participants expressed the view that it might be appro-
them all at once as well as whether using the same ap- priate for the Committee to restart reinvestments if the
proach would be appropriate for both Treasury securi- economy encountered significant adverse shocks that re-
ties and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS). quired a reduction in the target range for the federal
funds rate.
In their discussion, policymakers reaffirmed the ap-
proach to balance sheet normalization articulated in the When the time comes to implement a change to rein-
Committee’s Policy Normalization Principles and Plans vestment policy, participants generally preferred to
announced in September 2014. In particular, partici- phase out or cease reinvestments of both Treasury secu-
pants agreed that reductions in the Federal Reserve’s se- rities and agency MBS. Policymakers also discussed the
curities holdings should be gradual and predictable, and potential benefits and costs of approaches that would ei-
accomplished primarily by phasing out reinvestments of ther phase out or cease all at once reinvestments of prin-
principal received from those holdings. Most partici- cipal from these securities. An approach that phased out
pants expressed the view that changes in the target range reinvestments was seen as reducing the risks of trigger-
for the federal funds rate should be the primary means ing financial market volatility or of potentially sending
for adjusting the stance of monetary policy when the misleading signals about the Committee’s policy inten-
federal funds rate was above its effective lower bound. tions while only modestly slowing reductions in the
A number of participants indicated that the Committee Committee’s securities holdings. An approach that
should resume asset purchases only if substantially ad- ended reinvestments all at once, however, was generally
verse economic circumstances warranted greater mone- viewed as easier to communicate while allowing for
tary policy accommodation than could be provided by somewhat swifter normalization of the size of the bal-
lowering the federal funds rate to the effective lower ance sheet. To promote rapid normalization of the size
bound. Moreover, it was noted that the Committee’s and composition of the balance sheet, one participant
policy of maintaining reinvestments until normalization preferred to set a minimum pace for reductions in MBS
of the level of the federal funds rate was well under way holdings and, if and when necessary, to sell MBS to
had supported the smooth and effective conduct of maintain such a pace.
monetary policy and had helped maintain accommoda-
Nearly all participants agreed that the Committee’s in-
tive financial conditions.
tentions regarding reinvestment policy should be com-
Consistent with the Policy Normalization Principles and municated to the public well in advance of an actual
Plans, nearly all participants preferred that the timing of change. It was noted that the Committee would con-
a change in reinvestment policy depend on an assess- tinue its deliberations on reinvestment policy during up-
ment of economic and financial conditions. Several par- coming meetings and would release additional infor-
ticipants indicated that the timing should be based on a mation as it becomes available. In that context, several
quantitative threshold or trigger tied to the target range participants indicated that, when the Committee an-
for the federal funds rate. Some other participants ex- nounces its plans for a change to its reinvestment policy,
pressed the view that the timing should depend on a it would be desirable to also provide more information
qualitative judgment about economic and financial con- to the public about the Committee’s expectations for the
ditions. Such a judgment would importantly encompass size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s assets and
an assessment by the Committee of the risks to the out- liabilities in the longer run.
look, including the degree of confidence that evolving
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
circumstances would not soon require a reversal in the
The information reviewed for the March 14–15 meeting
direction of policy. Taking these considerations into ac-
suggested that the labor market strengthened further in
count, policymakers discussed the likely level of the fed-
January and February and that real gross domestic prod-
eral funds rate when a change in the Committee’s rein-
uct (GDP) was continuing to expand in the first quarter,
vestment policy would be appropriate. Provided that the
albeit at a slower pace than in the fourth quarter, with
economy continued to perform about as expected, most
some of the slowing likely reflecting transitory factors.
participants anticipated that gradual increases in the fed-
The 12-month change in consumer prices moved up in
eral funds rate would continue and judged that a change

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
recent months and was close to the Committee’s longer- some key factors that influence consumer spending—
run objective of 2 percent; excluding food and energy including further gains in employment, real disposable
prices, inflation was little changed and continued to run personal income, and households’ net worth—were
somewhat below 2 percent. consistent with moderate increases in real PCE in early
2017. In addition, consumer sentiment, as measured by
Total nonfarm payroll employment increased at a brisk
the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, re-
pace in January and February. The unemployment rate
mained at an elevated level in February.
edged back down to 4.7 percent in February, and the la-
bor force participation rate rose over the first two Recent information on housing activity suggested that
months of the year. The share of workers employed part residential investment increased at a solid pace early in
time for economic reasons was little changed on net. the year. Starts for both new single-family homes and
The rate of private-sector job openings was unchanged multifamily units strengthened in the fourth quarter and
at a high level in December, while the rate of hiring remained near those levels in January. Issuance of build-
edged up and the rate of quits edged down. The four- ing permits for new single-family homes—which tends
week moving average of initial claims for unemployment to be a reliable indicator of the underlying trend in con-
insurance benefits was at a very low level in early March. struction—also moved up in the fourth quarter and re-
Measures of labor compensation continued to rise at a mained near that level in January. Sales of existing
moderate rate. Compensation per hour in the nonfarm homes rose in January, while new home sales maintained
business sector increased 3¼ percent over the four quar- their fourth-quarter pace.
ters of 2016, and average hourly earnings for all employ-
Real private expenditures for business equipment and in-
ees increased 2¾ percent over the 12 months ending in
tellectual property appeared to be rising in the first quar-
February. The unemployment rates for African Ameri-
ter after a moderate gain in the fourth quarter. Nominal
cans, for Hispanics, and for whites were close to the lev-
new orders of nondefense capital goods excluding air-
els seen just before the most recent recession, but the
craft recorded a solid net gain over the three months
unemployment rates for African Americans and for His-
ending in January, and indicators of business sentiment
panics remained above the rate for whites. Over the past
were upbeat. Firms’ nominal spending for nonresiden-
year or so, the jobless rate for African Americans moved
tial structures excluding drilling and mining was fairly flat
lower, while the rates for Hispanics and for whites
in recent months, but the number of crude oil and natu-
moved roughly sideways.
ral gas rigs in operation, an indicator of spending for
Total industrial production declined in January, as un- structures in the drilling and mining sector, continued to
seasonably warm weather reduced the demand for heat- increase through early March. The limited available data
ing, which held down the output of utilities. Mining out- suggested that inventory investment was likely to make
put expanded further following a large gain in the fourth a smaller contribution to real GDP growth in the early
quarter, and manufacturing production continued to rise part of the year than it did in the fourth quarter.
at a modest pace. Automakers’ assembly schedules sug-
Total real government purchases appeared to be moving
gested that motor vehicle production would remain near
sideways in the first quarter after having been little
its January pace, on average, over the next few months,
changed in the fourth quarter. Nominal outlays for de-
while broader indicators of manufacturing production,
fense in January and February pointed to an increase in
such as the new orders indexes from national and re-
real federal purchases. Although state and local govern-
gional manufacturing surveys, pointed to further modest
ment payrolls expanded in January and February, nomi-
gains in factory output over the near term.
nal construction spending by these governments fell
Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) ap- sharply in January.
peared to be rising at a slower pace in the first quarter
Net exports exerted a significant drag on real GDP
than in the fourth quarter. Motor vehicle sales stepped
growth in the fourth quarter of 2016, and the January
down in January and February from their brisk year-end
trade data suggested that net exports would continue to
pace, and unseasonably warm weather prompted a fur-
weigh on growth in the first quarter of this year. The
ther decline in consumer spending for energy services.
U.S. international trade deficit widened in January in
Taken together, the components of the nominal retail
nominal terms, with imports—led by consumer
sales data used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis to
goods—rising more than exports. Over the past six
construct its estimate of PCE were unchanged in Febru-
months, nominal imports grew at a much faster
ary after a robust gain in January. Recent readings on
pace than nominal exports.

--- Page 5 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 1_4_–_1_5_,_ 2_0_1_7________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE Federal Reserve communications over the intermeeting
price index, increased a little less than 2 percent over the period contributed to increased expectations of a deci-
12 months ending in January. Core PCE price inflation, sion to raise the target range for the federal funds rate at
which excludes changes in food and energy prices, was the March meeting. The Chair’s semiannual monetary
1¾ percent over those same 12 months, held down in policy testimony reportedly led market participants to
part by decreases in the prices of non­energy imports price in a slightly higher probability of a monetary policy
over part of this period. Over the 12 months ending in firming in the near term. Subsequently, investors took
February, total consumer prices as measured by the con- note of the mention in the minutes of the January–
sumer price index (CPI) rose 2¾ percent, while core CPI February FOMC meeting that many participants ex-
inflation was 2¼ percent. The medians of survey-based pressed the view that it might be appropriate to raise the
measures of longer-run inflation expectations—such as federal funds rate again fairly soon if incoming infor-
those from the Michigan survey, the Survey of Profes- mation on the labor market and inflation was in line with
sional Forecasters, and the Desk’s Survey of Primary or stronger than their current expectations or if the risks
Dealers and Survey of Market Participants—were little of overshooting the Committee’s maximum-
changed, on balance, in recent months. employment and inflation objectives increased. Late in
the period, communications from several Federal Re-
Foreign real GDP growth slowed a bit in the fourth
serve officials led to an increase in market-based
quarter from a relatively strong rate in the third quarter,
measures of the probability that the target range for the
but it was still somewhat higher than its average pace
federal funds rate would rise at the March meeting.
over the past two years. In much of the world, including
Europe, Japan, and most of emerging Asia, economic Nominal Treasury yields increased over the intermeeting
activity continued to grow at a moderate pace. In Can- period, particularly for shorter maturities. Treasury
ada and Mexico—two important trading partners of the yields reacted only modestly over most of the period to
United States—growth stepped down from unusually domestic economic data releases that were reportedly
strong third-quarter rates to a still-solid pace in the seen as a little stronger than expected on balance. Yields
fourth quarter, and Brazil’s recession deepened. Re- on longer-dated Treasury securities rose late in the pe-
cently released purchasing managers indexes and confi- riod following comments by Federal Reserve offi-
dence indicators from abroad were generally upbeat and cials. Measures of inflation compensation based on
pointed to continued moderate foreign growth in early Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities were little
2017, although indicators from Mexico suggested a fur- changed, on net, since the February FOMC meeting.
ther slowing. Inflation in the advanced foreign econo-
Broad U.S. equity price indexes increased over the inter-
mies (AFEs) continued to rise, largely reflecting in-
meeting period, and some measures of valuations, such
creases in retail energy prices and currency depreciation.
as price-to-earnings ratios, rose further above historical
Among the emerging market economies (EMEs), infla-
norms. A standard measure of the equity risk premium
tion rose in Mexico, in part reflecting a substantial hike
edged lower, declining into the lower quartile of its his-
in fuel prices, but fell in China and parts of South Amer-
torical distribution of the previous three decades. Stock
ica.
prices rose across most industries, and equity prices for
Staff Review of the Financial Situation financial firms outperformed broader indexes. Mean-
Financial markets were generally quiet over the inter- while, spreads of yields on bonds issued by nonfinancial
meeting period. The Committee’s decision to keep the corporations over those on comparable-maturity Treas-
target range for the federal funds rate unchanged at the ury securities were little changed.
January–February FOMC meeting was well anticipated.
Since the previous FOMC meeting, better-than-
Broad equity price indexes rose further, leaving some
expected economic data and earnings releases abroad
standard measures of valuations above historical norms.
also supported risk sentiment: Foreign equity prices in-
Treasury yields rose late in the intermeeting period, fol-
creased, flows to emerging market mutual funds picked
lowing monetary policy communications by several Fed-
up, and emerging market bond spreads narrowed. Con-
eral Reserve officials. The broad dollar index was about
sistent with improved sentiment toward the EMEs, the
unchanged. Financing conditions for nonfinancial busi-
dollar depreciated against EME currencies. The Mexi-
nesses, households, and state and local governments re-
can peso appreciated substantially against the dollar, al-
mained generally accommodative in recent months.
though it remained weaker than just before the U.S. elec-
tions. In contrast, the dollar appreciated against the

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
AFE currencies, reflecting continued divergence in growth of consumer lending at banks continued in Jan-
monetary policy expectations for the United States and uary and February, albeit at a slower pace than in the
AFEs as well as political uncertainty in Europe. The fourth quarter of 2016. Financing conditions for con-
broad dollar index was little changed over the period. sumers remained accommodative except in the market
Sovereign yields in AFEs generally increased slightly. In for subprime credit card loans.
the United Kingdom, however, gilt yields declined and
Staff Economic Outlook
the pound weakened against the dollar in response to
In the U.S. economic projection prepared by the staff
weaker-than-expected inflation data and to an upward
for the March FOMC meeting, the near-term forecast
revision by the Bank of England, at its early February
for real GDP growth was a little weaker, on net, than in
policy meeting, of its assessment of the degree of slack
the previous projection. Real GDP was expected to ex-
in the labor market. As expected by market participants,
pand at a slower rate in the first quarter than in the
the European Central Bank, at its meeting in early
fourth quarter, reflecting some data for January that
March, kept its policy rate and the pace of its asset pur-
were judged to be transitorily weak, but growth was pro-
chases unchanged.
jected to move back up in the second quarter. The staff
In U.S. financial markets, credit flows to large firms re- maintained its assumption—provisionally included start-
mained solid in recent months, with strong bond issu- ing with the December 2016 forecast—of a more expan-
ance by investment-grade corporations and brisk origi- sionary fiscal policy in the coming years, but it pushed
nations of leveraged loans. Bank loans continued to be back the timing of when those policy changes were an-
largely available for small businesses, although small ticipated to take effect. The negative effect of this timing
business credit demand reportedly remained subdued. change on projected real GDP growth through 2019 was
offset by a higher assumed path for equity prices and by
In the municipal bond market, issuance was strong in
a lower assumed path for the exchange value of the dol-
January but decreased somewhat in February. Yields in-
lar. All told, the staff’s forecast for the level of real GDP
creased a little, about in line with the rise in Treasury
at the end of 2019 was essentially unrevised from the
yields. The number of ratings upgrades notably out-
previous forecast, and the staff continued to project that
paced the number of downgrades in January and Febru-
real GDP would expand at a modestly faster pace than
ary.
potential output in 2017 through 2019. The unemploy-
Commercial real estate loans on banks’ books continued ment rate was forecast to edge down gradually through
to grow in January and February. Spreads on highly the end of 2019 and to run below the staff’s estimate of
rated commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) its longer-run natural rate; the path for the unemploy-
over Treasury securities were little changed. However, ment rate was little changed from the previous projec-
the volumes of CMBS issuance and of deals in the pipe- tion.
line were lower in the first two months of the year than
The staff’s forecast for consumer price inflation, as
in each of the previous two years. Market commentators
measured by changes in the PCE price index, was un-
attributed some of the slowdown to the response of is-
changed for 2017 as a whole and over the next couple of
suers to risk retention rules that took effect in late 2016.
years. The staff continued to project that inflation
The delinquency rate on loans in CMBS pools had risen
would increase gradually over this period, as food and
since the spring of 2016, reflecting increased delinquen-
energy prices, along with the prices of non-energy im-
cies on loans originated before the financial crisis.
ports, were expected to begin steadily rising this year.
Mortgage credit continued to be readily available for However, inflation was projected to be slightly below the
households with strong credit scores and documented Committee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent in 2019.
incomes. Despite the increase in Treasury yields, the in-
The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections
terest rate on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages was little
for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla-
changed over the intermeeting period. Closed-end resi-
tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years. The
dential mortgage loans on banks’ books were about flat
risks to the forecast for real GDP were seen as tilted to
in January and February, while banks’ holdings of home
the downside, primarily reflecting the staff’s assessment
equity lines of credit continued their long contraction.
that monetary policy appeared to be better positioned to
Financing conditions in the market for asset-backed se-
respond to large positive shocks to the economic out-
curities remained favorable. Consumer credit continued
look than substantial adverse ones. However, the staff
to increase at a steady pace, with similar growth rates
viewed the risks to the forecast as less pronounced than
across credit card, automobile, and student loans. The

--- Page 7 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 1_4_–_1_5_,_ 2_0_1_7________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
in the recent past, reflecting both somewhat diminished compensation had remained low; survey-based measures
risks to the foreign outlook and an increase in U.S. con- of inflation compensation were little changed on bal-
sumer and business confidence over recent months. ance.
Consistent with the downside risks to aggregate demand,
Participants generally saw the incoming economic infor-
the staff viewed the risks to its outlook for the unem-
mation as consistent, overall, with their expectations and
ployment rate as tilted to the upside. The risks to the
indicated that their views about the economic outlook
projection for inflation were seen as roughly balanced.
had changed little since the January–February FOMC
The downside risks from the possibility that longer-term
meeting. Although GDP appeared to be expanding rel-
inflation expectations may have edged down or that the
atively slowly in the current quarter, that development
dollar could appreciate substantially further were seen as
seemed primarily to reflect temporary factors, possibly
roughly counterbalanced by the upside risk that inflation
including residual seasonality. Participants continued to
could increase more than expected in an economy that
anticipate that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of
was projected to continue operating above its longer-run
monetary policy, economic activity would expand at a
potential.
moderate pace, labor market conditions would
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the strengthen somewhat further, and inflation would stabi-
Economic Outlook lize around 2 percent over the medium term.
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of
Participants generally judged that risks to the economic
the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank pres-
outlook remained roughly balanced overall, although
idents submitted their projections of the most likely out-
they saw some of the considerations underlying that as-
comes for real output growth, the unemployment rate,
sessment as having changed modestly. Participants con-
and inflation for each year from 2017 through 2019 and
tinued to underscore the considerable uncertainty about
over the longer run, based on their individual assess-
the timing and nature of potential changes to fiscal poli-
ments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate.4
cies as well as the size of the effects of such changes on
The longer-run projections represented each partici-
economic activity. However, several participants now
pant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable
anticipated that meaningful fiscal stimulus would likely
would be expected to converge, over time, under appro-
not begin until 2018. In view of the substantial uncer-
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further
tainty, about half of the participants did not incorporate
shocks to the economy.5 These projections and policy
explicit assumptions about fiscal policy in their projec-
assessments are described in the Summary of Economic
tions. Nonetheless, most participants continued to view
Projections (SEP), which is an addendum to these
the prospect of more expansionary fiscal policies as an
minutes.
upside risk to their economic forecasts. At the same
In their discussion of the economic situation and the time, some participants and their business contacts saw
outlook, meeting participants agreed that information downside risks to labor force and economic growth
received over the intermeeting period indicated that the from possible changes to other government policies,
labor market had continued to strengthen and that eco- such as those affecting immigration and trade. Partici-
nomic activity had continued to expand at a moderate pants generally viewed the downside risks associated
pace. Job gains had remained solid and the unemploy- with the global economic outlook, particularly those re-
ment rate was little changed in recent months. House- lated to the economic situation in China and Europe, as
hold spending had continued to rise moderately while having diminished over recent months. At the same
business fixed investment appeared to have firmed time, several participants cautioned that upcoming elec-
somewhat. Inflation had increased in recent quarters tions in EU countries posed both near-term and longer-
and moved close to the Committee’s 2 percent longer- term risks.
run objective; excluding energy and food prices, inflation
Regarding the outlook for inflation, several participants
was little changed and had continued to run somewhat
noted that the apparently modest response of inflation
below 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation
to measures of resource slack in recent years, along with
4 The office of the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of First Vice President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta,
Atlanta was vacant at the time of this FOMC meeting; the in- submitted economic projections.
coming president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta is 5 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for
scheduled to assume office on June 5, 2017. Marie Gooding, real output growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal
funds rate.

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
inflation expectations that appeared to have remained noted as factors that were continuing to restrain overall
well anchored, limited the risk of a marked pickup in in- capital spending.
flation as the labor market tightened further. In contrast,
Labor market conditions had continued to improve.
some other participants continued to express concern
Monthly increases in nonfarm payroll employment aver-
that a substantial undershooting of the longer-run nor-
aged nearly 210,000 over the three months ending in
mal rate of unemployment, if it was to occur, posed a
February, the unemployment rate edged down, and the
significant upside risk to inflation, in part because of the
labor force participation rate ticked up. Some partici-
possibility that the behavior of inflation could differ
pants cited anecdotal evidence of a tightening of labor
from that in recent decades. Participants generally
markets. Business contacts in many Districts reported
agreed that it would be appropriate to continue to closely
difficulty recruiting qualified workers and indicated that
monitor inflation indicators and global economic and fi-
they had to either offer higher wages or hire workers
nancial developments.
with lower qualifications than desired. A couple of par-
In their discussion of developments in the household ticipants reported that the ongoing mismatch between
sector, participants agreed that consumer spending was the skill requirements of available jobs and the qualifica-
likely to contribute significantly to economic growth this tions of job applicants was a factor boosting the number
year. Although motor vehicle sales had fallen early in of unfilled positions. Tight labor markets were said to
the year and some other components of PCE had also increasingly be a factor in businesses’ planning. More
declined, many participants suggested that the slowdown employers reportedly were addressing the scarcity of la-
in consumer spending in January would likely be tempo- bor by expanding vocational programs, but contacts em-
rary. The slowing appeared to mainly reflect transitory phasized that, to be effective, such efforts needed to be
factors like lower energy consumption induced by warm complemented by other programs such as assistance
weather or delays in processing income tax refunds. In with child care and transportation. Shortages of produc-
addition, conditions conducive to growth in consumer tion crews were said to have restricted oil drilling in a
spending, such as a strong labor market or higher levels couple of Districts. In contrast, several other partici-
of household wealth, were expected to persist. A num- pants cited evidence that some slack remained in the la-
ber of participants also cited buoyant consumer confi- bor market, such as still-modest aggregate wage growth
dence as potentially supporting household expenditures, and the unevenness of wage gains across industries, an
although some also mentioned that improved sentiment elevated share of employees working part time for eco-
did not appear to have appreciably altered the trajectory nomic reasons, or other broad measures of labor un-
of consumer spending so far. In the housing market, derutilization. Participants noted the continued stability
access to mortgage credit that was still restricted for of the labor force participation rate in the face of its de-
some borrowers, constraints on buildable land in some mographically driven downward trend. A few partici-
regions, and rising interest rates were cited as having pants interpreted that development as suggesting that
continued to restrain the recovery in housing. slack in the labor market was minimal. A few others saw
it as an indication that labor force participation could in-
Participants generally agreed that recent momentum in
crease a bit more relative to trend and thus that some
the business sector had been sustained over the inter-
further reduction in labor market slack could occur.
meeting period. Many reported that manufacturing ac-
Most participants still expected that if economic growth
tivity in their Districts had strengthened further, and re-
stayed moderate, as they projected, the unemployment
ports from the service sector were positive. Business
rate would remain only modestly below their estimates
optimism remained elevated in a number of Districts. A
of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment over the
few participants reported increased capital expenditures
next few years. Some other participants, however, antic-
by businesses in their Districts, but business contacts in
ipated a more substantial undershoot.
several other Districts said they were waiting for more
clarity about government policy initiatives before imple- Participants generally viewed the information received
menting capital expansion plans. Investment in oil drill- over the intermeeting period as reinforcing their expec-
ing, and particularly extraction from shale, was described tation that inflation would stabilize around the Commit-
as increasing in a couple of Districts, and demand for tee’s 2 percent objective over the medium term. The
related production inputs was also said to be expanding. 12-month change in headline PCE prices increased from
Nonetheless, slower economic growth, ample existing 1.7 percent in December to 1.9 percent in January, as the
capacity, and modest returns in the energy sector were effects of firmer consumer energy prices were registered.
Core PCE prices rose at a relatively quick pace of

--- Page 9 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 1_4_–_1_5_,_ 2_0_1_7________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
0.3 percent for the month of January, although it was conditions and ongoing progress toward the Commit-
noted that residual seasonality might have exaggerated tee’s objective of 2 percent inflation. Participants noted
the increase. The Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas’s that their views of the economic outlook were essentially
12-month trimmed mean PCE inflation rate had gradu- unchanged from those of the past couple of meetings.
ally increased over the past couple of years, reaching Almost all participants saw the incoming data as con-
1.9 percent in January. Although market-based sistent with an increase of 25 basis points in the target
measures of inflation compensation had remained low, range for the federal funds rate at this meeting. They
they were somewhat above the levels seen last year. In judged that, even after an increase in the target range, the
addition, longer-term inflation expectations in the Mich- stance of monetary policy would remain accommoda-
igan survey had been relatively stable since the beginning tive, supporting some additional strengthening in labor
of the year, while other survey measures of inflation ex- market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent
pectations, such as the three-year-ahead measure from inflation.
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Survey of Con-
With their views of the outlook for the economy little
sumer Expectations, had increased in recent months.
changed, participants generally continued to judge that a
Notwithstanding these developments, some participants
gradual pace of rate increases was likely to be appropri-
cautioned that progress toward the Committee’s infla-
ate to promote the Committee’s objectives of maximum
tion objective should not be overstated; they noted that
employment and 2 percent inflation. Participants
inflation had been persistently below 2 percent during
pointed to several reasons for their assessment that a
the current economic expansion and that core inflation
gradual removal of policy accommodation likely would
on a 12-month basis was little changed in recent months
be appropriate. A few noted that it could take some time
at a level below 2 percent. In contrast, a few other par-
for inflation to rise to 2 percent on a sustained basis, and
ticipants commented that recent inflation data were
thus monetary policy would likely need to remain ac-
stronger than they had expected and that they antici-
commodative for a while longer in order to support the
pated that inflation would reach the Committee’s objec-
economic conditions that would foster such an increase.
tive of 2 percent this year.
Several participants remarked that risk-management
In their discussion of recent developments in financial considerations still argued for a gradual removal of ac-
markets, participants noted that financial conditions re- commodation because the proximity of the federal funds
mained accommodative despite the rise in longer-term rate to the effective lower bound placed constraints on
interest rates in recent months and continued to support the ability of monetary policy to respond to adverse
the expansion of economic activity. Many participants shocks. Moreover, the neutral real rate—defined as the
discussed the implications of the rise in equity prices real interest rate that is neither expansionary nor con-
over the past few months, with several of them citing it tractionary when the economy is operating at or near its
as contributing to an easing of financial conditions. A potential—still appeared to be low by historical stand-
few participants attributed the recent equity price appre- ards. Furthermore, uncertainty about current and pro-
ciation to expectations for corporate tax cuts or to in- spective values of the neutral real rate reinforced the ar-
creased risk tolerance among investors rather than to ex- gument for a gradual approach to removing monetary
pectations of stronger economic growth. Some partici- policy accommodation over the next few years.
pants viewed equity prices as quite high relative to stand-
Participants emphasized that they stood ready to change
ard valuation measures. It was observed that prices of
their assessments of, and communications about, the ap-
other risk assets, such as emerging market stocks, high-
propriate path for the federal funds rate in response to
yield corporate bonds, and commercial real estate, had
unanticipated developments. They pointed to several
also risen significantly in recent months. In contrast,
risks that, if realized, could lead them to reassess their
prices of farmland reportedly had edged lower, in part
views of the appropriate policy path. These risks in-
because low commodity prices continued to weigh on
cluded the possibility of stronger spending by businesses
farm income. Still, farmland valuations were said to re-
and households as a result of improved sentiment, ap-
main quite high as gauged by standard benchmarks such
preciably more expansionary fiscal policy, or a more
as rent-to-price ratios.
rapid buildup of inflationary pressures than anticipated.
In their consideration of monetary policy, participants In addition, a number of participants remarked that re-
generally agreed that the data over the intermeeting pe- cent and prospective changes in financial conditions
riod were broadly in line with their expectations, provid- posed upside risks to their economic projections, to the
ing evidence of further strengthening of labor market extent that financial developments provided greater

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
stimulus to spending than currently anticipated, as well jective for headline inflation on a sustained basis. Mem-
as downside risks to their economic projections if, for bers generally viewed it as important to highlight that
example, financial markets were to experience a signifi- core inflation—which excludes volatile energy and food
cant correction. Participants also mentioned potential prices and historically has tended to be a good indicator
developments abroad that could have adverse implica- of future headline inflation—was little changed and con-
tions for the U.S. economy. tinued to run somewhat below 2 percent. Moreover,
market-based measures of inflation compensation had
Nearly all participants judged that the U.S. economy was
remained low.
operating at or near maximum employment. In contrast,
participants held different views regarding prospects for With respect to the economic outlook and its implica-
the attainment of the Committee’s inflation goal. A tions for monetary policy, members continued to expect
number of participants noted that core inflation was a that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary
useful indicator of future headline inflation, and the lat- policy, economic activity would expand at a moderate
est reading on 12-month core inflation suggested that it pace and labor market conditions would strengthen
could still be some time before headline inflation somewhat further. It was noted that recent increases in
reached 2 percent on a sustained basis. Moreover, sev- consumer energy prices could cause inflation to tempo-
eral participants remarked that even though inflation was rarily reach or even rise a bit above 2 percent in the near
currently not that far below the Committee’s 2 percent term. Members anticipated that inflation would stabilize
objective, it was important for the Committee to remove around 2 percent over the medium term and com-
accommodation gradually to help ensure that inflation mented that transitory deviations above and below
would stabilize around that objective over the medium 2 percent were to be expected. Members continued to
term. These participants emphasized that a sustained re- judge that there was significant uncertainty about the ef-
turn to 2 percent inflation was particularly important in fects of possible changes in fiscal and other government
light of the persistent shortfall of inflation from its ob- policies but that near-term risks to the economic outlook
jective over the past several years. However, several appeared roughly balanced. A few members noted that
other participants judged that—with the headline PCE domestic upside risks may have increased somewhat in
price index rising nearly 2 percent and the core PCE in- recent months, partly reflecting potential changes in fis-
dex increasing close to 1¾ percent over the 12-month cal policy, while some downside risks from abroad ap-
period ending in January—the Committee essentially peared to have diminished. Members agreed that they
had met its inflation goal or was poised to meet it later would continue to closely monitor inflation indicators
this year. In the view of these participants, such circum- and global economic and financial developments.
stances could warrant a faster pace of scaling back ac-
After assessing current conditions and the outlook for
commodation than implied by the medians of partici-
economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, all but
pants’ assessments in the SEP.
one member agreed to raise the target range for the fed-
Committee Policy Action eral funds rate to ¾ to 1 percent. This increase was
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period viewed as appropriate in light of the further progress that
ahead, members judged that the information received had been made toward the Committee’s objectives of
since the Committee’s previous meeting indicated that maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. Mem-
the labor market had continued to strengthen and that bers generally noted that the increase in the target range
economic activity had continued to expand at a moder- did not reflect changes in their assessments of the eco-
ate pace. Job gains had remained solid, and the unem- nomic outlook or the appropriate path of the federal
ployment rate had changed little in recent months. funds rate, adding that the increase was consistent with
Household spending had continued to rise moderately, the gradual pace of removal of accommodation that was
while business fixed investment appeared to have firmed anticipated in December, when the Committee last
somewhat. raised the target range.
Inflation had increased in recent quarters, with the In the view of one member, it was premature to raise the
12-month change in the headline PCE price index rising target range for the federal funds rate at this meeting.
to nearly 2 percent in January, close to the Committee’s That member preferred to await additional information
longer-run objective. However, nearly all members on the amount of slack remaining in the labor market
judged that the Committee had not yet achieved its ob- and increased evidence that inflation would stabilize at

--- Page 11 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 1_4_–_1_5_,_ 2_0_1_7_______________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
the Committee’s objective before taking another step to following domestic policy directive, to be released at
remove monetary policy accommodation. 2:00 p.m.:
Members agreed that, in determining the timing and size “Effective March 16, 2017, the Federal Open
of future adjustments to the target range for the federal Market Committee directs the Desk to under-
funds rate, the Committee would assess realized and ex- take open market operations as necessary to
pected economic conditions relative to its objectives of maintain the federal funds rate in a target range
maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This as- of ¾ to 1 percent, including overnight reverse
sessment would take into account a wide range of infor- repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase
mation, including measures of labor market conditions, operations with maturities of more than one day
indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expecta- when necessary to accommodate weekend, hol-
tions, and readings on financial and international devel- iday, or similar trading conventions) at an offer-
opments. Partly in light of the likelihood that the recent ing rate of 0.75 percent, in amounts limited only
higher readings on headline inflation had mostly re- by the value of Treasury securities held outright
flected the temporary effect of increases in consumer en- in the System Open Market Account that are
ergy prices, members agreed that the Committee would available for such operations and by a per-
continue to carefully monitor actual and expected infla- counterparty limit of $30 billion per day.
tion developments relative to its inflation goal. A few
The Committee directs the Desk to continue
members expressed the view that the Committee should
rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auc-
avoid policy actions or communications that might be
tion and to continue reinvesting principal pay-
interpreted as suggesting that the Committee’s 2 percent
ments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-
inflation objective was actually a ceiling. Several mem-
backed securities in agency mortgage-backed se-
bers observed that an explicit recognition in the state-
curities. The Committee also directs the Desk
ment that the Committee’s inflation goal was symmetric
to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap trans-
could help support inflation expectations at a level con-
actions as necessary to facilitate settlement of
sistent with that goal, and it was noted that a symmetric
the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed
inflation objective implied that the Committee would ad-
securities transactions.”
just the stance of monetary policy in response to infla-
tion that was either persistently above or persistently be- The vote also encompassed approval of the statement
low 2 percent. Members also reiterated that they ex- below to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
pected that economic conditions would evolve in a man-
“Information received since the Federal Open
ner that would warrant gradual increases in the federal
Market Committee met in February indicates
funds rate. They agreed that the federal funds rate was
that the labor market has continued to
likely to remain, for some time, below levels expected to
strengthen and that economic activity has con-
prevail in the longer run. However, they noted that the
tinued to expand at a moderate pace. Job gains
actual path of the federal funds rate would depend on
remained solid and the unemployment rate was
the economic outlook as informed by incoming data.
little changed in recent months. Household
The Committee decided to maintain its existing policy of spending has continued to rise moderately while
reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of business fixed investment appears to have
agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in firmed somewhat. Inflation has increased in re-
agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over cent quarters, moving close to the Committee’s
maturing Treasury securities at auction. Members antic- 2 percent longer-run objective; excluding en-
ipated doing so until normalization of the level of the ergy and food prices, inflation was little changed
federal funds rate was well under way. They noted that and continued to run somewhat below 2 per-
this policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of cent. Market-based measures of inflation com-
longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help main- pensation remain low; survey-based measures
tain accommodative financial conditions. of longer-term inflation expectations are little
changed, on balance.
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe- mittee seeks to foster maximum employment
cute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the and price stability. The Committee expects that,

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
with gradual adjustments in the stance of mon- backed securities in agency mortgage-backed se-
etary policy, economic activity will expand at a curities and of rolling over maturing Treasury
moderate pace, labor market conditions will securities at auction, and it anticipates doing so
strengthen somewhat further, and inflation will until normalization of the level of the federal
stabilize around 2 percent over the medium funds rate is well under way. This policy, by
term. Near-term risks to the economic outlook keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-
appear roughly balanced. The Committee con- term securities at sizable levels, should help
tinues to closely monitor inflation indicators maintain accommodative financial conditions.”
and global economic and financial develop-
Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C.
ments.
Dudley, Lael Brainard, Charles L. Evans, Stanley
In view of realized and expected labor market Fischer, Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Jerome H.
conditions and inflation, the Committee de- Powell, and Daniel K. Tarullo.
cided to raise the target range for the federal
Voting against this action: Neel Kashkari.
funds rate to ¾ to 1 percent. The stance of
monetary policy remains accommodative, Mr. Kashkari dissented because he preferred to maintain
thereby supporting some further strengthening the existing target range for the federal funds rate at this
in labor market conditions and a sustained re- meeting. In his view, recent data had not pointed to fur-
turn to 2 percent inflation. ther progress on the Committee’s dual objectives and
thus had not provided a compelling case to firm mone-
In determining the timing and size of future ad-
tary policy at this meeting. He preferred to await addi-
justments to the target range for the federal
tional information on the amount of slack remaining in
funds rate, the Committee will assess realized
the labor market and increased evidence that inflation
and expected economic conditions relative to its
would stabilize at the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent
objectives of maximum employment and 2 per-
inflation objective before taking another step to remove
cent inflation. This assessment will take into ac-
monetary policy accommodation. Mr. Kashkari also
count a wide range of information, including
preferred that when data do support a removal of mon-
measures of labor market conditions, indicators
etary policy accommodation, the FOMC first publish a
of inflation pressures and inflation expectations,
detailed plan to normalize its balance sheet before pro-
and readings on financial and international de-
ceeding with further increases in the federal funds rate.
velopments. The Committee will carefully
monitor actual and expected inflation develop- To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target
ments relative to its symmetric inflation goal. range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors
The Committee expects that economic condi- voted unanimously to raise the interest rates on required
tions will evolve in a manner that will warrant and excess reserve balances ¼ percentage point, to
gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the 1 percent, effective March 16, 2017. The Board of Gov-
federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some ernors also voted unanimously to approve a ¼ percent-
time, below levels that are expected to prevail in age point increase in the primary credit rate (discount
the longer run. However, the actual path of the rate) to 1½ percent, effective March 16, 2017.6
federal funds rate will depend on the economic
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
outlook as informed by incoming data.
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, May 2–3, 2017.
The Committee is maintaining its existing policy The meeting adjourned at 10:40 a.m. on March 15, 2017.
of reinvesting principal payments from its hold-
ings of agency debt and agency mortgage-
6 In taking this action, the Board approved requests submitted of the Board of such a request. (Secretary’s note: Subse-
by the boards of directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of quently, the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, St. Louis,
Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, and Minneapolis were informed by the Secretary of the Board
Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco. This vote also en- of the Board’s approval of their establishment of a primary
compassed approval by the Board of Governors of the estab- credit rate of 1½ percent, effective March 16, 2017.) The sec-
lishment of a 1½ percent primary credit rate by the remaining ond vote of the Board also encompassed approval of the es-
Federal Reserve Banks, effective on the later of March 16, tablishment of the interest rates for secondary and seasonal
2017, and the date such Reserve Banks informed the Secretary credit under the existing formulas for computing such rates.

--- Page 13 ---

_____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _M__ar_c_h_ 1_4_–_1_5_,_ 2_0_1_7_______________________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Notation Vote
By notation vote completed on February 21, 2017, the
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
Committee meeting held on January 31–February 1,
2017.
_____________________________
Brian F. Madigan
Secretary

--- Page 14 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- As shown in figure 2, all but one participant expected
tee (FOMC) meeting held on March 14–15, 2017, meet- that the evolution of economic conditions would likely
ing participants submitted their projections of the most warrant gradual increases in the federal funds rate to
likely outcomes for real output growth, the unemploy- achieve and sustain maximum employment and 2 per-
ment rate, and inflation for each year from 2017 to 2019 cent inflation. The medians of projections for the fed-
and over the longer run.1 Each participant’s projection eral funds rate in 2017, 2018, and 2019 were essentially
was based on information available at the time of the the same as those in the December Summary of Eco-
meeting, together with his or her assessment of appro- nomic Projections (SEP). The median for 2019 was
priate monetary policy, including a path for the federal equal to the median of the longer-run projections. How-
funds rate and its longer-run value, and assumptions ever, the economic outlook is uncertain, and participants
about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes. noted that their economic projections and assessments
The longer-run projections represent each participant’s of appropriate monetary policy could change in response
assessment of the value to which each variable would be to incoming information.
expected to converge, over time, under appropriate
Most participants viewed the uncertainty attached to
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to
their projections as broadly similar to the average of the
the economy.2 “Appropriate monetary policy” is de-
past 20 years, although some participants saw the uncer-
fined as the future path of policy that each participant
tainty associated with their forecasts as higher than aver-
deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic ac-
age. Most participants also judged the risks around their
tivity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual
projections for economic growth, the unemployment
interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objectives of
rate, and inflation as broadly balanced, while several par-
maximum employment and stable prices.
ticipants saw the risks to their forecasts of real GDP
Most FOMC participants expected that, under appropri- growth and inflation as weighted to the upside and sev-
ate monetary policy, growth in real gross domestic prod- eral participants viewed the risks to their unemployment
uct (GDP) would run somewhat above their individual rate forecasts as tilted to the downside.
estimates of its longer-run rate this year and in 2018,
Figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C for real GDP growth, the un-
while about half of the participants projected that eco-
employment rate, and inflation, respectively, present for
nomic growth would slow in 2019 and run at or slightly
the first time “fan charts” as well as charts of partici-
below their individual longer-run estimates. A substan-
pants’ current qualitative assessments of the uncertainty
tial majority of participants projected that the unemploy-
and risks surrounding their economic projections. The
ment rate would run below their estimates of its longer-
fan charts (the panels at the top of these three figures)
run normal level in 2017 and remain below that level
show the medians of participants’ projections sur-
through 2019. A large majority of participants projected
rounded by confidence intervals that are computed from
that inflation, as measured by the four-quarter percent-
the forecast errors of various private and government
age change in the price index for personal consumption
projections made over the past 20 years. The width of
expenditures (PCE), would increase over the next two
the confidence interval for each variable at a given point
years; a majority of participants projected that inflation
provides a measure of forecast uncertainty at that hori-
would be at the Committee’s 2 percent objective in 2019,
zon. For all three macroeconomic variables, these charts
and all participants projected that inflation would be
illustrate that forecast uncertainty is substantial and gen-
within a couple of tenths of a percentage point of the
erally increases as the forecast horizon lengthens. Re-
objective in that year. Participants’ economic projec-
flecting in part the uncertainty about the future evolution
tions were generally quite similar to those submitted in
of GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation,
December. Table 1 and figure 1 provide summary sta-
participants’ assessments of appropriate monetary policy
tistics for the projections.
are also subject to considerable uncertainty. To illustrate
1 The office of the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of 2 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for
Atlanta was vacant at the time of this FOMC meeting; the in- real output growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal
coming president is scheduled to assume office on June 5, funds rate.
2017. Marie Gooding, First Vice President of the Federal Re-
serve Bank of Atlanta, submitted economic projections.

--- Page 15 ---

,stnediserp
knaB
evreseR
laredeF
dna
srebmem
draoB
evreseR
laredeF
fo
snoitcejorp
cimonocE
.1
elbaT
7102
hcraM
,ycilop
yratenom
etairporppa
detcejorp
fo
stnemssessa
laudividni
rieht
rednu
tnecreP
3egnaR
2ycnednetlartneC
1naideM
regnoL
9102
8102
7102
regnoL
9102
8102
7102
regnoL
9102
8102
7102
elbairaV
nur
nur
nur
2.2–6.1
2.2–5.1
4.2–7.1
3.2–7.1
0.2–8.1
0.2–8.1
3.2–8.1
2.2–0.2
8.1
9.1
1.2
1.2
PDGlaerniegnahC
2.2–6.1
2.2–5.1
3.2–7.1
4.2–7.1
0.2–8.1
0.2–8.1
2.2–8.1
3.2–9.1
8.1
9.1
0.2
1.2
noitcejorprebmeceD
0.5–5.4
8.4–1.4
7.4–2.4
7.4–4.4
0.5–7.4
7.4–3.4
6.4–3.4
6.4–5.4
7.4
5.4
5.4
5.4
etartnemyolpmenU
0.5–5.4
8.4–1.4
7.4–2.4
7.4–4.4
0.5–7.4
8.4–3.4
7.4–3.4
6.4–5.4
8.4
5.4
5.4
5.4
noitcejorprebmeceD
0.2
2.2–8.1
1.2–8.1
1.2–7.1
0.2
1.2–0.2
0.2–9.1
0.2–8.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
9.1
noitaflniECP
0.2
2.2–8.1
2.2–8.1
0.2–7.1
0.2
1.2–0.2
0.2–9.1
0.2–7.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
9.1
noitcejorprebmeceD
2.2–8.1
1.2–8.1
0.2–7.1
1.2–0.2
0.2–9.1
9.1–8.1
0.2
0.2
9.1
4noitaflniECPeroC
2.2–8.1
2.2–8.1
0.2–7.1
0.2
0.2–9.1
9.1–8.1
0.2
0.2
8.1
noitcejorprebmeceD
detcejorP:omeM
htapycilopetairporppa
8.3–5.2
9.3–9.0
4.3–9.0
1.2–9.0
0.3–8.2
3.3–6.2
9.2–1.2
6.1–4.1
0.3
0.3
1.2
4.1
etarsdnuflaredeF
8.3–5.2
9.3–9.0
4.3–9.0
1.2–9.0
0.3–8.2
3.3–4.2
6.2–9.1
6.1–1.1
0.3
9.2
1.2
4.1
noitcejorprebmeceD
eht
morf
segnahc
tnecrep
era
noitaflni
fo
serusaem
htob
rof
snoitcejorp
dna
)PDG(
tcudorp
citsemod
ssorg
laer
ni
egnahc
fo
snoitcejorP
:etoN
egnahcfosetaregatnecrepehteranoitaflniECPerocdnanoitaflniECP
.detacidniraeyehtforetrauqhtruofehtotraeysuoiverpehtforetrauqhtruof
rofsnoitcejorP
.ygrenednadoofgnidulcxeECProfxedniecirpehtdna)ECP(serutidnepxenoitpmusnoclanosreprofxedniecirpeht,ylevitcepser,ni
era
snoitcejorp
s’tnapicitrap
hcaE
.detacidni
raey
eht
fo
retrauq
htruof
eht
ni
etar
tnemyolpmenu
nailivic
egareva
eht
rof
era
etar
tnemyolpmenu
eht
hcaehcihwotetarehtfotnemssessas’tnapicitraphcaetneserpersnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.ycilopyratenometairporppafotnemssessarehrosihnodesab
ehtrofsnoitcejorpehT
.ymonoceehtotskcohsrehtruffoecnesbaehtnidnaycilopyratenometairporpparednuegrevnocotdetcepxeebdluowelbairav
tegratetairporppadetcejorpehtroetarsdnuflaredefehtrofegnartegratetairporppadetcejorpehtfotniopdimehtfoeulavehteraetarsdnuflaredef htiwnoitcnujnocniedamerewsnoitcejorprebmeceDehT
.nurregnolehtrevororaeyradnelacdefiicepsehtfodneehttaetarsdnuflaredefehtroflevel
niegnahcehtrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoltimbustondidtnapicitrapenO
.6102,41–31rebmeceDnoeettimmoCtekraMnepOlaredeFehtfogniteemeht
timbustondidtnapicitrapenodna,gniteem,6102,41–31rebmeceDehthtiwnoitcnujnocnietarsdnuflaredefehtro,etartnemyolpmenueht,PDGlaer
.gniteem,7102,51–41hcraMehthtiwnoitcnujnocnisnoitcejorphcus
snoitcejorpforebmunehtnehW
.tsehgihottsewolmorfdegnarraerasnoitcejorpehtnehwnoitcejorpelddimehtsinaidemeht,doirephcaeroF
.1
.snoitcejorpelddimowtehtfoegarevaehtsinaidemeht,nevesi
.raeyhcaenielbairavhcaerofsnoitcejorptsewoleerhtdnatsehgiheerhtehtsedulcxeycnednetlartnecehT
.2
.raeytahtnielbairavtahtrof,tsehgihottsewolmorf,snoitcejorp’stnapicitrapllasedulcniraeyneviganielbairavarofegnarehT
.3
.detcelloctoneranoitaflniECPerocrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.4
_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________

--- Page 16 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_4_–_1_5_, _2_0_17______________P_a_g_e_ _3
Figure1. Medians,centraltendencies,andrangesofeconomicprojections,2017–19andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections 3
2
Actual 1
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
8
7
6
5
4
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesof
thevariablesareannual.

--- Page 17 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure2. FOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy: Midpointoftargetrangeortargetlevelfor
thefederalfundsrate
Percent
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
2017 2018 2019 Longer run
Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual par-
ticipant’sjudgmentofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfundsrateortheappropriatetarget
levelforthefederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun. Oneparticipantdidnot
submitlonger-runprojectionsforthefederalfundsrate.

--- Page 18 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_ f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_4_–_1_5_, _2_0_17______________P_a_g_e_ _5
the uncertainty regarding the appropriate path for mon- for 2017 and 2018, while they shifted slightly lower for
etary policy, figure 5 shows a comparable fan chart 2019 and for the longer-run normal rate.
around the medians of participants’ assessments for the
The Outlook for Inflation
federal funds rate.3 As with the macroeconomic varia-
The medians of projections for headline PCE price in-
bles, forecast uncertainty for short-term interest rates is
flation were 1.9 percent in 2017 and 2.0 percent in 2018
substantial and increases as the horizon lengthens.
and 2019; these medians were unchanged from Decem-
The Outlook for Economic Activity ber. Only a few participants saw inflation continuing to
The median of participants’ projections for the growth run below 2 percent in 2019, while several participants
rate of real GDP, conditional on their individual as- projected that inflation would run modestly above the
sumptions about appropriate monetary policy, was Committee’s objective in that year. The medians of pro-
2.1 percent in 2017 and 2018 and 1.9 percent in 2019; jections for core inflation were 1.9 percent in 2017 and
the median of projections for the longer-run normal rate 2.0 percent in 2018 and 2019, very similar to the contour
of real GDP growth was 1.8 percent. Compared with in December.
the December SEP, the medians of the forecasts for real
Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri-
GDP growth over the period from 2017 to 2019, as well
butions of participants’ views about the outlook for in-
as the median assessment of the longer-run growth rate,
flation. The distributions of projections for headline
were mostly unchanged. As in December, about half of
PCE price inflation were largely unchanged from De-
the participants incorporated expectations of fiscal stim-
cember, while the distributions for core PCE price infla-
ulus into their projections; almost all in this group pro-
tion shifted up slightly. Some participants attributed the
jected slightly higher real GDP growth next year relative
upward shift in their projections for core inflation to re-
to their December projections.
cent data that were somewhat above expectations.
The median of projections for the unemployment rate in
Appropriate Monetary Policy
the fourth quarter of 2017 was 4.5 percent, unchanged
Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’
from December and 0.2 percentage point below the me-
judgments regarding the appropriate target or midpoint
dian assessment of its longer-run normal level. Almost
of the target range for the federal funds rate at the end
all participants projected that the unemployment rate
of each year from 2017 to 2019 and over the longer run.4
would not change much over the subsequent two years.
The distributions for 2017 through 2019 shifted up
Based on the median projections, the anticipated path of
modestly. The median projections of the federal funds
the unemployment rate for coming years was also un-
rate continued to show gradual increases, with the me-
changed from the previous forecast. The median esti-
dian assessment for 2017 standing at 1.38 percent, con-
mate of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment
sistent with three 25 basis point rate increases this year.
was 4.7 percent, slightly lower than in December.
Thereafter, the medians of the projections were
Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of partici- 2.13 percent at the end of 2018 and 3.00 percent at the
pants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unem- end of 2019; the median of the longer-run projections of
ployment rate from 2017 to 2019 and in the longer run. the federal funds rate was 3.00 percent. Compared with
The distribution of individual projections of real GDP the December SEP, the median of the projections for
growth for this year was less dispersed relative to the dis- the federal funds rate rose only for 2019, and in that case
tribution of the December projections, while the distri- just slightly.
bution for 2018 shifted up slightly. The distributions of
projections for the unemployment rate were unchanged
3 The fan chart for the federal funds rate provides a depiction term regimes for the U.S. economy, that these regimes are per-
of the uncertainty around the median assessment of the future sistent, and that the economy shifts between regimes in a way
path of appropriate monetary policy and is closely connected that cannot be forecast. Under this view, the economy cur-
with the uncertainty about the future value of economic vari- rently is in a regime characterized by expansion of economic
ables. In contrast, the dot plot shown in figure 2 displays the activity with low productivity growth and a low short-term real
dispersion of views across individual participants about the interest rate, but longer-term outcomes for variables other
appropriate level of the federal funds rate. than inflation cannot be usefully projected.
4 One participant’s projections for the federal funds rate, real
GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation were in-
formed by the view that there are multiple possible medium-

--- Page 19 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2017–19andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2017
March projections 18
December projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_4_–_1_5_, _2_0_17______________P_a_g_e_ _7
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2017–19andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2017
March projections 18
December projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2017–19andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2017
March projections 18
December projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1.9 2.1
1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1.9 2.1
1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1.9 2.1
1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1.9 2.1
1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 22 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_4_–_1_5_, _2_0_17______________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2017–19
Number of participants
2017
March projections
18
December projections
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1.9 2.1
1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1.9 2.1
1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 7 1.9 2.1
1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 23 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’judgmentsofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfunds
rateortheappropriatetargetlevelforthefederalfundsrate,2017–19andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2017
March projections 18
December projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8
1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8
1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8
1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8
1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 24 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_ f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_4_–_1_5_, _2_0_17_____________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges and, in assessing the path of appropriate monetary pol-
Percentage points icy, FOMC participants take account of the range of
Variable 2017 2018 2019
possible outcomes, the likelihood of their occurring, and
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . ±1.6 ±2.1 ±2.1
the potential benefits and costs to the economy should
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . ±0.5 ±1.3 ±1.8 they occur. Table 2 provides one measure of the fore-
cast uncertainty for the change in real GDP, the unem-
Total consumer prices2 . . . . . ±0.9 ±1.1 ±1.1
ployment rate, and total consumer price inflation—the
Short-term interest rates3 . . . . ±0.9 ±2.0 ±2.4
root mean squared error (RMSE) for forecasts made
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root
over the past 20 years. This measure of forecast uncer-
mean squared error of projections for 1997 through 2016 that were re-
leased in the spring by various private and government forecasters. As tainty is incorporated graphically in the top panels of fig-
described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, ures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C, which display fan charts plotting
there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real
the medians of participants’ projections for real GDP
GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will
be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the growth, the unemployment rate, and PCE price inflation
past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip surrounded by symmetric confidence intervals derived
(2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using His-
torical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance from the RMSEs presented in table 2. If the degree of
and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of uncertainty attending these projections is similar to the
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), available
typical magnitude of past forecast errors and if the risks
at www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2017/files/2017020pap.
pdf. around the projections are broadly balanced, then future
1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1. outcomes of these variables would have about a 70 per-
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
cent probability of occurring within these confidence in-
that has been most widely used in government and private economic
forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous tervals. For all three variables, this measure of forecast
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated. uncertainty is substantial and generally increases as the
3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds
rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. forecast horizon lengthens.
Historical projections are the average level, in percent, in the fourth
quarter of the year indicated. FOMC participants may judge that the widths of the
confidence intervals in the historical fan charts shown in
In discussing their March forecasts, many participants figures 4.A through 4.C do not adequately capture their
continued to express the view that the appropriate up- current assessments of the degree of uncertainty that
ward trajectory of the federal funds rate over the next surrounds their economic projections. Participants’ as-
few years would likely be gradual. That anticipated pace sessments of the current level of uncertainty surround-
reflected a few factors, such as a short-term neutral real ing their economic projections are shown in the bottom-
interest rate that was currently low and was expected to left panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. Most participants
move up only slowly as well as a gradual return of infla- continued to view the uncertainty attached to their eco-
tion to the Committee’s 2 percent objective. A few par- nomic projections as broadly similar to the average of
ticipants indicated that positive news on inflation and the past 20 years, with one fewer participant than in De-
the continued strengthening of labor market conditions cember seeing uncertainty about GDP growth, the un-
in recent months had increased their confidence that in- employment rate, and headline inflation as higher than
flation would move toward or to the 2 percent objective. its historical average.5 In their discussion of the uncer-
Some participants judged that a slightly firmer path of tainty attached to their current projections relative to lev-
monetary policy than in their previous projections would els of uncertainty over the past 20 years, as in December,
likely be appropriate. Most of the participants who com- about half of the participants expressed the view that, at
mented on the Committee’s reinvestment policy antici- this point, uncertainty surrounding prospective changes
pated that a change in that policy would be appropriate in fiscal and other policies is very large or that there is
before the end of this year if the economic outlook not yet enough information to make reasonable assump-
evolved as projected. tions about the timing, nature, and magnitude of the
changes.
Uncertainty and Risks
The economic projections of FOMC participants are The fan charts—which are symmetric around the me-
generally subject to considerable uncertainty and risks, dian projections by assumption—also do not necessarily
5 At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projec-
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the tions.
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess

--- Page 25 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4.A.UncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsofGDPgrowth
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections
70% confidence interval 4
3
2
Actual 1
0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth Risks to GDP growth
March projections March projections
18 18
December projections December projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Theblueandredlinesinthetoppanelshowactualvaluesandmedianprojectedvalues,respectively,ofthe
percentchangeinrealgrossdomesticproduct(GDP)fromthefourthquarterofthepreviousyeartothefourthquarter
of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is
basedonrootmeansquarederrorsofvariousprivateandgovernmentforecastsmadeovertheprevious20years;more
information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed,
on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the
historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around
theirprojections;thesecurrentassessmentsaresummarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,participantswho
judgetheuncertaintyabouttheirprojectionsas“broadlysimilar”totheaveragelevelsofthepast20yearswouldview
the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of
the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as“broadly
balanced”would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of
uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 26 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_4_–_1_5_, _2_0_17_____________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Figure4.B.Uncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsoftheunemploymentrate
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Unemployment rate
Median of projections 10
70% confidence interval
9
8
7
6
Actual
5
4
3
2
1
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate
March projections March projections
18 18
December projections December projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of
the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around
the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private
and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2.
Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width
and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC
participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are
summarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,participantswhojudgetheuncertaintyabouttheirprojectionsas
“broadlysimilar”totheaveragelevelsofthepast20yearswouldviewthewidthoftheconfidenceintervalshowninthe
historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise,
participants who judge the risks to their projections as“broadly balanced”would view the confidence interval around
theirprojectionsasapproximatelysymmetric. Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethe
box“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 27 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_4____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4.C.UncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsofPCEinflation
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
PCE inflation
Median of projections
70% confidence interval
3
2
1
Actual
0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation Risks to PCE inflation
March projections March projections
18 18
December projections December projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation Risks to core PCE inflation
March projections March projections
18 18
December projections December projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Theblueandredlinesinthetoppanelshowactualvaluesandmedianprojectedvalues,respectively,ofthe
percentchangeinthepriceindexforpersonalconsumptionexpenditures(PCE)fromthefourthquarteroftheprevious
yeartothefourthquarteroftheyearindicated. Theconfidenceintervalaroundthemedianprojectedvaluesisassumed
to be symmetricand is based on root mean squarederrorsof variousprivateand governmentforecastsmade over the
previous20years;moreinformationaboutthesedataisavailableintable2. Becausecurrentconditionsmaydifferfrom
those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated
onthebasisofthehistoricalforecasterrorsmaynotreflectFOMCparticipants’currentassessmentsoftheuncertainty
andrisksaroundtheirprojections;thesecurrentassessmentsaresummarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,
participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as“broadly similar”to the average levels of the past
20yearswouldviewthewidthoftheconfidenceintervalshowninthehistoricalfanchartaslargelyconsistentwiththeir
assessments of the uncertaintyabout their projections. Likewise, participantswho judgethe risks to their projections
as“broadly balanced”would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For
definitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 28 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_ f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_4_–_1_5_, _2_0_17_____________P__ag_e_ _1_5
reflect participants’ assessments of the balance of risks nal line in table 2 shows the RMSEs for forecasts of
to their economic projections. Participants’ assessments short-term interest rates. These RMSEs are not strictly
of the balance of risks to their economic projections are consistent with participants’ projections of the federal
shown in the bottom-right panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, funds rate, in part because these assessments are not
and 4.C. As in December, most participants judged the forecasts of the likeliest outcomes but rather reflect each
risks to their projections of real GDP growth, the unem- participant’s individual judgment of appropriate mone-
ployment rate, headline inflation, and core inflation as tary policy. However, the associated confidence inter-
broadly balanced—in other words, as broadly consistent vals may provide a sense of the likely uncertainty around
with a symmetric fan chart. One more participant saw the future path of the federal funds rate generated by the
the risks to unemployment as weighted to the downside uncertainty about the macroeconomic variables as well
than in December (the bottom-right panel of figure 4.B). as additional adjustments to monetary policy that may be
The balance of risks to the inflation projection shifted appropriate to offset the effects of shocks to the econ-
up slightly relative to December, as one fewer participant omy.
judged the risks to both headline and core inflation as
Figure 5 shows a fan chart plotting the medians of par-
weighted to the downside and one more participant
ticipants’ assessments of the appropriate path of the fed-
viewed the risks as weighted to the upside (the lower-
eral funds rate surrounded by confidence intervals de-
right panels of figure 4.C). In discussing the balance of
rived from the results presented in table 2. As with the
risks around their projections, some participants men-
macroeconomic variables, forecast uncertainty is sub-
tioned improvements in recent readings of household
stantial and increases at longer horizons. If at some
and business confidence as well as somewhat reduced
point in the future the confidence interval around the
risks from abroad. Moreover, a number of participants
federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would
noted that the possibility of a more expansionary U.S.
be truncated at zero for purposes of the chart shown in
fiscal policy might present upside risks to real GDP
figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for
growth and inflation and downside risks to unemploy-
the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the Com-
ment.
mittee in the past. This approach to the construction of
Participants’ assessments of the future path of the fed- the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a con-
eral funds rate consistent with appropriate policy are vention and would not have any implication for possible
generally subject to considerable uncertainty, reflecting future policy decisions regarding the use of negative in-
in part uncertainty about the evolution of GDP growth, terest rates to provide additional monetary policy ac-
the unemployment rate, and inflation over time. The fi- commodation if doing so were appropriate.

--- Page 29 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_6____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure5. Uncertaintyinprojectionsofthefederalfundsrate
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Federal funds rate
Midpoint of target range
6
Median of projections
70% confidence interval*
5
4
3
2
Actual 1
0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Com-
mittee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the
target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level.
The confidence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private
and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The confidence interval is not strictly consistent with the
projectionsforthefederalfundsrate,primarilybecausetheseprojectionsarenotforecastsofthelikeliestoutcomesfor
the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy.
Still,historicalforecasterrorsprovideabroadsenseoftheuncertaintyaroundthefuturepathofthefederalfundsrate
generatedbytheuncertaintyaboutthemacroeconomicvariablesaswellasadditionaladjustmentstomonetarypolicy
thatmaybeappropriatetooffsettheeffectsofshockstotheeconomy.
Theconfidenceintervalisassumedtobesymmetricexceptwhenitistruncatedatzero—thebottomofthelowest
target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would
not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy
accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools,
including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current
conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the
confidenceintervalestimatedonthebasisofthehistoricalforecasterrorsmaynotreflectFOMCparticipants’current
assessmentsoftheuncertaintyandrisksaroundtheirprojections.
* The confidence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth
quarteroftheyearindicated;moreinformationaboutthesedataisavailableintable2. Theshadedareaencompasses
lessthana70percentconfidenceintervaliftheconfidenceintervalhasbeentruncatedatzero.

--- Page 30 ---

___________________S_u_m_m__ar_y_ o_f_ _E_c_o_n_o_m_i_c_ P_r_o_je_c_t_io_n_s_ o_ f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ M__a_r_ch_ _1_4_–_1_5_, _2_0_17_____________P__ag_e_ _1_7
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the members of tions are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those fig-
the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal ures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the
Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are
policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top
projections, however. The economic and statistical models panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to par-
and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts ticipants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that
are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather
the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad than below their projections. These judgments are summa-
unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the rized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C.
stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the
what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as em- future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable
bodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each
possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the poten- participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of mone-
tial costs to the economy should they occur. tary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real ac-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a tivity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve
range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropri-
Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve ate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges
Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges for forecasts of short-term interest rates. They suggest that
shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty as- the historical confidence intervals associated with projections
sociated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted,
participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly con-
and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, sistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these
respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly out-
tending those projections is similar to that experienced in the comes but rather are projections of participants’ individual as-
past and the risks around the projections are broadly bal- sessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-
anced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a prob- of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a
ability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal
within a range of 1.4 to 4.6 percent in the current year, and funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeco-
0.9 to 5.1 percent in the second and third years. The corre- nomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary
sponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall infla- policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of
tion would be 1.1 to 2.9 percent in the current year, and 0.9 shocks to the economy.
to 3.1 percent in the second and third years. Figures 4.A If at some point in the future the confidence interval
through 4.C illustrate these confidence bounds in “fan around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it
charts” that are symmetric and centered on the medians of would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart
FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unem- shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target
ployment rate, and inflation. However, in some instances, range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the
the risks around the projections may not be symmetric. In Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of
particular, the unemployment rate cannot be negative; fur- the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention;
thermore, the risks around a particular projection might be it would not have any implications for possible future policy
tilted to either the upside or the downside, in which case the decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to pro-
corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned vide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so
around the median projection. were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could
Because current conditions may differ from those that also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset
prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide purchases, to provide additional accommodation.
judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on
projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1
than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncer- provides information on the range of views across FOMC
tainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A
reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections
the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ cur- across participants is much smaller than the average forecast
rent assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projec- errors over the past 20 years.

# Tables

## Page_10_Table_1


| jective for headline inflation on a sustained basis. Mem-   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| bers generally viewed it as important to highlight that     |
| core inflation—which excludes volatile energy and food      |
| prices and historically has tended to be a good indicator   |
| of future headline inflation—was little changed and con-    |
| tinued to run somewhat below 2 percent. Moreover,           |
| market-based measures of inflation compensation had         |
| remained low.                                               |
| With respect to the economic outlook and its implica-       |
| tions for monetary policy, members continued to expect      |
| that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary    |
| policy, economic activity would expand at a moderate        |
| pace and labor market conditions would strengthen           |
| somewhat further. It was noted that recent increases in     |
| consumer energy prices could cause inflation to tempo-      |
| rarily reach or even rise a bit above 2 percent in the near |
| term. Members anticipated that inflation would stabilize    |
| around 2 percent over the medium term and com-              |
| mented that transitory deviations above and below           |
| 2 percent were to be expected. Members continued to         |
| judge that there was significant uncertainty about the ef-  |
| fects of possible changes in fiscal and other government    |
| policies but that near-term risks to the economic outlook   |
| appeared roughly balanced. A few members noted that         |
| domestic upside risks may have increased somewhat in        |
| recent months, partly reflecting potential changes in fis-  |
| cal policy, while some downside risks from abroad ap-       |
| peared to have diminished. Members agreed that they         |
| would continue to closely monitor inflation indicators      |
| and global economic and financial developments.             |
| After assessing current conditions and the outlook for      |
| economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, all but |
| one member agreed to raise the target range for the fed-    |
| eral funds rate to ¾ to 1 percent. This increase was        |
| viewed as appropriate in light of the further progress that |
| had been made toward the Committee’s objectives of          |
| maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. Mem-            |
| bers generally noted that the increase in the target range  |
| did not reflect changes in their assessments of the eco-    |
| nomic outlook or the appropriate path of the federal        |
| funds rate, adding that the increase was consistent with    |
| the gradual pace of removal of accommodation that was       |
| anticipated in December, when the Committee last            |
| raised the target range.                                    |
| In the view of one member, it was premature to raise the    |
| target range for the federal funds rate at this meeting.    |
| That member preferred to await additional information       |
| on the amount of slack remaining in the labor market        |
| and increased evidence that inflation would stabilize at    |


## Page_10_Table_2


| In their discussion of monetary policy for the period    |
|----------------------------------------------------------|
| ahead, members judged that the information received      |
| since the Committee’s previous meeting indicated that    |
| the labor market had continued to strengthen and that    |
| economic activity had continued to expand at a moder-    |
| ate pace. Job gains had remained solid, and the unem-    |
| ployment rate had changed little in recent months.       |
| Household spending had continued to rise moderately,     |
| while business fixed investment appeared to have firmed  |
| somewhat.                                                |
| Inflation had increased in recent quarters, with the     |
| 12-month change in the headline PCE price index rising   |
| to nearly 2 percent in January, close to the Committee’s |
| longer-run objective. However, nearly all members        |
| judged that the Committee had not yet achieved its ob-   |


## Page_11_Table_1


| the Committee’s objective before taking another step to   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| remove monetary policy accommodation.                     |


## Page_11_Table_2


| The Committee decided to maintain its existing policy of    |
|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| reinvesting principal payments from its holdings of         |
| agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in        |
| agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over       |
| maturing Treasury securities at auction. Members antic-     |
| ipated doing so until normalization of the level of the     |
| federal funds rate was well under way. They noted that      |
| this policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of         |
| longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help main- |
| tain accommodative financial conditions.                    |


## Page_15_Table_1


|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                 |
|------------------|------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                 |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                 |
| 2ycnednetlartneC | regnoL
nur | 0.2–8.1 0.2–8.1 0.5–7.4 0.5–7.4
0.2 0.2
0.2–8.1 0.2–8.1 7.4–3.4 8.4–3.4 1.2–0.2 1.2–0.2 1.2–0.2
0.2
3.2–8.1 2.2–8.1 6.4–3.4 7.4–3.4 0.2–9.1 0.2–9.1 0.2–9.1 0.2–9.1
2.2–0.2 3.2–9.1 6.4–5.4 6.4–5.4 0.2–8.1 0.2–7.1 9.1–8.1 9.1–8.1 | 0.3–8.2 0.3–8.2
3.3–6.2 3.3–4.2
9.2–1.2 6.2–9.1
6.1–4.1 6.1–1.1 |
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                 |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                 |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                 |
| 1naideM          | regnoL
nur | 8.1 8.1 7.4 8.4 0.2 0.2
9.1 9.1 5.4 5.4 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
1.2 0.2 5.4 5.4 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
1.2 1.2 5.4 5.4 9.1 9.1 9.1 8.1                                                                                                             | 0.3 0.3
0.3 9.2
1.2 1.2
4.1 4.1                                 |
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                 |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                 |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                 |