# 20171213_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:38:46*
*Pages: 27, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
December 12–13, 2017
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of Market Account
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 12, 2017, Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,
at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, Board of Governors
December 13, 2017, at 9:00 a.m.1
Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve
PRESENT: Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of
Janet L. Yellen, Chair Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Financial Stability, Board of Governors
Lael Brainard
Charles L. Evans Jennifer Burns, Deputy Director, Division of
Patrick Harker Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors;
Robert S. Kaplan Rochelle M. Edge and Stephen A. Meyer, Deputy
Neel Kashkari Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Jerome H. Powell Governors; Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director,
Randal K. Quarles Division of Financial Stability, Board of Governors
Raphael W. Bostic, Loretta J. Mester, Mark L. Mullinix, Trevor A. Reeve, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair,
Michael Strine, and John C. Williams, Alternate Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Joseph W. Gruber, David Reifschneider, and John M.
James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Roberts, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Board Members, Board of Governors
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively
Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
James A. Clouse, Secretary Board Members, Board of Governors
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Antulio N. Bomfim, Edward Nelson, Ellen E. Meade,
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary and Robert J. Tetlow, Senior Advisers, Division of
Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel
Steven B. Kamin, Economist Shaghil Ahmed, Associate Director, Division of
Thomas Laubach, Economist International Finance, Board of Governors;
David W. Wilcox, Economist Elizabeth Kiser, John J. Stevens, and Stacey Tevlin,
Associate Directors, Division of Research and
Thomas A. Connors, Michael Dotsey, Eric M. Engen, Statistics, Board of Governors; David López-
Evan F. Koenig, Daniel G. Sullivan, William Salido, Associate Director, Division of Monetary
Wascher, and Beth Anne Wilson, Associate Affairs, Board of Governors
Economists
Norman J. Morin and Shane M. Sherlund, Assistant
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Directors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the 2 Attended through the discussion of developments in finan-
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. cial markets and open market operations.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Eric C. Engstrom, Adviser, Division of Monetary tors that the Treasury Department would issue substan-
Affairs, and Adviser, Division of Research and tial volumes of shorter-term securities in meeting its fi-
Statistics, Board of Governors nancing needs over coming years.
The deputy manager discussed open market operations
Penelope A. Beattie,3 Assistant to the Secretary, Office
over the period. Take-up at the System’s overnight re-
of the Secretary, Board of Governors
verse repurchase (ON RRP) agreement facility dropped
to relatively low levels over the period. In part, the de-
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of
cline appeared to reflect an increase in yields on alterna-
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
tive investments; Treasury bill yields, for example, had
moved higher over recent weeks as the Treasury boosted
Cynthia L. Doniger, Senior Economist, Division of
net issuance of Treasury bills. The Open Market Desk
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
continued to execute reinvestment operations for Treas-
ury and agency securities in the SOMA in accordance
Randall A. Williams, Senior Information Manager,
with the procedure specified in the Committee’s di-
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
rective to the Desk. The deputy manager also provided
an update on plans for the Federal Reserve Bank of New
Kelly J. Dubbert, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
York, in conjunction with the Treasury’s Office of Fi-
Bank of Kansas City
nancial Research, to begin publishing reference interest
rates for repurchase agreements involving Treasury se-
David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Mary Daly, Beverly
curities by the middle of next year.
Hirtle, Geoffrey Tootell, and Christopher J. Waller,
Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
of Atlanta, Richmond, San Francisco, New York, domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.
Boston, and St. Louis, respectively There were no intervention operations in foreign curren-
cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe-
Todd E. Clark and Marc Giannoni, Senior Vice riod.
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
and Dallas, respectively
The information reviewed for the December 12–13
meeting indicated that labor market conditions contin-
Jonathan L. Willis, Vice President, Federal Reserve
ued to strengthen through November and suggested that
Bank of Kansas City
real gross domestic product (GDP) was rising at a solid
pace in the second half of 2017. Total consumer price
Benjamin Malin, Senior Research Economist, Federal
inflation, as measured by the 12-month percentage
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
change in the price index for personal consumption ex-
penditures (PCE), remained below 2 percent in October
Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- and was lower than early in the year. Survey-based
ket Operations measures of longer-run inflation expectations were little
The manager of the System Open Market Account changed on balance.
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and in-
Total nonfarm payroll employment increased strongly in
ternational financial markets over the intermeeting pe-
October and November, likely reflecting in part a re-
riod. Equity prices moved higher over the period, with
bound from the negative effects of the hurricanes in
market participants pointing to the likely passage of tax
September. The national unemployment rate declined
reform legislation as an important factor contributing to
to 4.1 percent in October and remained at that level in
the rise. The narrowing of the spread between long- and
November. The unemployment rates for Hispanics, for
short-term Treasury yields over recent months had been
Asians, and for whites were lower in November than
a focus of market attention. Market participants cited a
two months earlier, while the rate for African Americans
range of factors as contributing to this narrowing, in-
was a little higher; the unemployment rates for each of
cluding the gradual firming in the stance of monetary
these groups were close to the levels seen just before the
policy as well as an increasing expectation among inves-
most recent recession. The national labor force partici-
pation rate was lower in November than it had been in
3 Attended Tuesday session only.

--- Page 3 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r_ 1_2_–_1_3_, _2_0_17_______________________P_a_g_e_ _3
September but remained in the range seen over the past the near term. In addition, readings on business senti-
several years. The share of workers employed part time ment remained upbeat. Firms’ nominal spending for
for economic reasons declined in October and was nonresidential structures excluding drilling and mining
about unchanged in November. The rates of private- rose in October, and the number of oil and gas rigs in
sector job openings and quits were little changed at rela- operation—an indicator of spending for structures in
tively high levels in September and October, and the the drilling and mining sector—started to edge up in late
four-week moving average of initial claims for unem- November after declining earlier in the fourth quarter.
ployment insurance benefits continued to be at a low
Total real government purchases looked to be rising in
level in early December. Recent readings showed that
the fourth quarter. Nominal defense expenditures in
wage gains remained modest. Compensation per hour
October and November pointed to a flattening in real
in the nonfarm business sector increased 1 percent over
federal government purchases. However, real purchases
the four quarters ending in the third quarter, and average
by state and local governments appeared to be moving
hourly earnings for all employees rose 2½ percent over
up, as these governments expanded their payrolls mod-
the 12 months ending in November.
estly over the two months ending in November and their
Total industrial production increased briskly in October, nominal construction spending increased in October.
boosted in part by a continued return to more-normal
The nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened
operations that reflected the waning of the negative ef-
slightly in September and sharply in October. Exports
fects of recent hurricanes in the previous two months.
picked up in September, led by exports of industrial sup-
Automakers’ schedules indicated that light motor vehicle
plies, but were flat in October. Imports grew signifi-
assemblies would likely move up in the coming months.
cantly in both months, reflecting strength in most cate-
Broader indicators of manufacturing production, such as
gories, although imports of automobiles declined. The
the new orders indexes from national and regional man-
available trade data suggested that the change in real net
ufacturing surveys, pointed to further increases in fac-
exports would make a neutral contribution to real U.S.
tory output in the near term.
GDP growth in the fourth quarter.
Real PCE increased modestly in October after expand-
Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE
ing strongly in September. The pace of light motor ve-
price index, increased slightly more than 1½ percent
hicle sales slowed in November from the elevated rate in
over the 12 months ending in October. Core PCE price
the preceding two months but continued to be above
inflation, which excludes changes in consumer food and
levels seen earlier in the year. Recent readings on key
energy prices, was nearly 1½ percent over that same pe-
factors that influence consumer spending—including
riod. The consumer price index (CPI) rose 2¼ percent
gains in employment, real disposable personal income,
over the 12 months ending in November, while core CPI
and households’ net worth—continued to be supportive
inflation was 1¾ percent. Recent readings on survey-
of moderate real PCE growth in the fourth quarter.
based measures of longer-run inflation expectations—
Consumer sentiment in early December, as measured by
including those from the Michigan survey, the Survey of
the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, re-
Professional Forecasters, and the Desk’s Survey of Pri-
mained at a high level.
mary Dealers and Survey of Market Participants—were
Recent information on housing activity suggested that little changed on balance.
real residential investment spending was edging up in the
Economic activity expanded at a solid pace in most for-
fourth quarter after declining in the previous two quar-
eign economies in the third quarter. In several advanced
ters. Both starts and building permit issuance for new
foreign economies (AFEs), economic growth slowed
single-family homes increased somewhat in October,
but remained firm. Economic activity in the emerging
and starts for multifamily units moved up considerably.
market economies (EMEs) continued to grow briskly for
Sales of both new and existing homes rose moderately
the most part, especially in Asia. However, the Mexican
in October.
economy contracted in the third quarter, as hurricanes
Real private expenditures for business equipment and in- and earthquakes disrupted economic activity. Despite a
tellectual property appeared to be rising further in the boost from recent increases in oil prices, inflation re-
fourth quarter. Nominal shipments of nondefense cap- mained relatively subdued in most AFEs and moderate
ital goods excluding aircraft increased in October, and in EMEs.
new orders of these goods continued to exceed ship-
ments, which pointed to further gains in shipments in

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Staff Review of the Financial Situation Conditions in short-term funding markets remained sta-
Movements in domestic financial asset prices over the ble over the intermeeting period. The effective federal
intermeeting period reflected slightly stronger-than- funds rate held steady, and rates and volumes in other
expected economic data releases, announcements re- overnight markets were little changed. Take-up of ON
lated to Treasury debt issuance, and an increase in the RRPs declined notably as Treasury bill supply continued
perceived probability that the Congress would enact tax to increase, and short-dated bill yields rose to levels sig-
legislation. On net, the Treasury yield curve flattened, nificantly above the ON RRP offering rate. On Decem-
U.S. equity prices moved up, and the foreign exchange ber 11, the Treasury declared a debt issuance suspension
value of the dollar was little changed. Financing condi- period to keep outstanding federal debt below the debt
tions for businesses and households remained broadly ceiling and began to use extraordinary measures to allow
supportive of continued growth in household spending continued financing of government operations.
and business investment.
Financing conditions for large nonfinancial corporations
Federal Reserve communications and economic data re- continued to be accommodative on balance. Gross is-
leases over the intermeeting period were characterized suance of corporate bonds and gross equity issuance re-
by market participants as reinforcing perceptions of a mained robust. Institutional leveraged loan issuance in
likely increase in the target range for the federal funds November was brisk. Growth of bank-intermediated
rate at the December meeting. The probability of an in- credit to nonfinancial firms, however, was tepid. On
crease as implied by quotes on federal funds futures con- balance, the credit quality of nonfinancial corporations
tracts edged up to around 95 percent, roughly consistent was little changed over the intermeeting period and ap-
with the average probability indicated by responses to peared to remain solid. Financing conditions for small
the Desk’s surveys of primary dealers and market partic- businesses also appeared to have remained favorable. In
ipants in December. municipal bond markets, gross issuance was strong and
credit quality remained stable.
The nominal Treasury yield curve flattened over the in-
termeeting period, as short-dated Treasury yields rose In commercial real estate (CRE) markets, spreads of
and the 10-year Treasury yield moved up only slightly. commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) yields
Market participants pointed to the November 1 release over comparable-maturity Treasury yields remained near
of the Treasury’s quarterly financing statement and ac- the lower end of the range seen since the financial crisis,
companying analysis by the Treasury Borrowing Advi- and delinquency rates on loans in CMBS pools contin-
sory Committee that highlighted some advantages of in- ued to decrease. The growth of CRE loans held by the
creasing issuance of relatively short-dated Treasury se- largest banks continued to slow, while CRE loan growth
curities as factors contributing to the flattening of the at smaller banks remained strong overall and even
yield curve over the period. Measures of inflation com- picked up a bit in October.
pensation based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securi-
In the residential mortgage market, although credit
ties were little changed, on net, over the intermeeting pe-
standards had loosened gradually for borrowers with low
riod. Option-adjusted spreads of yields on current-
credit scores, they continued to be tight for borrowers
coupon mortgage-backed securities (MBS) over Treas-
with low credit scores and hard-to-document incomes.
ury yields also were little changed. Overall, market par-
Mortgage credit remained readily available for borrowers
ticipants did not attribute any price changes in Treasury
with strong credit scores. Similarly, consumer credit re-
and agency MBS markets to the implementation of re-
mained readily available to borrowers with strong credit
ductions in reinvestments of the SOMA portfolio.
histories, but conditions for subprime borrowers stayed
Broad equity price indexes rose over the intermeeting tight in credit card markets and continued to tighten for
period, likely reflecting in part investors’ perceptions of auto loans. Issuance of asset-backed securities (ABS)
increased odds for the passage of federal tax legislation funding consumer loans was robust in recent months,
and an associated potential boost to corporate earnings. and ABS spreads were about unchanged over the inter-
One-month-ahead option-implied volatility on the meeting period.
S&P 500 index—the VIX—was little changed, on net, at
On balance, the broad index of the foreign exchange
levels close to historical lows. Spreads on both invest-
value of the dollar was little changed, longer-term sover-
ment- and speculative-grade corporate bond yields over
eign bond yields in AFEs declined modestly, and most
comparable-maturity Treasury yields were about flat on
foreign equity indexes moved lower over the intermeet-
net.
ing period. The euro appreciated modestly against the
U.S. dollar, in part because of strong economic data for

--- Page 5 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r_ 1_2_–_1_3_, _2_0_17_______________________P_a_g_e_ _5
the euro area early in the intermeeting period. The Brit- the other hand, considerable uncertainty remained about
ish pound was somewhat volatile amid Brexit-related de- a number of federal government policies relevant for the
velopments, and the Mexican peso fluctuated on news economic outlook. The staff saw the risks to the fore-
about negotiations associated with the North American casts for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate
Free Trade Agreement, but both currencies ended the as balanced. The risks to the projection for inflation also
period little changed. Following missed interest pay- were seen as balanced. Downside risks to inflation in-
ments on its sovereign bonds, Venezuela was assigned cluded the possibility that longer-term inflation expecta-
selective default status by two credit rating agencies in tions may move lower or that the run of soft core infla-
early November, which precipitated a “credit event” rul- tion readings this year could prove to be more persistent
ing by the International Swaps and Derivatives Associa- than the staff expected. These downside risks were seen
tion. However, developments related to Venezuela gen- as essentially counterbalanced by the upside risk that in-
erated little spillover to global financial markets. flation could increase more than expected in an econ-
omy that was projected to move further above its poten-
Staff Economic Outlook
tial.
The U.S. economic projection prepared by the staff for
the December FOMC meeting was generally compara- Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
ble with the staff’s previous forecast. Real GDP was Economic Outlook
forecast to have increased at a solid pace in the second In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of
half of 2017. Beyond 2017, the forecast for real GDP the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank pres-
growth was revised up modestly, reflecting the staff’s up- idents submitted their projections of the most likely out-
dated assumption that the reduction in federal income comes for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate,
taxes expected to begin next year would be larger than and inflation for each year from 2017 through 2020 and
assumed in the previous projection. The staff projected over the longer run, based on their individual assess-
that real GDP would increase at a modestly faster pace ments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate.4
than potential output through 2019. The unemployment The longer-run projections represented each partici-
rate was projected to decline further over the next few pant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable
years and to continue running below the staff’s slightly would be expected to converge, over time, under appro-
downward-revised estimate of the longer-run natural priate monetary policy and in the absence of further
rate over this period. shocks to the economy. These projections and policy
assessments are described in the Summary of Economic
The staff’s forecast for total PCE price inflation was re-
Projections (SEP), which is an addendum to these
vised up a little for 2017, as somewhat higher forecasts
minutes.
for core PCE prices and for consumer energy prices
were offset only partially by a lower forecast for con- In their discussion of economic conditions and the out-
sumer food prices. Total PCE price inflation in 2018 look, meeting participants agreed that information re-
was projected to be about the same as in 2017, despite ceived since the FOMC met in November indicated that
projected declines in consumer energy prices; core PCE economic activity had been rising at a solid rate and that
prices were forecast to rise faster in 2018, reflecting the the labor market had continued to strengthen. Averag-
expected waning of transitory factors that held down ing through fluctuations associated with the recent hur-
those prices in 2017. Beyond 2018, the inflation forecast ricanes, job gains had been solid and the unemployment
was little changed from the previous projection. The rate had declined further. Household spending had been
staff projected that inflation would be very close to the expanding at a moderate rate, and growth in business
Committee’s 2 percent objective in 2019 and at that ob- fixed investment had picked up in recent quarters. On a
jective in 2020. 12-month basis, both overall inflation and inflation for
items other than food and energy had declined this year
The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections
and were running below 2 percent. Market-based
for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla-
measures of inflation compensation remained low;
tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years. On
survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expecta-
the one hand, many indicators of uncertainty about the
tions were little changed, on balance.
macroeconomic outlook continued to be subdued; on
4 The incoming president of the Federal Reserve Bank of projections for this meeting. One participant did not submit
Richmond is scheduled to assume office on January 1, 2018; longer-run projections for real output growth, the unemploy-
First Vice President Mark L. Mullinix submitted economic ment rate, or the federal funds rate.

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Real economic activity appeared to be growing at a solid boost to capital spending, although the magnitude of the
pace, buttressed by gains in consumer and business effects was uncertain. The resulting increase in the cap-
spending, supportive financial conditions, and an im- ital stock could contribute to positive supply-side effects,
proving global economy. Participants judged that including an expansion of potential output over the next
hurricane-related disruptions and rebuilding had af- few years. However, some business contacts and re-
fected economic activity, employment, and inflation in spondents to business surveys suggested that firms were
recent months but had not materially altered the outlook cautious about expanding capital spending in response
for the national economy. They saw the incoming infor- to the proposed tax changes or noted that the increase
mation on spending and the labor market as consistent in cash flow that would result from corporate tax cuts
with continued above-trend growth and a further was more likely to be used for mergers and acquisitions
strengthening in labor market conditions. Conse- or for debt reduction and stock buybacks.
quently, participants continued to expect that, with grad-
Labor market conditions continued to strengthen in re-
ual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, eco-
cent months, with the unemployment rate declining fur-
nomic activity would expand at a moderate pace and la-
ther and payroll gains well above a pace consistent with
bor market conditions would remain strong. Inflation
maintaining a stable unemployment rate over time.
on a 12-month basis was expected to remain somewhat
Other indicators, such as consumer and business surveys
below 2 percent in the near term but to stabilize around
of job availability and job openings, also pointed to a
the Committee’s 2 percent objective over the medium
further tightening in labor market conditions. A couple
term. Near-term risks to the economic outlook ap-
of participants noted that broad improvements in labor
peared to be roughly balanced, but participants agreed
market conditions over the past several years were evi-
that it would be important to continue to monitor infla-
dent across demographic groups. In several Districts,
tion developments closely.
reports from business contacts or evidence from surveys
Participants expected moderate growth in consumer pointed to some difficulty in finding qualified workers;
spending in the near term, underpinned by ongoing in some cases, labor shortages were making it hard to fill
strength in the labor market, further improvements in customer demand or expand business. A few partici-
households’ net worth, and buoyant consumer senti- pants noted that a reduction in personal tax rates could
ment. Business contacts in a few Districts reported potentially increase labor supply, but the magnitude of
strong pre-holiday sales. Many participants expected the such effects was quite uncertain.
proposed cuts in personal taxes to provide some boost
Against the backdrop of the continued strengthening in
to consumer spending. A few participants noted that
labor market conditions, participants discussed recent
expectations of tax reform may have already raised con-
wage developments. Overall, the pace of wage increases
sumer spending somewhat to the extent that those ex-
had generally been modest and in line with inflation and
pectations had spurred increases in asset valuations and
productivity growth. In some Districts, reports from
household net worth. A number of participants ex-
business contacts or evidence from surveys pointed to a
pressed uncertainty about the magnitude of the effects
pickup in wage gains, particularly for unskilled or entry-
of tax reform on consumer spending.
level workers. In a couple of regions, businesses facing
District contacts were optimistic, and their reports were tight labor market conditions were said to be offering
generally consistent with continued steady growth in more flexible work arrangements or taking advantage of
business spending. Reports from District contacts technology to use employees more efficiently, rather
about both the manufacturing and service sectors were than raising wages. A few participants judged that the
generally positive. In contrast, reports on housing and tightness in labor markets was likely to translate into an
nonresidential construction were mixed. Activity in the acceleration in wages; however, another observed that
energy sector continued to firm, with transportation bot- the absence of broad-based upward wage pressures sug-
tlenecks and residual effects of the hurricanes putting gested that there might be scope for further improve-
some upward pressure on gasoline prices. In the agri- ment in labor market conditions.
cultural sector, farm income was under downward pres-
PCE price inflation over the 12 months ending in Octo-
sure due to low crop prices, and contacts expressed con-
ber, at 1.6 percent, continued to run below the Commit-
cern about the effects of the possible renegotiation of
tee’s longer-run objective of 2 percent; core PCE price
trade agreements on exports.
inflation for items other than consumer food and energy
Many participants judged that the proposed changes in prices was only 1.4 percent over the same period. It was
business taxes, if enacted, would likely provide a modest noted that recent readings on monthly inflation had

--- Page 7 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r_ 1_2_–_1_3_, _2_0_17_______________________P_a_g_e_ _7
edged up, and a couple of participants observed that of the longer-run neutral real interest rate, lower longer-
core inflation on a year-over-year basis appeared to be term inflation expectations, and lower term premiums.
stabilizing. Many indicated that they expected cyclical They generally agreed that the current degree of flatness
pressures associated with a tightening labor market to of the yield curve was not unusual by historical stand-
show through to higher inflation over the medium term. ards. However, several participants thought that it
These participants generally judged that much of the would be important to continue to monitor the slope of
softness in core inflation this year reflected transitory the yield curve. Some expressed concern that a possible
factors and that inflation would begin to rise as the in- future inversion of the yield curve, with short-term yields
fluence of these factors waned. However, one of them rising above those on longer-term Treasury securities,
noted that secular trends, such as technological innova- could portend an economic slowdown, noting that in-
tion or globalization, could be affecting competition and versions have preceded recessions over the past several
business pricing, and muting inflationary pressures. decades, or that a protracted yield curve inversion could
With core inflation readings having moved down this adversely affect the financial condition of banks and
year and remaining well below 2 percent, some partici- other financial institutions and pose risks to financial sta-
pants observed that there was a possibility that inflation bility. A couple of other participants viewed the flatten-
might stay below the objective for longer than they cur- ing of the yield curve as an expected consequence of in-
rently expected. Several of them expressed concern that creases in the Committee’s target range for the federal
persistently weak inflation may have led to a decline in funds rate, and judged that a yield curve inversion under
longer-term inflation expectations; they pointed to low such circumstances would not necessarily foreshadow or
market-based measures of inflation compensation, de- cause an economic downturn. It was also noted that
clines in some survey measures of inflation expectations, contacts in the financial sector generally did not express
or evidence from statistical models suggesting that the concern about the recent flattening of the term structure.
underlying trend in inflation had fallen in recent years.
In their discussion of monetary policy, participants saw
A few participants, however, noted that measures of in-
the outlook for economic activity and the labor market
flation expectations had remained broadly stable this
as having remained strong or having strengthened since
year despite the low readings on inflation and judged that
their previous meeting, in part reflecting a modest boost
this stability should support the return of inflation to the
from the expected passage of the tax legislation under
Committee’s 2 percent objective.
consideration. Regarding inflation, participants gener-
With regard to financial markets, some participants ob- ally viewed the medium-term outlook as little changed,
served that financial conditions remained accommoda- and a majority commented that they continued to expect
tive, citing a range of indicators including low interest inflation to gradually return to the Committee’s 2 per-
rates, narrow credit spreads, high equity values, a lower cent longer-run objective. A few participants again
dollar, and some evidence of easier terms for lending to noted that transitory factors had likely held down infla-
risky borrowers. In light of elevated asset valuations and tion earlier this year. However, several participants ob-
low financial market volatility, a couple of participants served that survey-based measures of inflation expecta-
expressed concern that the persistence of highly accom- tions or market-based measures of inflation compensa-
modative financial conditions could, over time, pose tion remained low, or that other persistent factors may
risks to financial stability. Participants also noted that be holding down inflation, which would present chal-
term premiums on longer-term nominal Treasury secu- lenges for the Committee in promoting a return of infla-
rities remained low. A number of factors were seen as tion to 2 percent over the medium term.
possibly contributing to the low levels of term premi-
Based on their current assessments, almost all partici-
ums, including large holdings of longer-term assets by
pants expressed the view that it would be appropriate for
major central banks, persistently low global inflation,
the Committee to raise the target range for the federal
and substantial global demand for assets with long dura-
funds rate 25 basis points at this meeting. These partic-
tions.
ipants agreed that, even after an increase in the target
Meeting participants also discussed the recent narrowing range at this meeting, the stance of monetary policy
of the gap between the yields on long- and short- would remain accommodative, supporting strong labor
maturity nominal Treasury securities, which had resulted market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent
in a flatter profile of the term structure of interest rates. inflation. A couple of participants did not believe it was
Among the factors contributing to the flattening, partic- appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds
ipants pointed to recent increases in the target range for rate at this meeting; these participants suggested that the
the federal funds rate, reductions in investors’ estimates Committee should maintain the target range at 1 to

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
1¼ percent until the actual rate of inflation had moved study of potential alternative frameworks for the con-
further toward the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run duct of monetary policy such as price-level targeting or
objective or inflation expectations had increased. They nominal GDP targeting could be useful.
judged that leaving the target range at its current level
Committee Policy Action
would better support an increase in inflation expecta-
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
tions and thereby increase the likelihood that inflation
ahead, members judged that information received since
will rise to 2 percent.
the Committee met in November indicated that the la-
Regarding the determination of the appropriate timing bor market had continued to strengthen and that eco-
and size of future adjustments to the target range for the nomic activity had been rising at a solid rate. Averaging
federal funds rate, participants reaffirmed the need to through hurricane-related fluctuations, job gains had
continue to assess realized and expected economic con- been solid, and the unemployment rate had declined fur-
ditions. Most participants reiterated their support for ther. Household spending had been expanding at a
continuing a gradual approach to raising the target range, moderate rate, and growth in business fixed investment
noting that this approach helped to balance risks to the had picked up in recent quarters. On a 12-month basis,
outlook for economic activity and inflation. Participants both overall inflation and inflation for items other than
discussed several risks that, if realized, could necessitate food and energy had declined for the year to date and
a steeper path of increases in the target range; these risks were running below 2 percent. Market-based measures
included the possibility that inflation pressures could of inflation compensation had remained low; survey-
build unduly if output expanded well beyond its maxi- based measures of longer-term inflation expectations
mum sustainable level, perhaps owing to fiscal stimulus had changed little, on balance.
or accommodative financial market conditions. Partici-
Members acknowledged that hurricane-related disrup-
pants also discussed risks that could lead to a flatter tra-
tions and rebuilding had affected economic activity, em-
jectory for the federal funds rate in the medium term,
ployment, and inflation in recent months but had not
including a failure of actual or expected inflation to
materially altered the outlook for the national economy.
move up to the Committee’s 2 percent objective. While
They continued to expect that, with gradual adjustments
participants generally saw the risks to the economic out-
in the stance of monetary policy, economic activity
look as roughly balanced, they agreed that inflation de-
would expand at a moderate pace and labor market con-
velopments should be monitored closely. A few partic-
ditions would remain strong. Members expected infla-
ipants indicated that they were not comfortable with the
tion on a 12-month basis to remain somewhat below
degree of additional policy tightening through the end of
2 percent in the near term. They also expected inflation
2018 implied by the median projections for the federal
to stabilize around the Committee’s 2 percent objective
funds rate in the December SEP. They expressed con-
over the medium term, but a couple of members ex-
cern that such a path of increases in the policy rate, while
pressed concern about whether inflation would return to
gradual, might prove inconsistent with a sustained return
2 percent on a sustained basis in the medium term if the
of inflation to 2 percent, or that the level of the federal
Committee increased the target range for the federal
funds rate might already be near its current neutral value.
funds rate at the pace that is implied by the medians of
A few other participants mentioned that they saw as ap-
the projections from the December SEP. Members saw
propriate a pace of additional policy tightening through
the near-term risks to the economic outlook as roughly
the end of 2018 that was somewhat faster than that im-
balanced, but they agreed to monitor inflation develop-
plied by the December SEP median forecast. They
ments closely.
noted that financial conditions had not materially tight-
ened since the removal of monetary policy accommoda- After assessing current conditions and the outlook for
tion began, that continued low interest rates risked fi- economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, nearly
nancial instability in the future, or that the labor market all members agreed to raise the target range for the fed-
was increasingly tight. A couple of participants noted eral funds rate to 1¼ to 1½ percent. These members
the need to continue to monitor and evaluate the effects noted that the stance of monetary policy remains accom-
of balance sheet normalization on long-term interest modative, thereby supporting strong labor market con-
rates and economic performance. ditions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation.
Two members preferred to leave the target range at 1 to
Due to the persistent shortfall of inflation from the
1¼ percent, suggesting that the Committee should wait
Committee’s 2 percent objective, or the risk that mone-
to raise the target range until inflation moves up closer
tary policy could again become constrained by the zero
lower bound, a few participants suggested that further

--- Page 9 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r_ 1_2_–_1_3_, _2_0_17_______________________P_a_g_e_ _9
to 2 percent on a sustained basis or inflation expecta- Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and
tions increase. agency mortgage-backed securities received
during December that exceeds $4 billion. Ef-
Members agreed that the timing and size of future ad-
fective in January, the Committee directs the
justments to the target range for the federal funds rate
Desk to roll over at auction the amount of prin-
would depend on their assessments of realized and ex-
cipal payments from the Federal Reserve’s hold-
pected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s
ings of Treasury securities maturing during each
objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent in-
calendar month that exceeds $12 billion, and to
flation. They noted that their assessments would take
reinvest in agency mortgage-backed securities
into account a wide range of information, including
the amount of principal payments from the
measures of labor market conditions, indicators of infla-
Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency debt and
tion pressures and inflation expectations, and readings
agency mortgage-backed securities received
on financial and international developments. Members
during each calendar month that exceeds $8 bil-
agreed that their assessments would also take into ac-
lion. Small deviations from these amounts for
count actual and expected inflation developments rela-
operational reasons are acceptable.
tive to the Committee’s symmetric inflation goal. Al-
most all members reaffirmed their expectation that eco- The Committee also directs the Desk to engage
nomic conditions would evolve in a manner that would in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
warrant gradual increases in the federal funds rate, and necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal
that the federal funds rate would be likely to remain, for Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities
some time, below levels that were expected to prevail in transactions.”
the longer run. Nonetheless, members reiterated that
The vote also encompassed approval of the statement
the actual path of the federal funds rate would depend
below to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data.
“Information received since the Federal Open
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
Market Committee met in November indicates
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
that the labor market has continued to
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to
strengthen and that economic activity has been
execute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with
rising at a solid rate. Averaging through
the following domestic policy directive, to be released at
hurricane-related fluctuations, job gains have
2:00 p.m.:
been solid, and the unemployment rate declined
“Effective December 14, 2017, the Federal further. Household spending has been expand-
Open Market Committee directs the Desk to ing at a moderate rate, and growth in business
undertake open market operations as necessary fixed investment has picked up in recent quar-
to maintain the federal funds rate in a target ters. On a 12-month basis, both overall infla-
range of 1¼ to 1½ percent, including overnight tion and inflation for items other than food and
reverse repurchase operations (and reverse re- energy have declined this year and are running
purchase operations with maturities of more below 2 percent. Market-based measures of in-
than one day when necessary to accommodate flation compensation remain low; survey-based
weekend, holiday, or similar trading conven- measures of longer-term inflation expectations
tions) at an offering rate of 1.25 percent, in are little changed, on balance.
amounts limited only by the value of Treasury
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
securities held outright in the System Open
mittee seeks to foster maximum employment
Market Account that are available for such op-
and price stability. Hurricane-related disrup-
erations and by a per-counterparty limit of
tions and rebuilding have affected economic ac-
$30 billion per day.
tivity, employment, and inflation in recent
The Committee directs the Desk to continue months but have not materially altered the out-
rolling over at auction the amount of principal look for the national economy. Consequently,
payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings the Committee continues to expect that, with
of Treasury securities maturing during Decem- gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary
ber that exceeds $6 billion, and to continue re- policy, economic activity will expand at a mod-
investing in agency mortgage-backed securities erate pace and labor market conditions will re-
the amount of principal payments from the main strong. Inflation on a 12‐month basis is

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
expected to remain somewhat below 2 percent Messrs. Evans and Kashkari dissented because they pre-
in the near term but to stabilize around the ferred to maintain the existing target range for the fed-
Committee’s 2 percent objective over the me- eral funds rate at this meeting.
dium term. Near-term risks to the economic
In Mr. Evans’s view, with inflation continuing to run
outlook appear roughly balanced, but the Com-
substantially below 2 percent and measures of inflation
mittee is monitoring inflation developments
expectations lower than he believed to be consistent
closely.
with a symmetric 2 percent inflation objective, it was im-
In view of realized and expected labor market portant to pause in the process of policy normalization.
conditions and inflation, the Committee de- Leaving the target range at 1 to 1¼ percent for a time
cided to raise the target range for the federal would better support an increase in inflation expecta-
funds rate to 1¼ to 1½ percent. The stance of tions, increase the likelihood that inflation will rise to
monetary policy remains accommodative, 2 percent and perhaps modestly beyond, and thus pro-
thereby supporting strong labor market condi- vide more support for the symmetry of the Committee’s
tions and a sustained return to 2 percent infla- inflation objective. Such a pause also would better allow
tion. the Committee time to assess the degree to which earlier
soft readings on inflation were transitory or more persis-
In determining the timing and size of future ad-
tent.
justments to the target range for the federal
funds rate, the Committee will assess realized In Mr. Kashkari’s view, while employment growth re-
and expected economic conditions relative to its mained strong, wage growth had not picked up and in-
objectives of maximum employment and 2 per- flation remained notably below the Committee’s 2 per-
cent inflation. This assessment will take into ac- cent target. In addition, the yield curve had flattened as
count a wide range of information, including long-term rates had not moved higher even though the
measures of labor market conditions, indicators Committee raised the federal funds rate target range. He
of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, was concerned that the flattening yield curve was partly
and readings on financial and international de- due to falling longer-term inflation expectations or a
velopments. The Committee will carefully lower neutral real rate of interest. He preferred to wait
monitor actual and expected inflation develop- for inflation to move closer to 2 percent on a sustained
ments relative to its symmetric inflation goal. basis or for inflation expectations to move up before fur-
The Committee expects that economic condi- ther raising the target range for the federal funds rate.
tions will evolve in a manner that will warrant
To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target
gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the
range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors
federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some
voted unanimously to raise the interest rates on required
time, below levels that are expected to prevail in
and excess reserve balances ¼ percentage point, to
the longer run. However, the actual path of the
1½ percent, effective December 14, 2017. The Board of
federal funds rate will depend on the economic
Governors also voted unanimously to approve a ¼ per-
outlook as informed by incoming data.”
centage point increase in the primary credit rate (dis-
Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C. count rate) to 2 percent, effective December 14, 2017.5
Dudley, Lael Brainard, Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan,
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
Jerome H. Powell, and Randal K. Quarles.
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, January 30–31,
Voting against this action: Charles L. Evans and Neel 2018. The meeting adjourned at 10:15 a.m. on
Kashkari. December 13, 2017.
5 In taking this action, the Board approved requests submitted of the Board of such a request. (Secretary’s note: Subse-
by the boards of directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of quently, the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, St. Louis, and
Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, At- Minneapolis were informed by the Secretary of the Board of
lanta, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco. This vote also the Board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit
encompassed approval by the Board of Governors of the es- rate of 2 percent, effective December 14, 2017.) The second
tablishment of a 2 percent primary credit rate by the remaining vote of the Board also encompassed approval of the establish-
Federal Reserve Banks, effective on the later of December 14, ment of the interest rates for secondary and seasonal credit
2017, and the date such Reserve Banks informed the Secretary under the existing formulas for computing such rates.

--- Page 11 ---

____________________________M_i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ _th_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ D__e_c_em__b_e_r_ 1_2_–_1_3_, _2_0_17______________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Notation Vote
By notation vote completed on November 21, 2017, the
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
Committee meeting held on October 31–November 1,
2017.
_____________________________
James A. Clouse
Secretary

--- Page 12 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- close to that objective by 2019. Most participants indi-
tee (FOMC) meeting held on December 12–13, 2017, cated that prospective changes in federal tax policy were
meeting participants submitted their projections of the a factor that led them to boost their projections of real
most likely outcomes for real gross domestic product GDP growth over the next couple of years; some partic-
(GDP) growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation for ipants, however, noted that they had already incorpo-
each year from 2017 to 2020 and over the longer run.1 rated at least some effects of future tax cuts in their Sep-
Each participant’s projection was based on information tember projections. Several also noted the possibility
available at the time of the meeting, together with his or that changes to tax policy could raise the level of poten-
her assessment of appropriate monetary policy—includ- tial GDP in the longer run.3 Table 1 and figure 1 pro-
ing a path for the federal funds rate and its longer-run vide summary statistics for the projections.
value—and assumptions about other factors likely to af-
As shown in figure 2, participants generally expected
fect economic outcomes. The longer-run projections
that the evolution of the economy relative to their ob-
represent each participant’s assessment of the value to
jectives of maximum employment and 2 percent infla-
which each variable would be expected to converge, over
tion would likely warrant further gradual increases in the
time, under appropriate monetary policy and in the ab-
federal funds rate. Compared with the projections they
sence of further shocks to the economy.2 “Appropriate
submitted in September, some participants raised their
monetary policy” is defined as the future path of policy
federal funds rate projections for 2018 and 2019, while
that each participant deems most likely to foster out-
several others lowered their projections, leaving the me-
comes for economic activity and inflation that best sat-
dian projection for the federal funds rate in those years
isfy his or her individual interpretation of the statutory
unchanged; the median projection for 2020 was slightly
mandate to promote maximum employment and price
higher, and the median projection for the longer-run
stability.
normal level of the federal funds rate was unchanged.
All participants who submitted longer-run projections Nearly all participants saw it as likely to be appropriate
expected that, under appropriate monetary policy, for the federal funds rate to rise above their estimates of
growth in real GDP in 2018 would be somewhat its longer-run normal level at some point during the
stronger than their individual estimates of its longer-run forecast period. Participants generally noted several
rate. All participants projected that real GDP growth sources of uncertainty about the future course of the
would moderate in 2019, and nearly all predicted that it federal funds rate, including the details of potential
would ease further in 2020; a solid majority of partici- changes in tax policy, how those changes would affect
pants thought that growth in real GDP would be at or the economy, and the range of factors influencing infla-
close to their individual estimates of the economy’s tion over the medium term.
longer-run growth rate by 2020. All participants who
In general, participants viewed the uncertainty attached
submitted longer-run projections expected that the un-
to their economic projections as broadly similar to the
employment rate would run below their estimates of its
average of the past 20 years, and all participants saw the
longer-run normal level through 2020. Participants gen-
uncertainty associated with their projections for real
erally projected that inflation, as measured by the four-
GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation as
quarter percentage change in the price index for personal
essentially unchanged from September. As in Septem-
consumption expenditures (PCE), would step up toward
the Committee’s 2 percent objective in 2018 and be at or
1 Four members of the Board of Governors were in office at Mullinix submitted economic projections at this meeting as he
the time of the December 2017 meeting, the same number as did in September.
in September 2017. However, since the September meeting, 2 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for
one member, Stanley Fischer, resigned from the Board and real output growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal
another, Randal K. Quarles, joined. The incoming president funds rate.
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond is scheduled to as- 3 Participants completed their submissions for the Summary
sume office on January 1, 2018; First Vice President Mark L. of Economic Projections before the reconciliation of the
House and Senate tax bills in the Congress.

--- Page 13 ---

,stnediserp
knaB
evreseR
laredeF
dna
srebmem
draoB
evreseR
laredeF
fo
snoitcejorp
cimonocE
.1
elbaT
7102
rebmeceD
,ycilop
yratenom
etairporppa
detcejorp
fo
stnemssessa
laudividni
rieht
rednu
tnecreP
3egnaR
2ycnednetlartneC
1naideM
regnoL
0202
9102
8102
7102
regnoL
0202
9102
8102
7102
regnoL
0202
9102
8102
7102
elbairaV
nur
nur
nur
2.2–7.1
2.2–1.1
4.2–7.1
8.2–2.2
6.2–4.2
9.1–8.1
0.2–7.1
3.2–9.1
6.2–2.2
5.2–4.2
8.1
0.2
1.2
5.2
5.2
PDGlaerniegnahC
2.2–5.1
0.2–4.1
3.2–4.1
6.2–7.1
7.2–2.2
0.2–8.1
0.2–6.1
1.2–7.1
3.2–0.2
5.2–2.2
8.1
8.1
0.2
1.2
4.2
noitcejorprebmetpeS
0.5–3.4
5.4–5.3
2.4–5.3
0.4–6.3
1.4
7.4–4.4
2.4–6.3
0.4–6.3
0.4–7.3
1.4
6.4
0.4
9.3
9.3
1.4
etartnemyolpmenU
0.5–4.4
8.4–8.3
5.4–8.3
5.4–9.3
5.4–2.4
8.4–5.4
5.4–0.4
4.4–9.3
2.4–0.4
3.4–2.4
6.4
2.4
1.4
1.4
3.4
noitcejorprebmetpeS
0.2
2.2–9.1
3.2–8.1
1.2–7.1
7.1–5.1
0.2
1.2–0.2
0.2
9.1–7.1
7.1–6.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
9.1
7.1
noitaflniECP
0.2
2.2–9.1
2.2–8.1
0.2–7.1
7.1–5.1
0.2
1.2–0.2
0.2
0.2–8.1
6.1–5.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
9.1
6.1
noitcejorprebmetpeS
3.2–9.1
3.2–8.1
0.2–7.1
5.1–4.1
1.2–0.2
0.2
9.1–7.1
5.1
0.2
0.2
9.1
5.1
4noitaflniECPeroC
2.2–9.1
2.2–8.1
0.2–7.1
7.1–4.1
1.2–0.2
0.2
0.2–8.1
6.1–5.1
0.2
0.2
9.1
5.1
noitcejorprebmetpeS
detcejorP:omeM
htapycilopetairporppa
0.3–3.2
1.4–4.1
6.3–4.1
6.2–1.1
4.1–1.1
0.3–8.2
1.3–6.2
1.3–4.2
4.2–9.1
4.1
8.2
1.3
7.2
1.2
4.1
etarsdnuflaredeF
5.3–3.2
9.3–1.1
4.3–1.1
6.2–1.1
6.1–1.1
0.3–5.2
5.3–5.2
1.3–4.2
4.2–9.1
4.1–1.1
8.2
9.2
7.2
1.2
4.1
noitcejorprebmetpeS
suoiverp
eht
fo
retrauq
htruof
eht
morf
segnahc
tnecrep
era
noitaflni
fo
serusaem
htob
rof
snoitcejorp
dna
)PDG(
tcudorp
citsemod
ssorg
laer
ni
egnahc
fo
snoitcejorP
:etoN
noitpmusnoclanosreprofxedniecirpeht,ylevitcepser
,niegnahcfosetaregatnecrepehteranoitaflniECPerocdnanoitaflniECP
.detacidniraeyehtforetrauqhtruofehtotraey
htruof
eht
ni
etar
tnemyolpmenu
nailivic
egareva
eht
rof
era
etar
tnemyolpmenu
eht
rof
snoitcejorP
.ygrene
dna
doof
gnidulcxe
ECP
rof
xedni
ecirp
eht
dna
)ECP(
serutidnepxe
s’tnapicitraphcaetneserpersnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.ycilopyratenometairporppafotnemssessarehrosihnodesaberasnoitcejorps’tnapicitraphcaE
.detacidniraeyehtforetrauq
snoitcejorpehT
.ymonoceehtotskcohsrehtruffoecnesbaehtnidnaycilopyratenometairporpparednuegrevnocotdetcepxeebdluowelbairavhcaehcihwotetarehtfotnemssessa
sdnuflaredefehtrofleveltegratetairporppadetcejorpehtroetarsdnuflaredefehtrofegnartegratetairporppadetcejorpehtfotniopdimehtfoeulavehteraetarsdnuflaredefehtrof eettimmoCtekraMnepOlaredeFehtfogniteemehthtiwnoitcnujnocniedamerewsnoitcejorprebmetpeSehT
.nurregnolehtrevororaeyradnelacdefiicepsehtfodneehttaetar
htiwnoitcnujnocnietarsdnuflaredefehtro,etartnemyolpmenueht,PDGlaerniegnahcehtrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoltimbustondidtnapicitrapenO
.7102,02–91rebmetpeSno
.gniteem,7102,31–21rebmeceDehthtiwnoitcnujnocnisnoitcejorphcustimbustondidtnapicitrapenodna,gniteem,7102,02–91rebmetpeSeht
eht
si
naidem
eht
,neve
si
snoitcejorp
fo
rebmun
eht
nehW
.tsehgih
ot
tsewol
morf
degnarra
era
snoitcejorp
eht
nehw
noitcejorp
elddim
eht
si
naidem
eht
,doirep
hcae
roF
.1
.snoitcejorpelddimowtehtfoegareva
.raeyhcaenielbairavhcaerofsnoitcejorptsewoleerhtdnatsehgiheerhtehtsedulcxeycnednetlartnecehT
.2
.raeytahtnielbairavtahtrof,tsehgihottsewolmorf,snoitcejorp’stnapicitrapllasedulcniraeyneviganielbairavarofegnarehT
.3
.detcelloctoneranoitaflniECPerocrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.4
_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________

--- Page 14 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _12_–_1_3_,_ 2_0_1_7____________P_a_g_e_ _3
Figure1. Medians,centraltendencies,andrangesofeconomicprojections,2017–20andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections 3
2
Actual 1
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
8
7
6
5
4
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesof
thevariablesareannual.

--- Page 15 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure2. FOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy: Midpointoftargetrangeortargetlevelfor
thefederalfundsrate
Percent
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer run
Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual par-
ticipant’sjudgmentofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfundsrateortheappropriatetarget
levelforthefederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun. Oneparticipantdidnot
submitlonger-runprojectionsforthefederalfundsrate.

--- Page 16 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _12_–_1_3_,_ 2_0_1_7____________P_a_g_e_ _5
ber, most participants judged the risks around their pro- bit below 2 percent in 2018, and only one participant ex-
jections for economic growth, the unemployment rate, pected inflation above 2 percent that year. A majority of
and inflation as broadly balanced. participants projected that inflation would be equal to
the Committee’s objective in 2019 and 2020. Several
The Outlook for Economic Activity
participants projected that inflation would slightly ex-
The median of participants’ projections for the growth
ceed 2 percent in 2019 or 2020. The medians of projec-
rate of real GDP for 2018, conditional on their individ-
tions for core PCE price inflation over the 2018–20 pe-
ual assessments of appropriate monetary policy, was
riod were the same as those for headline inflation.
2.5 percent, the same as for 2017. The median projec-
tions for GDP growth in 2019 and 2020 were slightly Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri-
lower, at 2.1 and 2.0 percent, respectively. Compared butions of participants’ views about the outlook for in-
with the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) from flation. On the whole, the distributions of projections
September, the median of the projections for real GDP for headline PCE price inflation and core PCE price in-
growth for 2018 was notably higher, while the medians flation beyond 2017 were little changed from September.
for real GDP growth for 2019 and 2020 were modestly
Appropriate Monetary Policy
higher. The median of projections for the longer-run
Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’
normal rate of real GDP growth remained at 1.8 percent.
judgments regarding the appropriate target—or mid-
Most participants pointed to changes in tax policy as
point of the target range—for the federal funds rate at
likely to provide some boost to real GDP growth over
the end of each year from 2017 to 2020 and in the longer
the forecast period; in September, fewer than half of the
run. Overall, the distributions differed in only small
participants incorporated prospective tax policy changes
ways from those reported in the September SEP. There
in their projections. Several participants indicated that
was a moderate reduction in the dispersion of the distri-
they had marked up their estimates of the magnitude of
bution for 2020 and for the longer run; some of the
tax cuts, relative to their assumptions in September.
lower-end projections for those horizons from the Sep-
The medians of projections for the unemployment rate tember SEP were revised up in the current projections.
in the fourth quarter of both 2018 and 2019 were
The median projection of the year-end federal funds rate
3.9 percent, 0.2 percentage point below the medians
continued to rise gradually over the 2018–20 period.
from September and about ¾ percentage point below
The median projection for the end of 2018 was 2.13 per-
the median assessment of its longer-run normal level.
cent; the medians of the projections were 2.69 percent at
The median projection for the unemployment rate
the end of 2019 and 3.07 percent at the end of 2020.
ticked up slightly to 4.0 percent in 2020.
Nearly all participants projected that it would likely be
Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of partici- appropriate for the federal funds rate to rise above their
pants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unem- individual estimates of the longer-run normal rate at
ployment rate from 2017 to 2020 and in the longer run. some point over the forecast period. Compared with
The distribution of individual projections for real GDP their projections prepared for the September SEP, a few
growth for 2018 shifted up, with more than half of the participants raised their projections for the federal funds
participants now expecting real GDP growth of 2.5 per- rate in the longer run and one lowered it; the median was
cent or more and none seeing it below 2.2 percent. The unchanged at 2.75 percent.
distribution of projected real GDP growth in 2019 and
In discussing their projections, many participants once
2020 also shifted up, albeit only slightly. The distribu-
again expressed the view that the appropriate trajectory
tion for the longer-run normal rate of GDP growth was
of the federal funds rate over the next few years would
little changed from September. The distributions of in-
likely involve gradual increases. This view was predi-
dividual projections for the unemployment rate in 2018
cated on several factors, including a judgment that the
and 2019 shifted down relative to those in September,
neutral real interest rate was currently low and would
broadly consistent with the changes in the distributions
move up only slowly, as well as the balancing of risks
for real GDP growth.
associated with, among other things, the possibility that
The Outlook for Inflation inflation pressures could build if the economy expands
The median of projections for headline PCE price infla- well beyond its long-run sustainable level, and the possi-
tion was 1.9 percent in 2018 and 2 percent in 2019 and bility that the forces depressing inflation could prove to
2020, the same as in the September SEP. Most partici- be more persistent than currently anticipated. As always,
pants anticipated that inflation would continue to run a the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on

--- Page 17 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2017–20andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2017
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 18 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _12_–_1_3_,_ 2_0_1_7____________P_a_g_e_ _7
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2017–20andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2017
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 19 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2017–20andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2017
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1 2. 3
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _12_–_1_3_,_ 2_0_1_7____________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2017–20
Number of participants
2017
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’judgmentsofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfunds
rateortheappropriatetargetlevelforthefederalfundsrate,2017–20andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2017
December projections 18
September projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 22 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _12_–_1_3_,_ 2_0_1_7___________P__ag_e_ _1_1
evolving economic conditions and their implications for Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges
the economic outlook. Percentage points
Variable 2017 2018 2019 2020
Uncertainty and Risks
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . ±0.8 ±1.7 ±2.1 ±2.2
In assessing the path for the federal funds rate that, in
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . ±0.1 ±0.8 ±1.5 ±1.9
their view, is likely to be appropriate, FOMC participants
take account of the range of possible economic out- Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.2 ±1.0 ±1.1 ±1.0
comes, the likelihood of those outcomes, and the poten- Short-term interest rates3 . . . ±0.1 ±1.4 ±1.9 ±2.4
tial benefits and costs should they occur. As a reference, NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the
table 2 provides a measure of forecast uncertainty, based root mean squared error of projections for 1997 through 2016 that
were released in the winter by various private and government fore-
on the forecast errors of various private and government
casters. As described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain
forecasts over the past 20 years, for real GDP growth, assumptions, there is about a 70 percent probability that actual out-
the unemployment rate, and total consumer price infla- comes for real GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal
funds rate will be in ranges implied by the average size of projection
tion. That measure is incorporated graphically in the top
errors made in the past. For more information, see David Reifschnei-
panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C, which display “fan der and Peter Tulip (2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic
charts” plotting the median SEP projections for the Outlook Using Historical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s
Approach,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020
three variables surrounded by symmetric confidence in- (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
tervals derived from the forecast errors presented in ta- February), www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2017/files/
2017020pap.pdf.
ble 2. If the degree of uncertainty attending these pro-
1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
jections is similar to the typical magnitude of past fore- 2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
cast errors and the risks around the projections are that has been most widely used in government and private economic
forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to
broadly balanced, future outcomes of these variables
fourth quarter basis.
would have about a 70 percent probability of occurring 3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds
within these confidence intervals. For all three variables, rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury
bills. Projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent,
this measure of projection uncertainty is substantial and in the fourth quarter.
generally increases as the forecast horizon lengthens.
Participants’ assessments of the level of uncertainty sur- as broadly consistent with a symmetric fan chart. The
rounding their economic projections are shown in the balance of risks to the economic outlook shifted slightly
bottom-left panels of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. Nearly in the direction of strength, with two more participants
all participants viewed the degree of uncertainty attached seeing upside risks to growth in real GDP than in Sep-
to their economic projections about GDP growth, the tember and one more seeing risks to the unemployment
unemployment rate, and inflation as broadly similar to rate as weighted to the downside. In addition, one more
the average of the past 20 years, a view that was essen- participant than before saw risks to inflation as weighted
tially unchanged from September.4 About half of the to the upside.
participants who commented on this topic suggested
Participants’ assessments of the future path of the fed-
that uncertainties about the details of the pending tax
eral funds rate consistent with appropriate policy are also
legislation had raised their assessment of uncertainty for
subject to considerable uncertainty. Because the Com-
GDP growth, albeit not by enough to tip their assess-
mittee adjusts the federal funds rate in response to actual
ments into the higher-than-average category.
and prospective developments over time in real GDP
Because the fan charts are constructed to be symmetric growth, unemployment, and inflation, uncertainty sur-
around the median projection, they do not reflect any rounding the projected path for the funds rate im-
asymmetries in the balance of risks that participants may portantly reflects the uncertainties about the path for
see in their economic projections. Accordingly, partici- those key economic variables. Figure 5 provides a
pants’ assessments of the balance of risks to their eco- graphical representation of this uncertainty, plotting the
nomic projections are shown in the bottom-right panels median SEP projection for the federal funds rate sur-
of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. As in September, most par- rounded by confidence intervals derived from the results
ticipants judged the risks to their projections of real presented in table 2. As with the macroeconomic varia-
GDP growth, the unemployment rate, headline inflation bles, forecast uncertainty is substantial and increases for
and core inflation as broadly balanced—in other words, longer horizons.
4 At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projec-
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the tions.
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess

--- Page 23 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4.A.UncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsofGDPgrowth
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections
70% confidence interval 4
3
2
Actual 1
0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth Risks to GDP growth
December projections December projections
18 18
September projections September projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Theblueandredlinesinthetoppanelshowactualvaluesandmedianprojectedvalues,respectively,ofthe
percentchangeinrealgrossdomesticproduct(GDP)fromthefourthquarterofthepreviousyeartothefourthquarter
of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is
basedonrootmeansquarederrorsofvariousprivateandgovernmentforecastsmadeovertheprevious20years;more
information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed,
on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the
historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around
theirprojections;thesecurrentassessmentsaresummarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,participantswho
judgetheuncertaintyabouttheirprojectionsas“broadlysimilar”totheaveragelevelsofthepast20yearswouldview
the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of
the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as“broadly
balanced”would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of
uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 24 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _12_–_1_3_,_ 2_0_1_7___________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Figure4.B.Uncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsoftheunemploymentrate
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Unemployment rate
Median of projections 10
70% confidence interval
9
8
7
6
Actual
5
4
3
2
1
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate
December projections December projections
18 18
September projections September projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of
the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around
the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private
and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2.
Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width
and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC
participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are
summarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,participantswhojudgetheuncertaintyabouttheirprojectionsas
“broadlysimilar”totheaveragelevelsofthepast20yearswouldviewthewidthoftheconfidenceintervalshowninthe
historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise,
participants who judge the risks to their projections as“broadly balanced”would view the confidence interval around
theirprojectionsasapproximatelysymmetric. Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethe
box“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 25 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_4____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4.C.UncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsofPCEinflation
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
PCE inflation
Median of projections
70% confidence interval
3
2
1
Actual
0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation Risks to PCE inflation
December projections December projections
18 18
September projections September projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation Risks to core PCE inflation
December projections December projections
18 18
September projections September projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Theblueandredlinesinthetoppanelshowactualvaluesandmedianprojectedvalues,respectively,ofthe
percentchangeinthepriceindexforpersonalconsumptionexpenditures(PCE)fromthefourthquarteroftheprevious
yeartothefourthquarteroftheyearindicated. Theconfidenceintervalaroundthemedianprojectedvaluesisassumed
to be symmetricand is based on root mean squarederrorsof variousprivateand governmentforecastsmade over the
previous20years;moreinformationaboutthesedataisavailableintable2. Becausecurrentconditionsmaydifferfrom
those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated
onthebasisofthehistoricalforecasterrorsmaynotreflectFOMCparticipants’currentassessmentsoftheuncertainty
andrisksaroundtheirprojections;thesecurrentassessmentsaresummarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,
participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as“broadly similar”to the average levels of the past
20yearswouldviewthewidthoftheconfidenceintervalshowninthehistoricalfanchartaslargelyconsistentwiththeir
assessments of the uncertaintyabout their projections. Likewise, participantswho judgethe risks to their projections
as“broadly balanced”would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For
definitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 26 ---

_________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y _o_f_ E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_c_ti_o_n_s _o_f_ t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _D_e_c_e_m_b__er_ _12_–_1_3_,_ 2_0_1_7___________P__ag_e_ _1_5
Figure5. Uncertaintyinprojectionsofthefederalfundsrate
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Federal funds rate
Midpoint of target range
6
Median of projections
70% confidence interval*
5
4
3
2
Actual 1
0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Com-
mittee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the
target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level.
The confidence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private
and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The confidence interval is not strictly consistent with the
projectionsforthefederalfundsrate,primarilybecausetheseprojectionsarenotforecastsofthelikeliestoutcomesfor
the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy.
Still,historicalforecasterrorsprovideabroadsenseoftheuncertaintyaroundthefuturepathofthefederalfundsrate
generatedbytheuncertaintyaboutthemacroeconomicvariablesaswellasadditionaladjustmentstomonetarypolicy
thatmaybeappropriatetooffsettheeffectsofshockstotheeconomy.
Theconfidenceintervalisassumedtobesymmetricexceptwhenitistruncatedatzero—thebottomofthelowest
target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would
not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy
accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools,
including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current
conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the
confidenceintervalestimatedonthebasisofthehistoricalforecasterrorsmaynotreflectFOMCparticipants’current
assessmentsoftheuncertaintyandrisksaroundtheirprojections.
* The confidence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth
quarteroftheyearindicated;moreinformationaboutthesedataisavailableintable2. Theshadedareaencompasses
lessthana70percentconfidenceintervaliftheconfidenceintervalhasbeentruncatedatzero.

--- Page 27 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_6____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the members of rent assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projec-
the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal tions are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those fig-
Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among ures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the
policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are
for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
projections, however. The economic and statistical models while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top
and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to par-
are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and ticipants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that
the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather
unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the than below their projections. These judgments are summa-
stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only rized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C.
what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as em- As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the
bodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable
possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the poten- uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each
tial costs to the economy should they occur. participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of mone-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a tary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real ac-
range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary tivity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve
Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropri-
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open ate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that
Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges
shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty as- for forecasts of short-term interest rates. They suggest that
sociated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a the historical confidence intervals associated with projections
participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted,
and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly con-
respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- sistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these
tending those projections is similar to that experienced in the projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly out-
past and the risks around the projections are broadly bal- comes but rather are projections of participants’ individual as-
anced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a prob- sessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-
ability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a
within a range of 2.2 to 3.8 percent in the current year, 1.3 to sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal
4.7 percent in the second year, 0.9 to 5.1 percent in the third funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeco-
year, and 0.8 to 5.2 percent in the fourth year. The corre- nomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary
sponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall infla- policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of
tion would be 1.8 to 2.2 percent in the current year, 1.0 to shocks to the economy.
3.0 percent in the second year, 0.9 to 3.1 percent in the third If at some point in the future the confidence interval
year, and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the fourth year. Figures 4.A around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it
through 4.C illustrate these confidence bounds in “fan would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart
charts” that are symmetric and centered on the medians of shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target
FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unem- range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the
ployment rate, and inflation. However, in some instances, Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of
the risks around the projections may not be symmetric. In the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention;
particular, the unemployment rate cannot be negative; fur- it would not have any implications for possible future policy
thermore, the risks around a particular projection might be decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to pro-
tilted to either the upside or the downside, in which case the vide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so
corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could
around the median projection. also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset
Because current conditions may differ from those that purchases, to provide additional accommodation.
prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on
judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1
projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller provides information on the range of views across FOMC
than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncer- participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A
tainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections
reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in across participants is much smaller than the average forecast
the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ cur- errors over the past 20 years.

# Tables

## Page_13_Table_1


|                  | 0202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
|------------------|------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
| 2ycnednetlartneC | regnoL
nur | 9.1–8.1 0.2–8.1 7.4–4.4 8.4–5.4
0.2 0.2
0.2–7.1 0.2–6.1 2.4–6.3 5.4–0.4 1.2–0.2 1.2–0.2 1.2–0.2 1.2–0.2
3.2–9.1 1.2–7.1 0.4–6.3 4.4–9.3
0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
6.2–2.2 3.2–0.2 0.4–7.3 2.4–0.4 9.1–7.1 0.2–8.1 9.1–7.1 0.2–8.1
5.2–4.2 5.2–2.2 3.4–2.4 7.1–6.1 6.1–5.1 6.1–5.1
1.4 5.1 | 0.3–8.2 0.3–5.2
1.3–6.2 5.3–5.2
1.3–4.2 1.3–4.2
4.2–9.1 4.2–9.1
4.1–1.1
4.1 |
|                  | 0202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
| 1naideM          | regnoL
nur | 8.1 8.1 6.4 6.4 0.2 0.2
0.2 8.1 0.4 2.4 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
1.2 0.2 9.3 1.4 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
5.2 1.2 9.3 1.4 9.1 9.1 9.1 9.1
5.2 4.2 1.4 3.4 7.1 6.1 5.1 5.1                                                                                                                         | 8.2 8.2
1.3 9.2
7.2 7.2
1.2 1.2
4.1 4.1                                     |
|                  | 0202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |                                                                             |