# 20170920_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:38:56*
*Pages: 29, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
September 19–20, 2017
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of Market Account
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, September 19, 2017, Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,
at 1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, September Board of Governors
20, 2017, at 9:00 a.m.1
Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve
PRESENT: Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of
Janet L. Yellen, Chair Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman of Supervision and Regulation, Board of
Lael Brainard Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director, Division of
Charles L. Evans Financial Stability, Board of Governors
Stanley Fischer
Patrick Harker Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of
Robert S. Kaplan Financial Stability, Board of Governors;
Neel Kashkari Stephen A. Meyer, Deputy Director, Division of
Jerome H. Powell Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Raphael W. Bostic, Loretta J. Mester, Mark L. Mullinix, Trevor A. Reeve, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair,
and John C. Williams, Alternate Members of the Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Federal Open Market Committee
David Bowman, Joseph W. Gruber, David
James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Reifschneider, and John M. Roberts, Special
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members,
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively Board of Governors
Brian F. Madigan, Secretary Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Board Members, Board of Governors
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary David E. Lebow and Michael G. Palumbo, Senior
Mark E. Van Der Weide, General Counsel Associate Directors, Division of Research and
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Statistics, Board of Governors
Steven B. Kamin, Economist
Thomas Laubach, Economist Antulio N. Bomfim, Edward Nelson, and Joyce K.
David W. Wilcox, Economist Zickler, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Evan F.
Koenig, William Wascher, Beth Anne Wilson, and Jane E. Ihrig, Associate Director, Division of Monetary
Mark L.J. Wright, Associate Economists Affairs, Board of Governors; John J. Stevens and
Stacey Tevlin, Associate Directors, Division of
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the 2 Attended the discussions of the proposed changes to Rules
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. Regarding Availability of Information and developments in fi-
nancial markets and open market operations.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Steven A. Sharpe, Deputy Associate Director, Division publication in the Federal Register of an earlier version of
of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors; the Rules.4 The amendment approved at this meeting
Min Wei, Deputy Associate Director, Division of indicated that if, in the course of processing a Freedom
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors of Information Act request, “an adverse determination
is upheld on appeal, in whole or in part,” the requester
Penelope A. Beattie,3 Assistant to the Secretary, Office will be informed “of the availability of dispute resolution
of the Secretary, Board of Governors services from the Office of Government Information
Services as a nonexclusive alternative to litigation.” This
Michiel De Pooter, Section Chief, Division of notice will be provided in addition to the ongoing prac-
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors tice of informing the requester of the right to seek judi-
cial review.
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of
Secretary’s note: The amended Rules adopted
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
at this meeting were published in the Federal Reg-
ister as a final rule on October 2, 2017, and will
Martin Bodenstein, Principal Economist, Division of
go into effect 30 days following publication.
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar-
Randall A. Williams, Information Manager, Division of ket Operations
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors The manager of the System Open Market Account
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and for-
Mark A. Gould, First Vice President, Federal Reserve eign financial markets over the period since the July
Bank of San Francisco FOMC meeting. Yields on longer-term Treasury secu-
rities had fallen modestly, the foreign exchange value of
David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Glenn D. Rudebusch, the dollar had declined, and broad equity price indexes
and Geoffrey Tootell, Executive Vice Presidents, had increased. Survey responses suggested that the vast
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, San majority of market participants expected the FOMC to
Francisco, and Boston, respectively announce a change in SOMA reinvestment policy at this
meeting and that nearly all market participants antici-
Spencer Krane and Keith Sill, Senior Vice Presidents, pated that the FOMC would also leave the target range
Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and for the federal funds rate unchanged.
Philadelphia, respectively
The deputy manager followed with a report on develop-
ments in money markets and open market operations
David C. Wheelock and Jonathan L. Willis, Vice
over the intermeeting period. The effective federal
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and
funds rate remained near the center of the FOMC’s tar-
Kansas City, respectively
get range except on month-ends. Take-up at the Sys-
tem’s overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility av-
Stefano M. Eusepi, Assistant Vice President, Federal
eraged somewhat less than in the previous period. The
Reserve Bank of New York
deputy manager provided updates on developments
with respect to reference interest rates and on small-
Edward S. Prescott, Senior Professional Economist,
value tests of open market operations, which are con-
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland
ducted routinely to promote operational readiness. The
deputy manager also summarized the results of the
Proposed Changes to Rules Regarding Availability
staff’s annual review of foreign reserves investment and
of Information
its recommendations to the Foreign Currency Subcom-
The Committee unanimously voted to further amend its
mittee for key parameters for foreign reserves invest-
Rules Regarding Availability of Information (Rules) in
ment for the forthcoming year, and the deputy manager
order to incorporate input received during the public
commenting process that followed the December 2016
3 Attended Tuesday session only. 4 In compliance with the FOIA Improvement Act of 2016, the
earlier version of the Rules was published in the Federal Register
as an interim final rule on December 27, 2016.

--- Page 3 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_9_–_2_0_, _2_0_1_7______________________P_a_g_e_ _3
noted that the Subcommittee would welcome any input ipation rate edged up in July and was unchanged in Au-
from the Committee regarding those parameters. gust, and the share of workers employed part time for
economic reasons was little changed on net. The rate of
Secretary’s note: On September 27, 2017, the
private-sector job openings increased in June and July,
Foreign Currency Subcommittee provided to
the hiring rate ticked up, and the quits rate edged down.
the Federal Reserve Bank selected to conduct
Initial claims for unemployment insurance benefits
open market operations instructions that incor-
jumped in early September from a very low level, and the
porated the staff recommendations for key pa-
Department of Labor noted that Hurricane Harvey had
rameters for foreign reserves investment.
an effect on claims. Changes in measures of labor com-
Finally, the manager reviewed details of the operational pensation were mixed. Compensation per hour rose just
approach that the Open Market Desk planned to follow 1¼ percent over the four quarters ending in the second
if the Committee decided at this meeting to initiate the quarter of 2017 (partly reflecting a significant downward
proposal for SOMA reinvestment policy described in revision to compensation per hour in the second half of
the Committee’s June 2017 Addendum to the Policy 2016), the employment cost index for private workers
Normalization Principles and Plans. increased 2½ percent over the 12 months ending in
June, and average hourly earnings for all employees rose
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
2½ percent over the 12 months ending in August.
domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.
There were no intervention operations in foreign curren- Total industrial production (IP) increased for a sixth
cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- consecutive month in July but then declined sharply in
riod. August. The decrease in August largely reflected the
temporary effects of Hurricane Harvey on drilling, ser-
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
vicing, and extraction activity for oil and natural gas and
The information reviewed for the September 19–20
on output in several manufacturing industries that are
meeting showed that labor market conditions continued
concentrated in the Gulf Coast region, including petro-
to strengthen in July and August and that real gross do-
leum refining, organic chemicals, and plastics materials
mestic product (GDP) appeared to be rising at a moder-
and resins. Production disruptions from Hurricane Har-
ate pace in the third quarter before the landfall of Hur-
vey continued into September, and the effects of Hurri-
ricanes Harvey and Irma. Only limited data pertaining
cane Irma were anticipated to hold down IP in that
to the economic effects of these hurricanes were availa-
month as well. Even so, anecdotal reports from the
ble at the time of the meeting, but it appeared likely that
hurricane-affected regions, as well as daily data on capac-
the negative effects would restrain national economic ac-
ity outages in selected Gulf Coast industries, indicated
tivity only in the near term.5 Total consumer price infla-
that production had already started to recover. Mean-
tion, as measured by the 12-month change in the price
while, automakers’ assembly schedules suggested that
index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE),
motor vehicle production would move up, on balance,
continued to run below 2 percent in July and was lower
over the remainder of the year despite a somewhat ele-
than at the start of the year. Survey-based measures of
vated level of dealers’ inventories and a slowing in the
longer-run inflation expectations were little changed on
pace of vehicle sales in recent months. Broader indica-
balance.
tors of manufacturing production, such as the new or-
Total nonfarm payroll employment rose solidly in July ders indexes from national and regional manufacturing
and August, with strong gains in private-sector jobs and surveys, continued to point to moderate gains in factory
declines in government employment. The unemploy- output over the near term.
ment rate dipped to 4.3 percent in July and edged back
Several pieces of information suggested that real PCE
up to 4.4 percent in August. The unemployment rates
was likely increasing at a slower rate in the third quarter
for African Americans, for Hispanics, and for whites
than in the second. First, the components of the nomi-
were lower, on average, in recent months than around
nal retail sales data used by the Bureau of Economic
the start of the year, whereas the unemployment rate for
Analysis to construct its estimate of PCE declined in Au-
Asians was a little higher. The overall labor force partic-
gust and were revised down in June and July. Second,
5 The background materials prepared by the staff for this
meeting were completed before the full effects of Hurricane
Maria were evident.

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
the pace of light motor vehicle sales moved lower, on Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE
net, in July and August. Third, Hurricanes Harvey and price index, increased nearly 1½ percent over the
Irma appeared likely to temporarily reduce consumer 12 months ending in July. Core PCE price inflation,
spending. However, recent readings on key factors that which excludes consumer food and energy prices, also
influence consumer spending—including continued was about 1½ percent over that same period. Over the
gains in employment, real disposable personal income, 12 months ending in August, the consumer price index
and households’ net worth—remained supportive of (CPI) increased almost 2 percent, while core CPI infla-
solid growth in real PCE. Consumer sentiment, as meas- tion was 1¾ percent. Retail gasoline prices moved up
ured by the University of Michigan Surveys of Consum- sharply following the landfall of Hurricane Harvey and
ers, was upbeat through early September. appeared likely to put temporary upward pressure on the
12-month change in total PCE prices. The median of
Recent information on housing activity suggested that
inflation expectations over the next 5 to 10 years from
real residential investment spending was decreasing in
the Michigan survey edged back up in the preliminary
the third quarter after declining in the second quarter.
reading for September, and the median expectation for
Starts for new single-family homes edged down, on net,
PCE price inflation over the next 10 years from the Sur-
in July and August, and starts for multifamily units
vey of Professional Forecasters edged down. The medi-
moved lower in both months. Building permit issuance
ans of longer-run inflation expectations from the Desk’s
for new single-family homes—which tends to be a good
Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market Partic-
indicator of the underlying trend in construction—de-
ipants were relatively little changed in September.
clined in July and August. Sales of both new and existing
homes decreased in July. Foreign economic activity continued to expand at a solid
pace. Economic growth picked up in the advanced for-
Real private expenditures for business equipment and in-
eign economies (AFEs) in the second quarter, especially
tellectual property appeared to be increasing at a solid
in Canada, and incoming indicators suggested that
rate in the third quarter. Nominal orders and shipments
growth slowed in the third quarter but remained firm.
of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft rose over
Recent indicators from the emerging market economies
the two months ending in July, and readings on business
(EMEs) also pointed to continued strong economic
sentiment remained upbeat. In contrast, investment in
growth, notwithstanding some slowing in the rate of ex-
nonresidential structures was poised to decline in the
pansion of activity in China. Headline inflation in most
third quarter. Firms’ nominal spending for nonresiden-
AFEs remained subdued, held down in part by falling
tial structures excluding drilling and mining fell sharply
retail energy prices, but data through August suggested
in June and July, and the number of oil and gas rigs in
that the drag from energy prices was diminishing. Infla-
operation, an indicator of spending for structures in the
tion also remained low in most EMEs, although food
drilling and mining sector, leveled out in the past couple
prices continued to put upward pressure on inflation in
of months after increasing steadily for the past year.
Mexico.
Total real government purchases looked to be roughly
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
flat, on balance, in the third quarter. Nominal outlays
Domestic financial market conditions remained gener-
for defense in July and August pointed to a small in-
ally accommodative over the intermeeting period. U.S.
crease in real federal government purchases in the third
equity prices increased, longer-term Treasury yields de-
quarter. However, payrolls for state and local govern-
clined, and the dollar depreciated. Investors’ interpreta-
ments declined in July and August, and nominal con-
tions of FOMC communications, market perceptions of
struction spending by these governments decreased in
a reduced likelihood of U.S. fiscal policy changes, and
July.
heightened geopolitical risks all reportedly placed down-
The nominal U.S. international trade deficit narrowed ward pressure on longer-term yields. At the same time,
substantially in June and was about unchanged in July. financing conditions for households and nonfinancial
After increasing in June, exports retraced a bit of this businesses continued to provide support for growth in
gain in July, with lower exports of consumer goods, au- spending and investment.
tomotive products, and services. Imports decreased a
FOMC communications over the intermeeting period
little in both months. The available data suggested that
reportedly were interpreted as indicating a somewhat
net exports contributed positively to real GDP growth
slower pace of increases in the target range for the fed-
in the third quarter.

--- Page 5 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_9_–_2_0_, _2_0_1_7______________________P_a_g_e_ _5
eral funds rate than previously expected. Market partic- Short-dated Treasury bill yields were elevated for a time,
ipants were attentive to the Committee’s assessment of reflecting concerns about potential delays in raising the
recent below-expectations inflation data and the ac- federal debt limit. However, following news of an agree-
knowledgment in the July FOMC minutes that inflation ment to extend the debt ceiling by three months, rates
might continue to run below the Committee’s 2 percent on Treasury bills maturing in October retraced their en-
objective for longer than anticipated. Investors also tire increase from early in the intermeeting period. Con-
took note of the Committee’s guidance in the July ditions in other domestic short-term funding markets
FOMC statement that it expected to begin implementing were stable. Yields on a broad set of money market in-
its balance sheet normalization program relatively soon. struments remained in the ranges observed since the
By the end of the intermeeting period, market partici- FOMC increased the target range for the federal funds
pants appeared nearly certain that the Committee would rate in June. Daily take-up at the System’s overnight re-
announce the implementation of its balance sheet nor- verse repurchase agreement facility ran somewhat lower
malization plan at the September meeting. The proba- than in the previous intermeeting period.
bility of an increase in the target range for the federal
Since the July FOMC meeting, asset price movements in
funds rate occurring at either the September or the No-
global financial markets were driven by geopolitical ten-
vember meeting, as implied by quotes on federal funds
sions in the Korean peninsula, improving economic pro-
futures contracts, fell to essentially zero, while the prob-
spects abroad, communications from AFE central
ability of a 25 basis point increase by the end of the year
banks, and changes in prospects for fiscal policy legisla-
stood near 50 percent and was little changed since the
tion in the United States. The broad index of the foreign
July meeting. Quotes on overnight index swaps (OIS)
exchange value of the dollar decreased 1½ percent; the
pointed to a slight flattening of the expected path of the
decline was widespread, led by the strengthening of the
federal funds rate through 2020, with a staff model at-
euro and the Chinese renminbi. The Canadian dollar ap-
tributing most of the declines in OIS rates to lower ex-
preciated following a rate hike by the Bank of Canada at
pected rates.
its September meeting that came sooner than market
Yields on intermediate- and longer-term nominal Treas- participants expected. Similarly, sterling appreciated af-
ury securities decreased modestly over the intermeeting ter the Bank of England signaled a potential rate hike in
period. Treasury yields fell following the July FOMC the coming months. Against this backdrop, longer-term
meeting, reflecting the response of investors to the yields rose slightly in Canada and the United Kingdom.
postmeeting statement, and then dropped further amid In contrast, longer-term German yields declined moder-
rising geopolitical tensions related to North Korea and ately, despite better-than-expected economic data re-
market perceptions of reduced prospects for enactment leases for the euro area, as market expectations shifted
of a fiscal stimulus program. Economic data releases ap- toward a more gradual withdrawal of stimulus by the Eu-
peared to have little net effect on Treasury yields over ropean Central Bank (ECB) even though the ECB kept
most of the period. A staff term structure model at- its policy stance unchanged.
tributed about half of the decline in the 10-year Treasury
Despite generally better-than-expected earnings releases,
yield to a decrease in the average expected future short-
AFE equity prices were mixed over the period, with
term rate and the remaining half to a lower term pre-
bank stocks underperforming broader indexes. Outside
mium. Measures of inflation compensation over the
South Korea, most emerging market asset prices were
next 5 years rose modestly, on net, partly in response to
little affected by the recent escalation of geopolitical con-
the release of higher-than-expected CPI data for August,
cerns. Net flows to emerging market mutual funds
while inflation compensation 5 to 10 years ahead was lit-
briefly turned negative in early August, but they quickly
tle changed.
returned to near the high levels seen since early this year.
Broad U.S. equity price indexes increased over the inter- Yield spreads on EME sovereign bonds edged down.
meeting period. One-month-ahead option-implied vol-
Financing conditions for U.S. nonfinancial businesses
atility of the S&P 500 index—the VIX—remained at his-
continued to be accommodative. Issuance of corporate
torically low levels despite brief spikes associated with
debt and equity was strong in July and August. Gross
increased investor concerns about geopolitical tensions
issuance of institutional leveraged loans continued its ro-
and political uncertainties. Over the intermeeting pe-
bust pace in June but slowed notably in July, as is typical
riod, spreads of yields on investment- and speculative-
during the summer. Meanwhile, the growth of commer-
grade nonfinancial corporate bonds over those on
cial and industrial (C&I) loans on banks’ books ticked up
comparable-maturity Treasury securities widened a bit.

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
in July and August compared with its pace over the first the previous forecast. Real GDP was expected to rise at
half of the year; however, C&I loan growth from the a solid pace, on net, in the second half of the year, and
fourth quarter of last year through August remained sig- by a little more than previously projected, reflecting data
nificantly lower than over recent years. on spending that were stronger than expected on bal-
ance. The short-term disruptions to spending and pro-
Gross issuance of municipal bonds was strong in Au-
duction associated with Hurricanes Harvey and Irma
gust, and spreads of yields on municipal bonds over
were expected to reduce real GDP growth in the third
those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities in-
quarter and to boost it in the fourth quarter as produc-
creased a bit over the intermeeting period. The credit
tion returned to its pre-hurricane path and as a portion
quality of state and local governments improved overall,
of the lost spending was made up. The hurricanes were
as the number of ratings upgrades notably outpaced the
also expected to depress payroll employment in Septem-
number of downgrades in August.
ber, with a reversal over the next few months. Beyond
The growth of commercial real estate (CRE) loans on 2017, the forecast for real GDP growth was little revised.
banks’ books continued to moderate in July and August, In particular, the staff continued to project that real
reflecting a slowdown in lending both for nonfarm non- GDP would expand at a modestly faster pace than po-
residential units and for construction and land develop- tential output through 2019. The unemployment rate
ment; nonetheless, CRE financing appeared to remain was projected to decline gradually over the next couple
broadly available. Issuance of commercial mortgage- of years and to continue running below the staff’s esti-
backed securities (CMBS) so far this year was similar to mate of its longer-run natural rate over this period. Be-
that in the same period a year earlier. Spreads on CMBS cause of continued subdued inflation readings and, given
over Treasury securities narrowed a little over the inter- real GDP growth, a larger-than-expected decline in the
meeting period and were near the bottom of their ranges unemployment rate over much of the past year, the staff
of the past several years. Delinquency rates on loans in revised down slightly its estimate of the longer-run nat-
CMBS pools declined slightly but remained elevated for ural rate of unemployment in this projection.
loans that were originated before the financial crisis.
The staff’s forecast for consumer price inflation, as
Interest rates on 30-year fixed-rate residential mortgages measured by the change in the PCE price index, was re-
moved lower over the intermeeting period, in line with vised up somewhat for 2017 in response to hurricane-
comparable-maturity Treasury yields. Growth in mort- related effects on gasoline prices. The near-term fore-
gage lending for home purchases picked up in July and cast for core PCE price inflation was essentially unre-
August compared with its pace over the second quarter. vised. Total PCE price inflation this year was expected
However, credit conditions remained tight for borrow- to run at the same pace as last year, with a slower increase
ers with low credit scores or hard-to-document incomes. in core PCE prices offset by a slightly larger increase in
energy prices and an upturn in the prices for food and
Consumer credit continued to be readily available for
non-energy imports. Beyond 2017, the inflation forecast
most borrowers, and overall loan balances rose at a mod-
was little revised from the previous projection. The staff
erate pace in the second quarter, reflecting further ex-
continued to project that inflation would edge higher in
pansions in credit card, auto, and student loan balances.
the next couple of years and that it would reach the
Issuance of asset-backed securities remained robust over
Committee’s longer-run objective in 2019.
the year to date and outpaced that of the previous year,
providing support for consumer lending. However, The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections
standards and terms on auto and credit card loans were for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla-
tighter for subprime borrowers, likely in response to ris- tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years. On
ing delinquencies on such loans. Subprime auto loan the one hand, many financial market indicators of uncer-
balances have declined so far this year, partly reflecting tainty remained subdued, and the uncertainty associated
the tighter lending standards, and the average credit with the foreign outlook still appeared to be less than
score of all borrowers who obtained an auto loan in the last year; on the other hand, uncertainty about the direc-
second quarter remained near the upper end of its range tion of some economic policies was judged to have re-
of the past few years. mained elevated. The staff saw the risks to the forecasts
for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate as bal-
Staff Economic Outlook
anced. The risks to the projection for inflation were also
The U.S. economic projection prepared by the staff for
seen as balanced. Downside risks included the possibil-
the September FOMC meeting was broadly similar to
ities that longer-term inflation expectations may have

--- Page 7 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_9_–_2_0_, _2_0_1_7______________________P_a_g_e_ _7
edged down or that the recent run of soft inflation read- but, abstracting from those effects, employment gains
ings could prove to be more persistent than the staff ex- were anticipated to remain solid, and the unemployment
pected. These downside risks were seen as essentially rate was expected to decline a bit further by year-end.
counterbalanced by the upside risk that inflation could
Based on the estimated effects of past major hurricanes
increase more than expected in an economy that was
that made landfall in the United States, participants
projected to continue operating above its longer-run po-
judged that the recent storms were unlikely to materially
tential.
alter the course of the national economy over the me-
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the dium term. Moreover, they generally viewed the infor-
Economic Outlook mation on spending, production, and labor market ac-
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of tivity that became available over the intermeeting period,
the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank pres- which was mostly not affected by the hurricanes, as sug-
idents submitted their projections of the most likely out- gesting little change in the outlook for economic growth
comes for real output growth, the unemployment rate, and the labor market over the medium term. Conse-
and inflation for each year from 2017 through 2020 and quently, they continued to expect that, with gradual ad-
over the longer run, based on their individual assess- justments in the stance of monetary policy, economic ac-
ments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate.6 tivity would expand at a moderate pace and labor market
The longer-run projections represented each partici- conditions would strengthen somewhat further. In the
pant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable aftermath of the hurricanes, higher prices for gasoline
would be expected to converge, over time, under appro- and some other items were likely to boost inflation tem-
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further porarily. Apart from that effect, inflation on a 12-month
shocks to the economy. These projections and policy basis was expected to remain somewhat below 2 percent
assessments are described in the Summary of Economic in the near term but to stabilize around the Committee’s
Projections, which is an addendum to these minutes. 2 percent objective over the medium term. Near-term
risks to the economic outlook appeared roughly bal-
In their discussion of the economic situation and the
anced, but participants agreed to continue to monitor in-
outlook, meeting participants agreed that information
flation developments closely.
received over the intermeeting period indicated that the
labor market had continued to strengthen and that eco- Consumer spending had been expanding at a moderate
nomic activity had been rising moderately so far this rate through the summer, and reports on retail activity
year. Job gains had remained solid in recent months, and from participants’ contacts were generally positive. Par-
the unemployment rate had stayed low. Household ticipants expected some fluctuations in consumer spend-
spending had been expanding at a moderate rate, and ing to result from the hurricanes, but they generally
growth in business fixed investment had picked up in judged that consumption growth would continue to be
recent quarters. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation supported by still-solid fundamental determinants of
and the measure excluding food and energy prices had household spending, including the income generated by
declined this year and were running below 2 percent. the ongoing strength in the labor market, improved
Market-based measures of inflation compensation re- household balance sheets, and high levels of consumer
mained low; survey-based measures of longer-term in- confidence. Sales of autos and light trucks had softened
flation expectations were little changed on balance. over the summer, leading producers to slow production
to address a buildup of inventories, but a couple of par-
Participants acknowledged that Hurricanes Harvey,
ticipants noted that automakers expected to see a tem-
Irma, and Maria would affect economic activity in the
porary increase in demand as households and businesses
near term. They expected growth of real GDP in the
replaced vehicles damaged during the storms.
third quarter to be held down by the severe disruptions
caused by the storms but to rebound beginning in the Incoming data on business spending showed that equip-
fourth quarter as rebuilding got under way and economic ment investment had picked up during 2017 after having
activity in the affected areas resumed. Similarly, employ- been weak during much of 2016. Shipments and orders
ment would be temporarily depressed by the hurricanes,
6 Four members of the Board of Governors, the same number FOMC meetings; First Vice President Mark L. Mullinix sub-
as in June 2017, were in office at the time of the September mitted economic projections. One participant did not submit
2017 meeting. The office of the president of the Federal Re- longer-run projections for real output growth, the unemploy-
serve Bank of Richmond was vacant at the time of both ment rate, or the federal funds rate.

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
of nondefense capital goods had been on a steady up- Labor market conditions strengthened further in recent
trend over the first eight months of 2017. A number of months. The increases in nonfarm payroll employment
participants reported that their business contacts ap- in July and August remained well above the pace likely
peared to have become more confident about the eco- to be sustainable in the longer run. Although the unem-
nomic outlook, and it was noted that the National Fed- ployment rate was little changed from March to August,
eration of Independent Business reported that greater it remained below participants’ estimates of its longer-
optimism among small businesses had contributed to a run normal level. Other indicators suggested that labor
sharp increase in the proportion of small firms planning market conditions had continued to tighten over recent
increases in their capital expenditures. A couple of par- quarters. The labor force participation rate had been
ticipants commented that competitive pressures and moving sideways despite factors, such as demographic
tight labor markets were increasing the incentives for changes, that were contributing to a declining longer-run
businesses to substitute capital for labor or to invest in trend. In addition, the number of individuals working
information technology. In contrast, reports on the part time for economic reasons, as a share of household
strength of nonresidential construction were mixed. employment, had moved lower. The job openings rate,
And in energy-producing regions, the count of drilling the quits rate, households’ assessments of job availabil-
rigs in operation had begun to level off before the onset ity, and the labor market conditions index prepared by
of Hurricane Harvey. the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City had returned
to pre-recession levels. However, some participants still
Participants generally indicated that, before the recent
saw room for further increases in labor utilization, with
hurricanes, business activity in their Districts was ex-
a couple of them noting that the employment-to-
panding at a moderate pace. Although industrial pro-
population ratio and the participation rate for prime-age
duction in areas affected by the storms was estimated to
workers had not fully recovered to pre-recession levels.
have declined in August, a number of participants from
other areas reported further solid gains in manufacturing Against the backdrop of the continued strengthening in
activity in their Districts. Participants from the regions labor market conditions, participants discussed recent
affected by the hurricanes reported that businesses in wage developments. Increases in most aggregate
their Districts anticipated that the disruptions to busi- measures of hourly wages and labor compensation re-
ness and sales would be relatively short lived. In the en- mained subdued, and several participants commented
ergy sector, Hurricane Harvey had shut down drilling that the absence of broad-based upward wage pressures
and refining activity, but by the time of the meeting, suggested that the sustainable rate of unemployment
these operations had substantially resumed. And many might be lower than they currently estimated. Other fac-
business contacts in the affected areas reported that they tors that may have been contributing to the subdued
expected their operations to return to normal before the pace of wage increases reported in the national data in-
end of the year. Farming in some parts of the country cluded low productivity growth, changes in the compo-
had been affected by drought, and income in the agricul- sition of the workforce, and competitive pressure on
tural sector was under downward pressure because of employers to hold down their costs. However, reports
low crop prices. from business contacts in several Districts indicated that
employers in labor markets in which demand was high
Overall, the available information suggested that, al-
or in which workers in some occupations were in short
though the storms would likely affect the quarterly pat-
supply were raising wages noticeably to compete for
tern of changes in real GDP at least through the second
workers and limit turnover. It was noted that the ex-
half of the year, economic activity would continue to ex-
pected increase in demand for skilled construction work-
pand at a moderate rate over the medium term, sup-
ers for reconstruction in hurricane-affected areas would
ported by further gains in consumer spending and the
likely exacerbate existing shortages. Most participants
pickup in business investment. In addition, improving
expected wage increases to pick up over time as the labor
global economic conditions and the depreciation of the
market strengthened further; a couple of participants
dollar in recent months were anticipated to result in a
cautioned that a broader acceleration in wages may al-
modest positive contribution to domestic economic ac-
ready have begun, consistent with already-tight labor
tivity from net exports. In contrast, most participants
market conditions.
had not assumed enactment of a fiscal stimulus package
in their economic projections or had marked down the Based on the available data, PCE price inflation over the
expected magnitude of any stimulus. 12 months ending in August was estimated to be about
1½ percent, remaining below the Committee’s longer-

--- Page 9 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_9_–_2_0_, _2_0_1_7______________________P_a_g_e_ _9
run objective. In their review of the recent data and the On balance, participants continued to forecast that PCE
outlook for inflation, participants discussed a number of price inflation would stabilize around the Committee’s
factors that could be contributing to the low readings on 2 percent objective over the medium term. However,
consumer prices this year and weighed the extent to several noted that in preparing their projections for this
which those factors might be transitory or could prove meeting, they had taken on board the likelihood that
more persistent. Many participants continued to believe convergence to the Committee’s symmetric 2 percent
that the cyclical pressures associated with a tightening la- inflation objective might take somewhat longer than
bor market or an economy operating above its potential they anticipated earlier. Participants generally agreed it
were likely to show through to higher inflation over the would be important to monitor inflation developments
medium term. In addition, many judged that at least part closely. Several of them noted that interpreting the next
of the softening in inflation this year was the result of few inflation reports would likely be complicated by the
idiosyncratic or one-time factors, and, thus, their effects temporary run-up in energy costs and in the prices of
were likely to fade over time. However, other develop- other items affected by storm-related disruptions and re-
ments, such as the effects of earlier changes to govern- building.
ment health-care programs that had been holding down
In financial markets, longer-term interest rates and the
health-care costs, might continue to do so for some time.
foreign exchange value of the dollar declined over the
Some participants discussed the possibility that secular
intermeeting period, and equity prices increased. It was
trends, such as the influence of technological innova-
noted that U.S. financial conditions recently appeared to
tions on competition and business pricing, also might
be responding as much or more to economic and finan-
have been muting inflationary pressures and could be in-
cial news from abroad as to domestic developments.
tensifying. It was noted that other advanced economies
Many participants viewed accommodative financial con-
were also experiencing low inflation, which might sug-
ditions, which had prevailed even as the Committee
gest that common global factors could be contributing
raised the federal funds rate, as likely to provide support
to persistence of below-target inflation in the United
for the economic expansion. However, a couple of
States and abroad. Several participants commented on
those participants expressed concern that the persis-
the importance of longer-run inflation expectations to
tence of highly accommodative financial conditions
the outlook for a return of inflation to 2 percent. A
could, over time, pose risks to financial stability. In con-
number of indicators of inflation expectations, including
trast, a few participants cautioned that these financial
survey statistics and estimates derived from financial
market conditions might not deliver much impetus to
market data, were generally viewed as indicating that
aggregate demand if they instead reflected a more pessi-
longer-run inflation expectations remained reasonably
mistic assessment of prospects for longer-run economic
stable, although a few participants saw some of these
growth and, accordingly, a view that the longer-run neu-
measures as low or slipping.
tral rate of interest in the United States would remain
Participants raised a number of important considera- low.
tions about the implications of persistently low inflation
In their discussion of monetary policy, all participants
for the path of the federal funds rate over the medium
agreed that the economy had evolved broadly as they
run. Several expressed concern that the persistence of
had anticipated at the time of the June meeting and that
low rates of inflation might imply that the underlying
the incoming data had not materially altered the me-
trend was running below 2 percent, risking a decline in
dium-term economic outlook. Consistent with those as-
inflation expectations. If so, the appropriate policy path
sessments, participants saw it as appropriate, at this
should take into account the need to bolster inflation ex-
meeting, to announce implementation of the plan for re-
pectations in order to ensure that inflation returned to
ducing the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings that the
2 percent and to prevent erosion in the credibility of the
Committee released in June. Many underscored that the
Committee’s objective. It was also noted that the per-
reduction in securities holdings would be gradual and
sistence of low inflation might result in the federal funds
that financial market participants appeared to have a
rate staying uncomfortably close to its effective lower
clear understanding of the Committee’s planned ap-
bound. However, a few others pointed out the need to
proach for a gradual normalization of the size of the
consider the lags in the response of inflation to tighten-
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. Consequently, partici-
ing resource utilization and, thus, increasing upside risks
pants generally expected that any reaction in financial
to inflation as the labor market tightened further.
markets to the start of balance sheet normalization
would likely be limited.

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
With the medium-term outlook little changed, inflation Committee Policy Action
below 2 percent, and the neutral rate of interest esti- In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
mated to be quite low, all participants thought it would ahead, members judged that information received since
be appropriate for the Committee to maintain the cur- the Committee met in July indicated that the labor mar-
rent target range for the federal funds rate at this meet- ket had continued to strengthen and that economic ac-
ing, and nearly all supported again indicating in the tivity had been rising moderately so far this year. Job
postmeeting statement that a gradual approach to in- gains had remained solid in recent months, and the un-
creasing the federal funds rate will likely be warranted. employment rate had stayed low. Household spending
Nevertheless, many participants expressed concern that had been expanding at a moderate rate, and growth in
the low inflation readings this year might reflect not only business fixed investment had picked up in recent quar-
transitory factors, but also the influence of develop- ters. On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and the
ments that could prove more persistent, and it was noted measure excluding food and energy prices had declined
that some patience in removing policy accommodation this year and were running below 2 percent. Market-
while assessing trends in inflation was warranted. A few based measures of inflation compensation remained
of these participants thought that no further increases in low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation ex-
the federal funds rate were called for in the near term or pectations were little changed on balance.
that the upward trajectory of the federal funds rate might
Members noted that Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Ma-
appropriately be quite shallow. Some other participants,
ria had devastated many communities, inflicting severe
however, were more worried about upside risks to infla-
hardship. Members judged that storm-related disrup-
tion arising from a labor market that had already reached
tions and rebuilding would affect economic activity in
full employment and was projected to tighten further.
the near term, but past experience suggested that the
Their concerns were heightened by the apparent easing
hurricanes were unlikely to materially alter the course of
in financial conditions that had developed since the
the national economy over the medium term. Conse-
Committee’s policy normalization process was initiated
quently, the Committee continued to expect that, with
in December 2015. These participants cautioned that an
gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy,
unduly slow pace in removing policy accommodation
economic activity would expand at a moderate pace, and
could result in an overshoot of the Committee’s inflation
labor market conditions would strengthen somewhat
objective in the medium term that would likely be costly
further. Higher prices for gasoline and some other items
to reverse or could lead to an intensification of financial
in the aftermath of the hurricanes would likely boost in-
stability risks or to other imbalances that might prove
flation temporarily; apart from that effect, inflation on a
difficult to unwind.
12-month basis was expected to remain somewhat be-
Consistent with the expectation that a gradual rise in the low 2 percent in the near term but to stabilize around the
federal funds rate would be appropriate, many partici- Committee’s 2 percent objective over the medium term.
pants thought that another increase in the target range Members saw near-term risks to the economic outlook
later this year was likely to be warranted if the medium- as roughly balanced, but they agreed to continue to mon-
term outlook remained broadly unchanged. Several oth- itor inflation developments closely.
ers noted that, in light of the uncertainty around their
After assessing current conditions and the outlook for
outlook for inflation, their decision on whether to take
economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, mem-
such a policy action would depend importantly on
bers decided to maintain the target range for the federal
whether the economic data in coming months increased
funds rate at 1 to 1¼ percent. They noted that the
their confidence that inflation was moving up toward the
stance of monetary policy remained accommodative,
Committee’s objective. A few participants thought that
thereby supporting some further strengthening in labor
additional increases in the federal funds rate should be
market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent in-
deferred until incoming information confirmed that the
flation.
low readings on inflation this year were not likely to per-
sist and that inflation was clearly on a path toward the Members agreed that the timing and size of future ad-
Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective over the me- justments to the target range for the federal funds rate
dium term. All agreed that they would closely monitor would depend on their assessment of realized and ex-
and assess incoming data before making any further ad- pected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s
justment to the federal funds rate. objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent in-
flation. They expected that economic conditions would

--- Page 11 ---

___________________________M__i_n_u_te_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_ f_ S_e_p_t_e_m_b_e_r_ 1_9_–_2_0_, _2_0_1_7_____________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
evolve in a manner that would warrant gradual increases turing during September, and to continue rein-
in the federal funds rate and that the federal funds rate vesting in agency mortgage-backed securities
was likely to remain, for some time, below levels that the principal payments received through Sep-
were expected to prevail in the longer run. Members tember from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of
also again stated that the actual path of the federal funds agency debt and agency mortgage-backed secu-
rate would depend on the economic outlook as informed rities.
by incoming data. In particular, they reaffirmed that
Effective in October 2017, the Committee di-
they would carefully monitor actual and expected infla-
rects the Desk to roll over at auction the
tion developments relative to the Committee’s symmet-
amount of principal payments from the Federal
ric inflation goal. Some members emphasized that, in
Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities matur-
considering the timing of further adjustments in the fed-
ing during each calendar month that exceeds
eral funds rate, they would be evaluating incoming infor-
$6 billion, and to reinvest in agency mortgage-
mation to assess the likelihood that recent low readings
backed securities the amount of principal pay-
on inflation were transitory and that inflation was again
ments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of
on a trajectory consistent with achieving the Commit-
agency debt and agency mortgage-backed secu-
tee’s 2 percent objective over the medium term.
rities received during each calendar month that
Members agreed that, in October, the Committee would exceeds $4 billion. Small deviations from these
initiate the balance sheet normalization program de- amounts for operational reasons are acceptable.
scribed in the June 2017 Addendum to the Policy Nor-
The Committee also directs the Desk to engage
malization Principles and Plans. Several members ob-
in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as
served that, in part because financial market participants
necessary to facilitate settlement of the Federal
appeared to have a clear understanding of the Commit-
Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed securities
tee’s plan for gradually reducing the Federal Reserve’s
transactions.”
securities holdings, any reaction in financial markets to
the announcement and implementation of the program The vote also encompassed approval of the statement
would likely be limited. below to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee “Information received since the Federal Open
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank Market Committee met in July indicates that the
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe- labor market has continued to strengthen and
cute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the that economic activity has been rising moder-
following domestic policy directive, to be released at ately so far this year. Job gains have remained
2:00 p.m.: solid in recent months, and the unemployment
rate has stayed low. Household spending has
“Effective September 21, 2017, the Federal
been expanding at a moderate rate, and growth
Open Market Committee directs the Desk to
in business fixed investment has picked up in
undertake open market operations as necessary
recent quarters. On a 12-month basis, overall
to maintain the federal funds rate in a target
inflation and the measure excluding food and
range of 1 to 1¼ percent, including overnight
energy prices have declined this year and are
reverse repurchase operations (and reverse re-
running below 2 percent. Market-based
purchase operations with maturities of more
measures of inflation compensation remain low;
than one day when necessary to accommodate
survey-based measures of longer-term inflation
weekend, holiday, or similar trading conven-
expectations are little changed, on balance.
tions) at an offering rate of 1.00 percent, in
amounts limited only by the value of Treasury Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
securities held outright in the System Open mittee seeks to foster maximum employment
Market Account that are available for such op- and price stability. Hurricanes Harvey, Irma,
erations and by a per-counterparty limit of and Maria have devastated many communities,
$30 billion per day. inflicting severe hardship. Storm-related dis-
ruptions and rebuilding will affect economic ac-
The Committee directs the Desk to continue
tivity in the near term, but past experience sug-
rolling over at auction Treasury securities ma-
gests that the storms are unlikely to materially

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
alter the course of the national economy over gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the
the medium term. Consequently, the Commit- federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some
tee continues to expect that, with gradual adjust- time, below levels that are expected to prevail in
ments in the stance of monetary policy, eco- the longer run. However, the actual path of the
nomic activity will expand at a moderate pace, federal funds rate will depend on the economic
and labor market conditions will strengthen outlook as informed by incoming data.
somewhat further. Higher prices for gasoline
In October, the Committee will initiate the bal-
and some other items in the aftermath of the
ance sheet normalization program described in
hurricanes will likely boost inflation temporar-
the June 2017 Addendum to the Committee’s
ily; apart from that effect, inflation on a
Policy Normalization Principles and Plans.”
12-month basis is expected to remain somewhat
below 2 percent in the near term but to stabilize Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C.
around the Committee’s 2 percent objective Dudley, Lael Brainard, Charles L. Evans, Stanley
over the medium term. Near-term risks to the Fischer, Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel
economic outlook appear roughly balanced, but Kashkari, and Jerome H. Powell.
the Committee is monitoring inflation develop-
Voting against this action: None.
ments closely.
Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the
In view of realized and expected labor market
target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the
conditions and inflation, the Committee de-
Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in-
cided to maintain the target range for the federal
terest rates on required and excess reserve balances un-
funds rate at 1 to 1¼ percent. The stance of
changed at 1¼ percent and voted unanimously to ap-
monetary policy remains accommodative,
prove establishment of the primary credit rate (discount
thereby supporting some further strengthening
rate) at the existing level of 1¾ percent.7
in labor market conditions and a sustained re-
turn to 2 percent inflation. It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, October 31–
In determining the timing and size of future ad-
November 1, 2017. The meeting adjourned at
justments to the target range for the federal
10:05 a.m. on September 20, 2017.
funds rate, the Committee will assess realized
and expected economic conditions relative to its Notation Vote
objectives of maximum employment and 2 per- By notation vote completed on August 15, 2017, the
cent inflation. This assessment will take into ac- Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
count a wide range of information, including Committee meeting held on July 25–26, 2017.
measures of labor market conditions, indicators
of inflation pressures and inflation expectations,
and readings on financial and international de-
velopments. The Committee will carefully
_____________________________
monitor actual and expected inflation develop-
Brian F. Madigan
ments relative to its symmetric inflation goal.
Secretary
The Committee expects that economic condi-
tions will evolve in a manner that will warrant
7 The second vote of the Board also encompassed approval of
the establishment of the interest rates for secondary and sea-
sonal credit under the existing formulas for computing such
rates.

--- Page 13 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- then step up in the next three years; about half of them
tee (FOMC) meeting held on September 19–20, 2017, projected that inflation would be at the Committee’s
meeting participants submitted their projections of the 2 percent objective in 2019 and 2020, and all judged that
most likely outcomes for real output growth, the unem- inflation would be within a couple of tenths of a percent-
ployment rate, and inflation for each year from 2017 to age point of the objective in those years. Most partici-
2020 and over the longer run.1 Each participant’s pro- pants commented on the effects of Hurricanes Harvey
jections were based on information available at the time and Irma and judged that there would likely be some ef-
of the meeting, together with his or her assessment of fect on national economic activity and inflation in the
appropriate monetary policy—including a path for the near term but little effect in the medium term.3 Table 1
federal funds rate and its longer-run value—and as- and figure 1 provide summary statistics for the projec-
sumptions about other factors likely to affect economic tions.
outcomes. The longer-run projections represent each
As shown in figure 2, participants generally expected
participant’s assessment of the value to which each var-
that evolving economic conditions would likely warrant
iable would be expected to converge, over time, under
further gradual increases in the federal funds rate to
appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of fur-
achieve and sustain maximum employment and 2 per-
ther shocks to the economy.2 “Appropriate monetary
cent inflation. Although some participants lowered their
policy” is defined as the future path of policy that each
federal funds rate projections since June, the median
participant deems most likely to foster outcomes for
projections for the federal funds rate in 2017 and 2018
economic activity and inflation that best satisfy his or her
were unchanged; the median projection for 2019 was
individual interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objec-
slightly lower, and the median projection for the longer-
tives of maximum employment and stable prices.
run normal level of the federal funds rate edged down.
All participants who submitted longer-run projections However, because of considerable uncertainty about
expected that, under appropriate monetary policy, how the economy will evolve, the actual path of short-
growth in real gross domestic product (GDP) this year term interest rates, including the federal funds rate, can
would run somewhat above their individual estimates of differ substantially from projections.
its longer-run rate. Almost all participants projected that
In general, participants viewed the uncertainty attached
economic growth would moderate over the next three
to their economic projections as broadly similar to the
years, and almost all projected that real GDP growth in
average of the past 20 years, and all participants saw the
2019 and 2020 would be at or close to their individual
uncertainty associated with their forecasts for real GDP
estimates of the economy’s longer-run potential growth
growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation as un-
rate. All participants who submitted longer-run projec-
changed from June. Most participants judged the risks
tions expected that the unemployment rate would run
around their projections for economic growth, the un-
below their estimates of its longer-run normal level in
employment rate, and inflation as broadly balanced.
2017, and almost all projected that the unemployment
rate would remain below their estimates of its longer-run The Outlook for Economic Activity
level through 2020. All participants projected that infla- The median of participants’ projections for the growth
tion, as measured by the four-quarter percentage change rate of real GDP, conditional on their individual as-
in the price index for personal consumption expendi- sumptions about appropriate monetary policy, was
tures (PCE), would run below 2 percent in 2017 and 2.4 percent in 2017, about 2 percent in 2018 and 2019,
1 Four members of the Board of Governors, the same number characterized by multiple medium-term regimes, that these re-
as in June 2017, were in office at the time of the September gimes are persistent, and that optimal monetary policy is re-
2017 meeting. As in June 2017, the office of the president of gime dependent. Because switches between regimes are diffi-
the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond was vacant at the time cult to predict and affect the longer-run outlook, this partici-
of this FOMC meeting; First Vice President Mark L. Mullinix pant’s forecast did not incorporate convergence to longer-
again submitted economic projections. term outcomes for variables other than inflation.
2 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for 3 Participants had completed their submissions for the Sum-
real output growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal mary of Economic Projections before the full effects of Hur-
funds rate. This participant’s projections over the next several ricane Maria were evident.
years were informed by the view that the U.S. economy is

--- Page 14 ---

,stnediserp
knaB
evreseR
laredeF
dna
srebmem
draoB
evreseR
laredeF
fo
snoitcejorp
cimonocE
.1
elbaT
7102
rebmetpeS
,ycilop
yratenom
etairporppa
detcejorp
fo
stnemssessa
laudividni
rieht
rednu
tnecreP
3egnaR
2ycnednetlartneC
1naideM
regnoL
0202
9102
8102
7102
regnoL
0202
9102
8102
7102
regnoL
0202
9102
8102
7102
elbairaV
nur
nur
nur
2.2–5.1
0.2–4.1
3.2–4.1
6.2–7.1
7.2–2.2
0.2–8.1
0.2–6.1
1.2–7.1
3.2–0.2
5.2–2.2
8.1
8.1
0.2
1.2
4.2
PDGlaerniegnahC
2.2–5.1
.a.n
3.2–4.1
3.2–7.1
5.2–0.2
0.2–8.1
.a.n
0.2–8.1
2.2–8.1
2.2–1.2
8.1
.a.n
9.1
1.2
2.2
noitcejorpenuJ
0.5–4.4
8.4–8.3
5.4–8.3
5.4–9.3
5.4–2.4
8.4–5.4
5.4–0.4
4.4–9.3
2.4–0.4
3.4–2.4
6.4
2.4
1.4
1.4
3.4
etartnemyolpmenU
0.5–5.4
.a.n
5.4–8.3
5.4–9.3
5.4–1.4
8.4–5.4
.a.n
4.4–1.4
3.4–0.4
3.4–2.4
6.4
.a.n
2.4
2.4
3.4
noitcejorpenuJ
0.2
2.2–9.1
2.2–8.1
0.2–7.1
7.1–5.1
0.2
1.2–0.2
0.2
0.2–8.1
6.1–5.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
9.1
6.1
noitaflniECP
0.2
.a.n
2.2–8.1
1.2–7.1
8.1–5.1
0.2
.a.n
1.2–0.2
0.2–8.1
7.1–6.1
0.2
.a.n
0.2
0.2
6.1
noitcejorpenuJ
2.2–9.1
2.2–8.1
0.2–7.1
7.1–4.1
1.2–0.2
0.2
0.2–8.1
6.1–5.1
0.2
0.2
9.1
5.1
4noitaflniECPeroC
.a.n
2.2–8.1
1.2–7.1
8.1–6.1
.a.n
1.2–0.2
0.2–8.1
7.1–6.1
.a.n
0.2
0.2
7.1
noitcejorpenuJ detcejorP:omeM
htapycilopetairporppa
5.3–3.2
9.3–1.1
4.3–1.1
6.2–1.1
6.1–1.1
0.3–5.2
5.3–5.2
1.3–4.2
4.2–9.1
4.1–1.1
8.2
9.2
7.2
1.2
4.1
etarsdnuflaredeF
5.3–5.2
.a.n
1.4–1.1
1.3–1.1
6.1–1.1
0.3–8.2
.a.n
1.3–6.2
6.2–9.1
6.1–1.1
0.3
.a.n
9.2
1.2
4.1
noitcejorpenuJ
suoiverp
eht
fo retrauq
htruof
eht
morf
segnahc
tnecrep
era
noitaflni
fo
serusaem
htob
rof
snoitcejorp
dna
)PDG(
tcudorp
citsemod
ssorg
laer
ni
egnahc
fo
snoitcejorP
:etoN
noitpmusnoclanosreprofxedniecirpeht,ylevitcepser
,niegnahcfosetaregatnecrepehteranoitaflniECPerocdnanoitaflniECP
.detacidniraeyehtforetrauqhtruofehtotraey
htruof
eht
ni
etar
tnemyolpmenu
nailivic
egareva
eht
rof
era
etar
tnemyolpmenu
eht
rof
snoitcejorP
.ygrene
dna
doof
gnidulcxe
ECP
rof
xedni
ecirp
eht
dna
)ECP(
serutidnepxe
s’tnapicitraphcaetneserpersnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.ycilopyratenometairporppafotnemssessarehrosihnodesaberasnoitcejorps’tnapicitraphcaE
.detacidniraeyehtforetrauq
snoitcejorpehT
.ymonoceehtotskcohsrehtruffoecnesbaehtnidnaycilopyratenometairporpparednuegrevnocotdetcepxeebdluowelbairavhcaehcihwotetarehtfotnemssessa
laredef
eht
rof
level
tegrat
etairporppa
detcejorp
eht
ro
etar
sdnuf
laredef
eht
rof
egnar
tegrat
etairporppa
detcejorp
eht
fo
tniopdim
eht
fo
eulav
eht
era
etar
sdnuf
laredef
eht
rof
noeettimmoCtekraMnepOlaredeFehtfogniteemehthtiwnoitcnujnocniedamerewsnoitcejorpenuJehT
.nurregnolehtrevororaeyradnelacdefiicepsehtfodneehttaetarsdnuf
enuJehthtiwnoitcnujnocnietarsdnuflaredefehtro,etartnemyolpmenueht,PDGlaerniegnahcehtrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoltimbustondidtnapicitrapenO
.7102,41–31enuJ
.gniteem,7102,02–91rebmetpeSehthtiwnoitcnujnocnisnoitcejorphcustimbustondidtnapicitrapenodna,gniteem,7102,41–31
eht
si
naidem
eht
,neve
si
snoitcejorp
fo
rebmun
eht
nehW
.tsehgih
ot
tsewol
morf
degnarra
era
snoitcejorp
eht
nehw
noitcejorp
elddim
eht
si
naidem
eht
,doirep
hcae
roF
.1
.snoitcejorpelddimowtehtfoegareva
.raeyhcaenielbairavhcaerofsnoitcejorptsewoleerhtdnatsehgiheerhtehtsedulcxeycnednetlartnecehT
.2
.raeytahtnielbairavtahtrof,tsehgihottsewolmorf,snoitcejorp’stnapicitrapllasedulcniraeyneviganielbairavarofegnarehT
.3
.detcelloctoneranoitaflniECPerocrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.4
_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________

--- Page 15 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_9–_2_0_,_ 2_0_1_7____________P_a_g_e_ _3
Figure1. Medians,centraltendencies,andrangesofeconomicprojections,2017–20andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections 3
2
Actual 1
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
8
7
6
5
4
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesof
thevariablesareannual.

--- Page 16 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure2. FOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy: Midpointoftargetrangeortargetlevelfor
thefederalfundsrate
Percent
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
2017 2018 2019 2020 Longer run
Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual par-
ticipant’sjudgmentofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfundsrateortheappropriatetarget
levelforthefederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun. Oneparticipantdidnot
submitlonger-runprojectionsforthefederalfundsrate.

--- Page 17 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t _h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_9–_2_0_,_ 2_0_1_7____________P_a_g_e_ _5
and 1.8 percent in 2020; the median of projections for Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri-
the longer-run normal rate of real GDP growth was butions of participants’ views about the outlook for in-
1.8 percent. Compared with the June Summary of Eco- flation. The distributions of projections for headline
nomic Projections (SEP), the median of the forecasts for PCE inflation and for core PCE inflation in 2017 moved
real GDP growth for 2017 was a bit higher, while the down somewhat from June, and the distributions for
medians for 2018 and 2019, as well as the median assess- both measures in 2018 shifted down slightly. Most par-
ment of the longer-run growth rate, were mostly un- ticipants indicated that the soft readings on inflation so
changed. Most participants did not incorporate expec- far this year were a factor contributing to the revisions
tations of fiscal stimulus in their projections. Several in their inflation forecasts.
participants who included some fiscal stimulus indicated
Appropriate Monetary Policy
that they had marked down its expected magnitude rela-
Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’
tive to their June projections.
judgments regarding the appropriate target or midpoint
The median of projections for the unemployment rate in of the target range for the federal funds rate at the end
the fourth quarter of 2017 was 4.3 percent, unchanged of each year from 2017 to 2020 and over the longer run.
from June and 0.3 percentage point below the median The distributions for 2017 and 2018 became somewhat
assessment of its longer-run normal level. The medians less dispersed compared with those in June. Even
of the unemployment rate projections for 2018 through though the range of the distribution in 2019 was nar-
2020 were a little above 4 percent. The median estimate rower than in June, other measures of dispersion were
of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment was roughly unchanged. The median projections of the fed-
4.6 percent, unchanged from June. eral funds rate continued to show gradual increases, with
the median assessment for 2017 standing at 1.38 per-
Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of partici-
cent, consistent with three 25 basis point increases this
pants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unem-
year. Thereafter, the medians of the projections were
ployment rate from 2017 to 2020 and in the longer run.
2.13 percent at the end of 2018, 2.69 percent at the end
The distribution of individual projections for real GDP
of 2019, and 2.88 percent at the end of 2020. Compared
growth for this year shifted up, with half of the partici-
with their projections prepared for the June SEP, some
pants now expecting real GDP growth of 2.4 or 2.5 per-
participants reduced their projection for the federal
cent and none seeing it below 2.2 percent. The distribu-
funds rate in the longer run; the median declined
tion of projected real GDP growth in 2018 also shifted
0.25 percentage point, to 2.75 percent.
up a bit, while the distributions in 2019 and in the longer
run were broadly similar to the distributions of the June In discussing their September projections, many partici-
projections. The distributions of individual projections pants again expressed the view that the appropriate up-
for the unemployment rate in 2018 and 2019 shifted ward trajectory of the federal funds rate over the next
down slightly. few years would likely be gradual. That anticipated pace
reflected a few factors, including a neutral real interest
The Outlook for Inflation
rate that was currently low and was expected to move up
The median of projections for headline PCE inflation
only slowly as well as a gradual return of inflation to the
was 1.6 percent this year, 1.9 percent next year, and
Committee’s 2 percent objective. Some participants
2 percent in 2019 and 2020, about unchanged from June.
judged that a slightly lower path of the federal funds rate
Most participants anticipated that inflation would con-
than in their previous projections would likely be appro-
tinue to run slightly below 2 percent in 2018, while no
priate, with a few citing a slower rate of progress toward
participants expected inflation above 2 percent in that
the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective than pre-
year. About half projected that inflation would be equal
viously expected or reduced prospects for fiscal stimu-
to the Committee’s objective in 2019 and 2020; others
lus. In their discussions of appropriate monetary policy,
projected that inflation would run a little above or below
some of the participants mentioned their assumptions
the Committee’s objective in one or both of those years.
for the Committee’s reinvestment policy; all of those
The median of projections for core PCE inflation was
who did so anticipated that the Committee would begin
1.5 percent in 2017 and 1.9 percent in 2018, a decline of
its program of balance sheet normalization, described in
0.2 percentage point and 0.1 percentage point from
the Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles
June, respectively. The median projection for core PCE
and Plans released in June, before the end of this year.
inflation in 2019 and 2020 was 2.0 percent.

--- Page 18 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2017–20andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2017
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 2 1. 4 1. 6 1. 8 2. 0 2. 2 2. 4 2. 6
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 2 1. 4 1. 6 1. 8 2. 0 2. 2 2. 4 2. 6
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 2 1. 4 1. 6 1. 8 2. 0 2. 2 2. 4 2. 6
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 2 1. 4 1. 6 1. 8 2. 0 2. 2 2. 4 2. 6
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 19 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_9–_2_0_,_ 2_0_1_7____________P_a_g_e_ _7
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2017–20andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2017
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2 4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0
3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2 4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0
3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2 4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0
3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5.0
3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2 4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0
3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2017–20andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2017
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_9–_2_0_,_ 2_0_1_7____________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2017–20
Number of participants
2017
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 3 1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 22 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’judgmentsofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfunds
rateortheappropriatetargetlevelforthefederalfundsrate,2017–20andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2017
September projections 18
June projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
2020
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 23 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t _h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_9–_2_0_,_ 2_0_1_7___________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges and the risks around the projections are broadly bal-
Percentage points anced, future outcomes of these variables would have
Variable 2017 2018 2019 2020
about a 70 percent probability of occurring within these
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . ±1.2 ±1.9 ±2.0 ±2.1
confidence intervals. For all three variables, this meas-
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . ±0.3 ±1.1 ±1.6 ±2.0 ure of forecast uncertainty is substantial and generally
increases as the forecast horizon lengthens.
Total consumer prices2 . . . . ±0.8 ±1.1 ±1.2 ±1.1
Short-term interest rates3 . . . ±0.5 ±1.7 ±2.3 ±2.7 FOMC participants may judge that the width of the his-
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root torical fan charts shown in figures 4.A through 4.C does
mean squared error of projections for 1997 through 2016 that were re- not adequately capture their current assessments of the
leased in the fall by various private and government forecasters. As de-
degree of uncertainty that surrounds their economic
scribed in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions,
there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real GDP, projections. Participants’ assessments of the current
unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will be in level of uncertainty surrounding their economic projec-
ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the past.
tions are shown in the bottom-left panels of figures 4.A,
For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2017),
“Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using Historical 4.B, and 4.C. All or nearly all participants viewed the
Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance and Eco-
degree of uncertainty attached to their economic projec-
nomics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System, February), www.federalreserve.gov/ tions about GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and
econresdata/feds/2017/files/2017020pap.pdf. inflation as broadly similar to the average of the past
1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
20 years, and all participants saw the degree of uncer-
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure
that has been most widely used in government and private economic tainty as unchanged from June.4 In their discussion of
forecasts. Projections are percent changes on a fourth quarter to fourth the uncertainty attached to their current projections, a
quarter basis.
few participants judged that near-term uncertainty for
3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds
rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills. economic activity and inflation had increased as a result
Projection errors are calculated using average levels, in percent, in the of the effects of Hurricanes Harvey and Irma but com-
fourth quarter.
mented that their assessment of medium-term prospects
was unaffected.
Uncertainty and Risks
The fan charts, which are constructed so as to be sym-
The future outcomes of economic variables are subject
metric around the median projections, also may not fully
to considerable uncertainty. In assessing the path of
reflect participants’ current assessments of the balance
monetary policy that, in their view, is likely to be most
of risks to their economic projections. Participants’ as-
appropriate, FOMC participants take account of the
sessments of the balance of risks to their economic pro-
range of possible economic outcomes, the likelihood of
jections are shown in the bottom-right panels of figures
those outcomes, and the potential benefits and costs
4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. As in June, most participants judged
should they occur. Table 2 provides one measure of
the risks to their projections of real GDP growth, the
forecast uncertainty for the change in real GDP, the un-
unemployment rate, headline inflation, and core infla-
employment rate, and total consumer price inflation—
tion as broadly balanced—in other words, as broadly
the root mean squared error (RMSE) from forecast er-
consistent with a symmetric fan chart. One fewer par-
rors of various private and government projections
ticipant than in June judged the risks to GDP growth as
made over the past 20 years. This measure of forecast
weighted to the upside, and one fewer participant judged
uncertainty is incorporated graphically in the top panels
the risks to the unemployment rate as weighted to the
of figures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C, which display “fan charts”
downside. Also, one fewer participant judged the risks
plotting the median SEP projections for the three varia-
to inflation to be weighted to the upside, and one more
bles surrounded by symmetric confidence intervals de-
viewed the risks as weighted to the downside.
rived from the RMSEs presented in table 2. The width
of the confidence interval for each variable at a given Participants’ assessments of the future path of the fed-
point is a measure of forecast uncertainty at that horizon. eral funds rate consistent with appropriate policy are also
If the degree of uncertainty attending these projections subject to considerable uncertainty, reflecting in part un-
is similar to the typical magnitude of past forecast errors certainty about the evolution of GDP growth, the un-
employment rate, and inflation over time. The final line
4 At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projec-
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the tions.
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess

--- Page 24 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4.A.UncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsofGDPgrowth
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections
70% confidence interval 4
3
2
Actual 1
0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth Risks to GDP growth
September projections September projections
18 18
June projections June projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Theblueandredlinesinthetoppanelshowactualvaluesandmedianprojectedvalues,respectively,ofthe
percentchangeinrealgrossdomesticproduct(GDP)fromthefourthquarterofthepreviousyeartothefourthquarter
of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is
basedonrootmeansquarederrorsofvariousprivateandgovernmentforecastsmadeovertheprevious20years;more
information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed,
on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the
historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around
theirprojections;thesecurrentassessmentsaresummarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,participantswho
judgetheuncertaintyabouttheirprojectionsas“broadlysimilar”totheaveragelevelsofthepast20yearswouldview
the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of
the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as“broadly
balanced”would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of
uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 25 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t_h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_9–_2_0_,_ 2_0_1_7___________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Figure4.B.Uncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsoftheunemploymentrate
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Unemployment rate
Median of projections 10
70% confidence interval
9
8
7
6
Actual
5
4
3
2
1
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate
September projections September projections
18 18
June projections June projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of
the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around
the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private
and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2.
Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width
and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC
participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are
summarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,participantswhojudgetheuncertaintyabouttheirprojectionsas
“broadlysimilar”totheaveragelevelsofthepast20yearswouldviewthewidthoftheconfidenceintervalshowninthe
historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise,
participants who judge the risks to their projections as“broadly balanced”would view the confidence interval around
theirprojectionsasapproximatelysymmetric. Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethe
box“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 26 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_4____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4.C.UncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsofPCEinflation
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
PCE inflation
Median of projections
70% confidence interval
3
2
1
Actual
0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation Risks to PCE inflation
September projections September projections
18 18
June projections June projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation Risks to core PCE inflation
September projections September projections
18 18
June projections June projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Theblueandredlinesinthetoppanelshowactualvaluesandmedianprojectedvalues,respectively,ofthe
percentchangeinthepriceindexforpersonalconsumptionexpenditures(PCE)fromthefourthquarteroftheprevious
yeartothefourthquarteroftheyearindicated. Theconfidenceintervalaroundthemedianprojectedvaluesisassumed
to be symmetricand is based on root mean squarederrorsof variousprivateand governmentforecastsmade over the
previous20years;moreinformationaboutthesedataisavailableintable2. Becausecurrentconditionsmaydifferfrom
those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated
onthebasisofthehistoricalforecasterrorsmaynotreflectFOMCparticipants’currentassessmentsoftheuncertainty
andrisksaroundtheirprojections;thesecurrentassessmentsaresummarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,
participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as“broadly similar”to the average levels of the past
20yearswouldviewthewidthoftheconfidenceintervalshowninthehistoricalfanchartaslargelyconsistentwiththeir
assessments of the uncertaintyabout their projections. Likewise, participantswho judgethe risks to their projections
as“broadly balanced”would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For
definitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 27 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t _h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_9–_2_0_,_ 2_0_1_7___________P__ag_e_ _1_5
in table 2 shows the RMSEs for forecasts of short-term ments to monetary policy that may be appropriate to off-
interest rates. These RMSEs are not strictly consistent set the effects of shocks to the economy. To illustrate
with the SEP projections for the federal funds rate, in the uncertainty regarding the appropriate path for mon-
part because the SEP projections are not forecasts of the etary policy, figure 5 shows a fan chart plotting the me-
most likely outcomes but rather reflect each participant’s dian SEP projections for the federal funds rate sur-
individual assessment of appropriate monetary policy. rounded by confidence intervals derived from the results
However, the associated confidence intervals provide a presented in table 2. As with the macroeconomic varia-
sense of the likely uncertainty around the future path of bles, forecast uncertainty is substantial and increases at
the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about longer horizons.
the macroeconomic variables and additional adjust-

--- Page 28 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_6____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure5. Uncertaintyinprojectionsofthefederalfundsrate
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Federal funds rate
Midpoint of target range
6
Median of projections
70% confidence interval*
5
4
3
2
Actual 1
0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Com-
mittee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the
target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level.
The confidence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private
and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The confidence interval is not strictly consistent with the
projectionsforthefederalfundsrate,primarilybecausetheseprojectionsarenotforecastsofthelikeliestoutcomesfor
the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy.
Still,historicalforecasterrorsprovideabroadsenseoftheuncertaintyaroundthefuturepathofthefederalfundsrate
generatedbytheuncertaintyaboutthemacroeconomicvariablesaswellasadditionaladjustmentstomonetarypolicy
thatmaybeappropriatetooffsettheeffectsofshockstotheeconomy.
Theconfidenceintervalisassumedtobesymmetricexceptwhenitistruncatedatzero—thebottomofthelowest
target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would
not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy
accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools,
including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current
conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the
confidenceintervalestimatedonthebasisofthehistoricalforecasterrorsmaynotreflectFOMCparticipants’current
assessmentsoftheuncertaintyandrisksaroundtheirprojections.
* The confidence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth
quarteroftheyearindicated;moreinformationaboutthesedataisavailableintable2. Theshadedareaencompasses
lessthana70percentconfidenceintervaliftheconfidenceintervalhasbeentruncatedatzero.

--- Page 29 ---

_________________S_u_m_m__a_ry_ _o_f _E_c_o_n_o_m__ic_ _P_ro_j_e_ct_io__n_s _o_f _t _h_e _M__ee_t_in_g_ _o_f _S_e_p_te_m__b_er_ _1_9–_2_0_,_ 2_0_1_7___________P__ag_e_ _1_7
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the members of rent assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projec-
the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal tions are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those fig-
Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among ures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the
policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are
for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
projections, however. The economic and statistical models while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top
and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to par-
are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and ticipants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that
the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather
unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the than below their projections. These judgments are summa-
stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only rized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C.
what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as em- As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the
bodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable
possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the poten- uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each
tial costs to the economy should they occur. participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of mone-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a tary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real ac-
range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary tivity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve
Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropri-
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open ate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that
Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges
shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty as- for forecasts of short-term interest rates. They suggest that
sociated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a the historical confidence intervals associated with projections
participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted,
and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly con-
respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- sistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these
tending those projections is similar to that experienced in the projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly out-
past and the risks around the projections are broadly bal- comes but rather are projections of participants’ individual as-
anced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a prob- sessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an
ability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand end-of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should pro-
within a range of 1.8 to 4.2 percent in the current year, 1.1 to vide a sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the
4.9 percent in the second year, 1.0 to 5.0 percent in the third federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the mac-
year, and 0.9 to 5.1 percent in the fourth year. The corre- roeconomic variables as well as additional adjustments to
sponding 70 percent confidence intervals for overall infla- monetary policy that would be appropriate to offset the ef-
tion would be 1.2 to 2.8 percent in the current year, 0.9 to fects of shocks to the economy.
3.1 percent in the second year, 0.8 to 3.2 percent in the third If at some point in the future the confidence interval
year, and 0.9 to 3.1 percent in the fourth year. Figures 4.A around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it
through 4.C illustrate these confidence bounds in “fan would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart
charts” that are symmetric and centered on the medians of shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target
FOMC participants’ projections for GDP growth, the unem- range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the
ployment rate, and inflation. However, in some instances, Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of
the risks around the projections may not be symmetric. In the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention;
particular, the unemployment rate cannot be negative; fur- it would not have any implications for possible future policy
thermore, the risks around a particular projection might be decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to pro-
tilted to either the upside or the downside, in which case the vide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so
corresponding fan chart would be asymmetrically positioned were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could
around the median projection. also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset
Because current conditions may differ from those that purchases, to provide additional accommodation.
prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on
judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1
projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller provides information on the range of views across FOMC
than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncer- participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A
tainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections
reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in across participants is much smaller than the average forecast
the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ cur- errors over the past 20 years.

# Tables

## Page_14_Table_1


|                  | 0202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                              |
|------------------|------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                              |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                              |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                              |
| 2ycnednetlartneC | regnoL
nur | 0.2–8.1 0.2–8.1 8.4–5.4 8.4–5.4
0.2 0.2
0.2–6.1 5.4–0.4 1.2–0.2 1.2–0.2
.a.n .a.n .a.n .a.n
1.2–7.1 0.2–8.1 4.4–9.3 4.4–1.4 1.2–0.2 1.2–0.2
0.2 0.2
3.2–0.2 2.2–8.1 2.4–0.4 3.4–0.4 0.2–8.1 0.2–8.1 0.2–8.1 0.2–8.1
5.2–2.2 2.2–1.2 3.4–2.4 3.4–2.4 6.1–5.1 7.1–6.1 6.1–5.1 7.1–6.1 | 0.3–5.2 0.3–8.2
5.3–5.2
.a.n
1.3–4.2 1.3–6.2
4.2–9.1 6.2–9.1
4.1–1.1 6.1–1.1 |
|                  | 0202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                              |
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                              |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                              |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                              |
| 1naideM          | regnoL
nur | 8.1 8.1 6.4 6.4 0.2 0.2
8.1 .a.n 2.4 .a.n 0.2 .a.n 0.2 .a.n
0.2 9.1 1.4 2.4 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
1.2 1.2 1.4 2.4 9.1 0.2 9.1 0.2
4.2 2.2 3.4 3.4 6.1 6.1 5.1 7.1                                                                                                                         | 8.2 0.3
9.2 .a.n
7.2 9.2
1.2 1.2
4.1 4.1                                     |
|                  | 0202       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                              |
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                              |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                              |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |                                                                              |