# 20170726_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:38:20*
*Pages: 11, Tables: 0*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

________________________________________________________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
July 25–26, 2017
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Ann E. Misback,2 Secretary, Office of the Secretary,
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of Board of Governors
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, July 25, 2017, at 1:00 Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division of Supervision
p.m. and continued on Wednesday, July 26, 2017, at 9:00 and Regulation, Board of Governors; Andreas
a.m.1 Lehnert, Director, Division of Financial Stability,
Board of Governors
PRESENT:
Janet L. Yellen, Chair Margie Shanks,3 Deputy Secretary, Office of the
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Secretary, Board of Governors
Lael Brainard
Charles L. Evans Stephen A. Meyer, Deputy Director, Division of
Stanley Fischer Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Mark E.
Patrick Harker Van Der Weide, Deputy Director, Division of
Robert S. Kaplan Supervision and Regulation, Board of Governors
Neel Kashkari
Jerome H. Powell Trevor A. Reeve, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair,
Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Raphael W. Bostic, Loretta J. Mester, Mark L. Mullinix,
Michael Strine, and John C. Williams, Alternate Joseph W. Gruber, David Reifschneider, and John M.
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee Roberts, Special Advisers to the Board, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren,
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Linda Robertson,2 Assistant to the Board, Office of
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively Board Members, Board of Governors
Brian F. Madigan, Secretary Joshua Gallin and David E. Lebow, Senior Associate
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Directors, Division of Research and Statistics,
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Board of Governors; Fabio M. Natalucci, Senior
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Board of Governors
Steven B. Kamin, Economist
Thomas Laubach, Economist Antulio N. Bomfim, Ellen E. Meade, Edward Nelson,
David W. Wilcox, Economist Robert J. Tetlow, and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior
Advisers, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Michael Dotsey, Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd, Senior Adviser,
Eric M. Engen, Evan F. Koenig, Beth Anne Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
Wilson, and Mark L.J. Wright, Associate Governors
Economists
Stephanie R. Aaronson and Glenn Follette, Assistant
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Directors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors; Elizabeth Klee, Assistant
Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Market Account Governors
1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the 2 Attended Tuesday session only.
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. 3 Attended Wednesday session only.

--- Page 2 ---

_P _ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Penelope A. Beattie,2 Assistant to the Secretary, Office Take-up at the System’s overnight reverse repurchase
of the Secretary, Board of Governors agreement facility averaged about $200 billion. Condi-
tions in foreign exchange swap markets were fairly sta-
Dana L. Burnett, Section Chief, Division of Monetary ble, and demand at central bank dollar auctions was rel-
Affairs, Board of Governors atively low. The manager also reported on small-value
tests of open market operations, which are conducted
John Kandrac, Senior Economist, Division of routinely to promote operational readiness.
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Market expectations for the path of the federal funds
rate were little changed. Survey evidence suggested that
Mark Libell,3 Assistant Congressional Liaison, Office of
most market participants now anticipated that the
Board Members, Board of Governors
FOMC would announce at its September meeting a date
for implementation of a change in reinvestment policy,
Gregory L. Stefani, First Vice President, Federal
although a couple of survey respondents expressed the
Reserve Bank of Cleveland
view that the timing could be affected by developments
regarding the federal debt ceiling. The survey results
David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Beverly Hirtle,
also suggested that, while views were somewhat dis-
Glenn D. Rudebusch, Ellis W. Tallman, and
persed, respondents typically expected effects on bond
Christopher J. Waller, Executive Vice Presidents,
yields and spreads on mortgage-backed securities from
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Richmond, New
the change in reinvestment policy to be modest.
York, San Francisco, Cleveland, and St. Louis,
respectively By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Open
Market Desk’s domestic transactions over the intermeet-
Daniel Aaronson, Joe Peek, and Jonathan L. Willis, ing period. There were no intervention operations in
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago, foreign currencies for the System’s account during the
Boston, and Kansas City, respectively intermeeting period.
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
Selection of Committee Officer
The information reviewed for the July 25–26 meeting
By unanimous vote, the Committee selected Mark E.
showed that labor market conditions continued to
Van Der Weide to serve as general counsel, effective at
strengthen in June and that real gross domestic product
the time he becomes the Board of Governors’ general
(GDP) likely expanded at a faster pace in the second
counsel, until the selection of his successor at the first
quarter than in the first quarter. The 12-month change
regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2018.
in overall consumer prices, as measured by the price in-
Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar- dex for personal consumption expenditures (PCE),
ket Operations slowed again in May; both total consumer price inflation
The manager of the System Open Market Account and core inflation, which excludes consumer food and
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and for- energy prices, were running below 2 percent. Data from
eign financial markets over the period since the June the consumer and producer price indexes for June sug-
FOMC meeting. The intermeeting period was relatively gested that both total and core PCE price inflation (on a
uneventful. Bond yields in advanced economies in- 12-month change basis) remained at a pace similar to
creased moderately, in part reflecting evolving market that seen in the previous month. Survey-based measures
perceptions of prospects for foreign monetary policies. of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed
U.S. bond yields rose to a smaller degree, and the value on balance.
of the dollar on foreign exchange markets decreased.
Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded solidly in
Implied volatility in fixed-income markets remained low.
June, and the average monthly pace of private-sector job
Equity prices rose further, with notable advances in in-
gains over the first half of the year was essentially the
dexes for emerging markets.
same as last year. The unemployment rate edged up to
The increase in the FOMC’s target range for the federal 4.4 percent in June; the unemployment rates for African
funds rate at the June meeting was reflected in other Americans and for Hispanics declined slightly but re-
money market interest rates, and the effective federal mained above the unemployment rates for Asians and
funds rate was near the middle of the new target range for whites. In addition, the median length of time that
over the intermeeting period except on quarter-end. unemployed African Americans had been out of work

--- Page 3 ---

_ _____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f _J_u_ly_ 2_5_–_2_6_,_ 2_0_1_7_________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
exceeded the comparable figures for whites and for His- home sales in May partly reversed the previous month’s
panics, a pattern that has prevailed for at least the past decline.
two decades. The overall labor force participation rate
Real private expenditures for business equipment and in-
edged up in June, and the share of workers employed
tellectual property appeared to have increased moder-
part time for economic reasons rose a bit. The rate of
ately in the second quarter after a solid gain in the first
private-sector job openings decreased in May after hav-
quarter. Nominal shipments of nondefense capital
ing risen for a couple of months, while the quits rate and
goods excluding aircraft rose again in May, and new or-
the hiring rate both increased. The four-week moving
ders of these goods continued to exceed shipments,
average of initial claims for unemployment insurance
pointing to further gains in shipments in the near term.
benefits remained at a very low level through mid-July.
In addition, indicators of business sentiment remained
Average hourly earnings for all employees increased
upbeat. Investment in nonresidential structures ap-
2½ percent over the 12 months ending in June, about
peared to have risen at a markedly slower pace in the
the same as over the comparable period a year earlier but
second quarter than in the first. Firms’ nominal spend-
a little slower than the rate of increase in late 2016.
ing for nonresidential structures excluding drilling and
Total industrial production rose moderately, on balance, mining declined further in May, and the number of oil
in May and June, as an increase in the output of mines and gas rigs in operation, an indicator of spending for
and utilities more than offset a net decline in manufac- structures in the drilling and mining sector, leveled out
turing production. Automakers’ assembly schedules in- in recent weeks after increasing steadily for the past year.
dicated that motor vehicle production would edge down
Nominal outlays for defense through June pointed to an
again in the third quarter, likely reflecting a somewhat
increase in real federal government purchases in the sec-
elevated level of dealers’ inventories and a slowing in the
ond quarter. However, real purchases by state and local
pace of vehicle sales last quarter. However, broader in-
governments appeared to have declined. Payrolls for
dicators of manufacturing production, such as the new
state and local governments expanded during the second
orders indexes from national and regional manufactur-
quarter, but nominal construction spending by these
ing surveys, pointed to moderate gains in factory output
governments decreased, on net, in April and May.
over the near term.
The nominal U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in
Real PCE appeared to have rebounded in the second
May, with an increase in exports and a small decline in
quarter after increasing only modestly in the first quarter.
imports. Export growth was led by consumer goods,
Much of the rebound looked to have been concentrated
automotive products, and services. The import decline
in spending on energy services and energy goods, which
was driven by consumer goods and automotive prod-
was held down by unseasonably warm weather earlier in
ucts. The available data suggested that net exports were
the year. The components of the nominal retail sales
a slight drag on real GDP growth in the second quarter.
data used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis to con-
struct its estimate of PCE declined in June but rose, on Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE
net, in the second quarter. Light motor vehicle sales price index, increased 1½ percent over the 12 months
edged down further in June. However, recent readings ending in May. Core PCE price inflation was also
on key factors that influence consumer spending— 1½ percent over that same period. Over the 12 months
including continued gains in employment, real disposa- ending in June, the consumer price index (CPI) rose
ble personal income, and households’ net worth— 1½ percent, while core CPI inflation was 1¾ percent.
pointed to solid growth in total real PCE in the near The median of inflation expectations over the next 5 to
term. Consumer sentiment, as measured by the Univer- 10 years from the Michigan survey edged up both in June
sity of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, remained up- and in the preliminary reading for July. Other measures
beat despite having moved down in early July. of longer-run inflation expectations were generally little
changed, on balance, in recent months, although those
Residential investment seemed to have declined in the
from the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey
second quarter. Starts of both new single-family homes
of Market Participants had ticked down recently.
and multifamily units rose in June but still decreased for
the second quarter as a whole. The issuance of building Incoming data suggested that economic growth contin-
permits for both types of housing was lower in the sec- ued to firm abroad, especially among advanced foreign
ond quarter than in the first quarter. Sales of existing economies (AFEs). The pickup in advanced-economy
homes decreased, on net, in May and June, and new demand also contributed to relatively strong growth in

--- Page 4 ---

_P _ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
China and emerging Asia, but growth in Latin America very low by historical standards, apparently weighed
remained relatively weak, partly reflecting tight monetary down by accommodative monetary policies abroad and
and fiscal policies. Despite the stronger momentum of possibly by declines in the long-term neutral real interest
economic activity in the AFEs, headline inflation de- rate over recent years.
clined sharply in the second quarter, largely reflecting
Broad U.S. equity price indexes rose. One-month-ahead
lower retail energy prices, and core inflation stayed sub-
option-implied volatility of the S&P 500 index—the
dued in many AFEs. Although inflation was also low in
VIX—remained at historically low levels. Spreads of
most emerging market economies (EMEs), it remained
yields on investment- and speculative-grade nonfinancial
elevated in Mexico because of rising food inflation and
corporate bonds over comparable-maturity Treasury se-
earlier peso depreciation.
curities narrowed a bit on net.
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
Conditions in short-term funding markets were stable
Domestic financial market conditions remained gener-
over the intermeeting period. Reflecting the FOMC’s
ally accommodative over the intermeeting period. U.S.
policy action in June, yields on a broad set of money
equity prices rose, longer-term Treasury yields increased
market instruments moved about 25 basis points higher.
slightly, and the dollar depreciated. The Committee’s
However, over much of the period, the net increase in
decision to raise the target range for the federal funds
rates on shorter-dated Treasury bills was smaller, report-
rate to 1 to 1¼ percent at the June meeting was widely
edly reflecting a reduction in Treasury bill supply.
anticipated in financial markets, and market participants
reportedly viewed FOMC communications as largely in Financing for large nonfinancial firms remained readily
line with expectations. Financing conditions for nonfi- available, although debt issuance moderated. Gross is-
nancial businesses and households generally remained suance of corporate bonds stepped down in June from
supportive of growth in spending. a strong pace in May, while issuance of institutional lev-
eraged loans continued to be robust. Commercial and
FOMC communications over the intermeeting period
industrial lending by banks remained quite weak in the
were viewed as broadly in line with investors’ expecta-
second quarter. Responses from the July Senior Loan
tions that the Committee would continue to remove pol-
Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices
icy accommodation at a gradual pace. Market partici-
(SLOOS) indicated that depressed demand was largely
pants generally interpreted the information on reinvest-
responsible, and that banks’ lending standards were little
ment policy provided in June in the Committee’s
changed in recent months. The most cited reason for
postmeeting statement and its Addendum to the Policy
the lackluster loan demand was subdued investment
Normalization Principles and Plans as consistent with
spending by nonfinancial businesses, but banks also re-
their expectation that a change to reinvestment policy
ported that some borrowers had shifted to other sources
was likely to occur this year. Market participants also
of external financing or to internally generated funds.
took note of the summary in the June minutes of the
Committee’s discussion of the progress toward the Financing conditions for commercial real estate (CRE)
Committee’s 2 percent longer-run inflation objective remained accommodative, although the growth of CRE
and the extent to which recent softness in price data re- loans on banks’ books slowed somewhat. Respondents
flected idiosyncratic factors. Overnight index swap rates to the July SLOOS reported tightening credit standards
pointed to little change in the expected path of the fed- for these loans. SLOOS respondents also reported that
eral funds rate on net. standards on CRE loans were tight relative to their his-
torical range, and that, on net, demand for CRE loans
Yields on intermediate- and longer-term nominal Treas-
weakened in recent months. The pace of issuance of
ury securities increased slightly over the intermeeting pe-
commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS)
riod. Although yields fell following the publication of
through the first half of the year was similar to that seen
lower-than-expected CPI data, yields were boosted by
last year. Delinquency rates on loans in CMBS pools
comments from foreign central bank officials that inves-
originated before the financial crisis continued to in-
tors read as pointing to less accommodative monetary
crease.
policies abroad than previously expected. Measures of
inflation compensation based on Treasury Inflation- Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market
Protected Securities ticked up since the June FOMC were little changed, and flows of new credit continued at
meeting. Despite their intermeeting period gains, a moderate pace. However, growth of mortgage loans
longer-term real and nominal Treasury yields remained on banks’ books slowed somewhat in the first half of this

--- Page 5 ---

_ _____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f _J_u_ly_ 2_5_–_2_6_,_ 2_0_1_7_________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
year. SLOOS respondents, on net, reported that stand- Staff Economic Outlook
ards on most residential mortgage loan categories eased The U.S. economic projection prepared by the staff for
slightly. the July FOMC meeting was broadly similar to the pre-
vious forecast. In particular, real GDP growth, which
Consumer credit continued to grow on a year-over-year
was modest in the first quarter, was still expected to have
basis, but the expansion of credit card and auto loan bal-
stepped up to a solid pace in the second quarter and to
ances appeared to slow from the rapid pace that was ev-
maintain roughly the same rate of increase in the second
ident through the end of last year. In the July SLOOS,
half of the year. In this projection, the staff scaled back
banks reported having tightened standards and widened
its assumptions regarding the magnitude and duration of
spreads for credit card and auto loans on net. Standards
fiscal policy expansion in the coming years. However,
for the subprime segments of these loan types were par-
the effect of this change on the projection for real GDP
ticularly tight compared with their historical ranges. Re-
over the next couple of years was largely offset by lower
flecting in part continued tightening of lending
assumed paths for the exchange value of the dollar and
standards, consumer loan growth at banks moderated
for longer-term interest rates. Thus, as in the June pro-
further in the second quarter; however, that weakness
jection, the staff projected that real GDP would expand
was partially offset by more robust lending by credit un-
at a modestly faster pace than potential output in
ions.
2017 through 2019. The unemployment rate was pro-
Since the June FOMC meeting, the broad dollar depre- jected to decline gradually over the next couple of years
ciated 2 percent, weakening more against AFE curren- and to continue running below the staff’s estimate of its
cies than against EME currencies. The dollar’s depreci- longer-run natural rate over this period.
ation was driven in part by policy communications from
The staff’s forecast for consumer price inflation, as
the central banks of several AFEs that market partici-
measured by the change in the PCE price index, was re-
pants viewed as less accommodative than expected as
vised down slightly for 2017 in response to weaker-than-
well as by weaker-than-expected CPI data in the United
expected incoming data for inflation. As a result, infla-
States. The Bank of Canada raised its policy rate in July.
tion this year was expected to be similar in magnitude to
Sovereign yields increased notably in Canada, Germany,
last year, with an upturn in the prices for food and non-
and the United Kingdom. Changes in foreign equity in-
energy imports offset by a slower increase in core PCE
dexes were mixed over the intermeeting period: Euro-
prices and weaker energy prices. Beyond 2017, the fore-
pean equities edged lower, Japanese equities were little
cast was little revised from the previous projection, as
changed, and EME equities increased. European pe-
the recent weakness in inflation was viewed as transitory.
ripheral sovereign bond spreads narrowed over the pe-
The staff continued to project that inflation would in-
riod, reflecting in part positive sentiment related to the
crease in the next couple of years and that it would be
outcomes of the French parliamentary election, Greek
close to the Committee’s longer-run objective in 2018
debt negotiations, and bank resolutions in Italy. EME
and at 2 percent in 2019.
sovereign spreads were little changed on net.
The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections
The staff provided its latest report on potential risks to
for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla-
financial stability, indicating that it continued to judge
tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years. On
the vulnerabilities of the U.S financial system as moder-
the one hand, many financial market indicators of uncer-
ate on balance. This overall assessment incorporated the
tainty remained subdued, and the uncertainty associated
staff’s judgment that, since the April assessment, vulner-
with the foreign outlook still appeared to be less than
abilities associated with asset valuation pressures had
late last year; on the other hand, uncertainty about the
edged up from notable to elevated, as asset prices re-
direction of some economic policies was judged to have
mained high or climbed further, risk spreads narrowed,
remained elevated. The staff saw the risks to the fore-
and expected and actual volatility remained muted in a
casts for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate
range of financial markets. However, the staff continued
as balanced. The risks to the projection for inflation also
to view vulnerabilities stemming from financial leverage
were seen as balanced. Downside risks included the pos-
as well as maturity and liquidity transformation as low,
sibilities that longer-term inflation expectations may
and vulnerabilities from leverage in the nonfinancial sec-
have edged down, that the dollar could appreciate sub-
tor appeared to remain moderate.
stantially, or that the recent run of soft inflation readings
could prove to be more persistent than the staff ex-
pected. These downside risks were seen as essentially

--- Page 6 ---

_P _ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
counterbalanced by the upside risk that inflation could Reports from District contacts on both manufacturing
increase more than expected in an economy that was and services were also generally consistent with moder-
projected to continue operating above its longer-run po- ate growth in economic activity overall. Construction-
tential. sector contacts were generally upbeat. Reports on the
energy sector indicated that activity was continuing to
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
expand, albeit more slowly than previously; survey evi-
Economic Outlook
dence suggested that oil drilling remained profitable in
In their discussion of the economic situation and the
some locations at current oil prices. The agricultural sec-
outlook, meeting participants agreed that information
tor remained weak, and some regions were experiencing
received over the intermeeting period indicated that the
drought conditions. A couple of participants had re-
labor market had continued to strengthen and that eco-
ceived indications from contacts that business invest-
nomic activity had been rising moderately so far this
ment spending in their Districts might strengthen.
year. Job gains had been solid, on average, since the be-
ginning of the year, and the unemployment rate had de- Nevertheless, several participants noted that uncertainty
clined, on net, over the same period. Household spend- about the course of federal government policy, including
ing and business fixed investment had continued to ex- in the areas of fiscal policy, trade, and health care, was
pand. On a 12-month basis, both overall inflation and tending to weigh down firms’ spending and hiring plans.
the measure excluding food and energy prices had de- In addition, a few participants suggested that the likeli-
clined and were running below 2 percent. Market-based hood of near-term enactment of a fiscal stimulus pro-
measures of inflation compensation remained low; gram had declined further or that the fiscal stimulus
survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expecta- likely would be smaller than they previously expected. It
tions were little changed on balance. was also observed that the budgets of some state and
local governments were under strain, limiting growth in
Participants generally saw the incoming information on
their expenditures. In contrast, the prospects for U.S.
spending and labor market indicators as consistent,
exports had been boosted by a brighter international
overall, with their expectations and indicated that their
economic outlook.
views of the outlook for economic growth and the labor
market were little changed, on balance, since the June Participants noted that labor market conditions had
FOMC meeting. Participants continued to expect that, strengthened further over the intermeeting period. The
with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary pol- unemployment rate rose slightly to 4.4 percent in June
icy, economic activity would expand at a moderate pace but remained low by historical standards. Payroll gains
and labor market conditions would strengthen some- picked up substantially in June. In addition, the
what further. In light of continued low recent readings employment-to-population ratio increased. Participants
on inflation, participants expected that inflation on a observed that the unemployment rate was likely close to
12-month basis would remain somewhat below 2 per- or below its longer-run normal rate and could decline
cent in the near term. However, most participants further if, as expected, growth in output remained some-
judged that inflation would stabilize around the Com- what in excess of the potential growth rate. A few par-
mittee’s 2 percent objective over the medium term. ticipants expressed concerns about the possibility of
substantially overshooting full employment, with one
Data received over the intermeeting period reinforced
citing past difficulties in achieving a soft landing. Dis-
earlier indications that real GDP growth had turned up
trict contacts confirmed tightness in the labor market
after having been slow in the first quarter of this year.
but relayed little evidence of wage pressures, although
As anticipated, growth in household spending appeared
some firms were reportedly attempting to attract work-
to have been stronger in the second quarter after its first-
ers with a variety of nonwage benefits. The absence of
quarter weakness. Reports from District contacts on
sizable wage pressures also seemed to be confirmed by
consumer spending were generally positive. However,
most aggregate wage measures. However, a few partici-
sales of motor vehicles had softened, and automakers
pants suggested that, in a tight labor market, measured
were reportedly adjusting production and assessing
aggregate wage growth was being held down by compo-
whether the underlying demand for automobiles had de-
sitional changes in employment associated with the hir-
clined. Participants noted that the fundamentals under-
ing of less experienced workers at lower wages than
pinning consumption growth, including increases in pay-
those of established workers. In addition, a number of
rolls, remained solid. However, the weakness in retail
sales in June offered a note of caution.

--- Page 7 ---

_ _____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f _J_u_ly_ 2_5_–_2_6_,_ 2_0_1_7_________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
participants suggested that the rate of increase in nomi- and restraints on pricing power from global develop-
nal wages was not low in relation to the rate of produc- ments and from innovations to business models spurred
tivity growth and the modest rate of inflation. by advances in technology. A couple of participants ar-
gued that the response of inflation to resource utilization
Participants discussed the softness in inflation in recent
could become stronger if output and employment ap-
months. Many participants noted that much of the re-
preciably overshot their full employment levels,
cent decline in inflation had probably reflected idiosyn-
although other participants pointed out that this hypoth-
cratic factors. Nonetheless, PCE price inflation on a
esized nonlinear response had little empirical support.
12-month basis would likely continue to be held down
over the second half of the year by the effects of those In assessing recent developments in financial market
factors, and the monthly readings might be depressed by conditions, participants referred to the continued low
possible residual seasonality in measured PCE inflation. level of longer-term interest rates, in particular those on
Still, most participants indicated that they expected in- U.S Treasury securities. The level of such yields ap-
flation to pick up over the next couple of years from its peared to reflect both low expected future short-term in-
current low level and to stabilize around the Commit- terest rates and depressed term premiums. Asset pur-
tee’s 2 percent objective over the medium term. Many chases by foreign central banks and the Federal Re-
participants, however, saw some likelihood that inflation serve’s securities holdings were also likely contributing
might remain below 2 percent for longer than they cur- to currently low term premiums, although the exact size
rently expected, and several indicated that the risks to of these contributions was uncertain. A number of par-
the inflation outlook could be tilted to the downside. ticipants pointed to potential concerns about low longer-
Participants agreed that a fall in longer-term inflation ex- term interest rates, including the possibility that inflation
pectations would be undesirable, but they differed in expectations were too low, that yields could rise
their assessments of whether inflation expectations were abruptly, or that low yields were inducing investors to
well anchored. One participant pointed to the stability take on excessive risk in a search for higher returns.
of a number of measures of inflation expectations in re-
Several participants noted that the further increases in
cent months, but a few others suggested that continuing
equity prices, together with continued low longer-term
low inflation expectations may have been a factor put-
interest rates, had led to an easing of financial condi-
ting downward pressure on inflation or that inflation ex-
tions. However, different assessments were expressed
pectations might need to be bolstered in order to ensure
about the implications of this development for the out-
their consistency with the Committee’s longer-term in-
look for aggregate demand and, consequently, appropri-
flation objective.
ate monetary policy. According to one view, the easing
A number of participants noted that much of the analy- of financial conditions meant that the economic effects
sis of inflation used in policymaking rested on a frame- of the Committee’s actions in gradually removing policy
work in which, for a given rate of expected inflation, the accommodation had been largely offset by other factors
degree of upward pressures on prices and wages rose as influencing financial markets, and that a tighter mone-
aggregate demand for goods and services and employ- tary policy than otherwise was warranted. According to
ment of resources increased above long-run sustainable another view, recent rises in equity prices might be part
levels. A few participants cited evidence suggesting that of a broad-based adjustment of asset prices to changes
this framework was not particularly useful in forecasting in longer-term financial conditions, importantly includ-
inflation. However, most participants thought that the ing a lower neutral real interest rate, and, therefore, the
framework remained valid, notwithstanding the recent recent equity price increases might not provide much ad-
absence of a pickup in inflation in the face of a tighten- ditional impetus to aggregate spending on goods and ser-
ing labor market and real GDP growth in excess of their vices.
estimates of its potential rate. Participants discussed
Participants also considered equity valuations in their
possible reasons for the coexistence of low inflation and
discussion of financial stability. A couple of participants
low unemployment. These included a diminished re-
noted that favorable macroeconomic factors provided
sponsiveness of prices to resource pressures, a lower
backing for current equity valuations; in addition, as re-
natural rate of unemployment, the possibility that slack
cent equity price increases did not seem to stem im-
may be better measured by labor market indicators other
portantly from greater use of leverage by investors, these
than unemployment, lags in the reaction of nominal
increases might not pose appreciable risks to financial
wage growth and inflation to labor market tightening,
stability. Several participants observed that the banking

--- Page 8 ---

_P _ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
system was well capitalized and had ample liquidity, re- that the Committee could afford to be patient under cur-
ducing the risk of financial instability. It was noted that rent circumstances in deciding when to increase the fed-
financial stability assessments were based on current eral funds rate further and argued against additional ad-
capital levels within the banking sector, and that such as- justments until incoming information confirmed that the
sessments would likely be adjusted should these recent low readings on inflation were not likely to persist
measures of loss-absorbing capacity change. Partici- and that inflation was more clearly on a path toward the
pants underscored the need to monitor financial institu- Committee’s symmetric 2 percent objective over the
tions for shifts in behavior—such as an erosion of lend- medium term. In contrast, some other participants were
ing standards or increased reliance on unstable sources more worried about risks arising from a labor market
of funding—that could lead to subsequent problems. In that had already reached full employment and was pro-
addition, participants judged that it was important to jected to tighten further or from the easing in financial
look for signs that either declining market volatility or conditions that had developed since the Committee’s
heavy concentration by investors in particular assets policy normalization process was initiated in December
might create financial imbalances. A couple of partici- 2015. They cautioned that a delay in gradually removing
pants expressed concern that smaller banks could be as- policy accommodation could result in an overshooting
suming significant risks in efforts to expand their CRE of the Committee’s inflation objective that would likely
lending. Furthermore, a couple of participants saw, as be costly to reverse, or that a delay could lead to an in-
possible sources of financial instability, the pace of in- tensification of financial stability risks or to other imbal-
crease in real estate prices in the multifamily segment ances that might prove difficult to unwind. One partic-
and the pattern of the lending and borrowing activities ipant stressed that the risks both to the Committee’s in-
of certain government-sponsored enterprises. flation objective and to financial stability would require
careful monitoring. This participant expressed the view
Participants agreed that the regulatory and supervisory
that a gradual approach to removing policy accommoda-
tools developed since the financial crisis had played an
tion would likely strike the appropriate balance between
important role in fostering financial stability. Changes
promoting the Committee’s inflation and full employ-
in regulation had likely helped in making the banking
ment objectives and mitigating financial stability con-
system more resilient to major shocks, in promoting
cerns.
more prudent balance sheet management strategies on
the part of nonbank financial institutions, and in reduc- A number of participants also commented that the ap-
ing the degree to which variations in lending to the pri- propriate pace of normalization of the federal funds rate
vate sector intensify cycles in output and in asset prices. would depend on how financial conditions evolved and
Participants agreed that it would not be desirable for the on the implications of those developments for the pace
current regulatory framework to be changed in ways that of economic activity. Among the considerations men-
allowed a reemergence of the types of risky practices that tioned were the extent of current downward pressure on
contributed to the crisis. longer-term yields arising from the Federal Reserve’s as-
set holdings and how this pressure would diminish over
In their discussion of monetary policy, participants reaf-
time as balance sheet normalization proceeded, the
firmed their view that a gradual approach to removing
strength and degree of persistence of other domestic and
policy accommodation was likely to remain appropriate
global factors that had contributed to the easing of fi-
to promote the Committee’s objectives of maximum
nancial conditions and elevated asset prices, and whether
employment and 2 percent inflation. Participants com-
and how much the neutral rate of interest would rise as
mented on a number of factors that would influence
the economy continued to expand.
their ongoing assessments of the appropriate path for
the federal funds rate. Most saw the outlook for eco- Participants also discussed the appropriate time to im-
nomic activity and the labor market as little changed plement the plan for reducing the Federal Reserve’s se-
from their earlier projections and continued to anticipate curities holdings that was announced in June in the
that inflation would stabilize around the Committee’s Committee’s postmeeting statement and its Addendum
2 percent objective over the medium term. However, to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans. Par-
some participants expressed concern about the recent ticipants generally agreed that, in light of their current
decline in inflation, which had occurred even as resource assessment of economic conditions and the outlook, it
utilization had tightened, and noted their increased un- was appropriate to signal that implementation of the
certainty about the outlook for inflation. They observed program likely would begin relatively soon, absent sig-

--- Page 9 ---

_ _____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f _J_u_ly_ 2_5_–_2_6_,_ 2_0_1_7_________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
nificant adverse developments in the economy or in fi- market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent in-
nancial markets. Many noted that the program was ex- flation.
pected to contribute only modestly to the reduction in
Members agreed that the timing and size of future ad-
policy accommodation. Several reiterated that, once the
justments to the target range for the federal funds rate
program was under way, further adjustments to the
would depend on their assessment of realized and ex-
stance of monetary policy in response to economic de-
pected economic conditions relative to the Committee’s
velopments would be centered on changes in the target
objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent in-
range for the federal funds rate. Although several par-
flation. They expected that economic conditions would
ticipants were prepared to announce a starting date for
evolve in a manner that would warrant gradual increases
the program at the current meeting, most preferred to
in the federal funds rate, and that the federal funds rate
defer that decision until an upcoming meeting while ac-
was likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are
cumulating additional information on the economic out-
expected to prevail in the longer run. They also again
look and developments potentially affecting financial
stated that the actual path of the federal funds rate would
markets.
depend on the economic outlook as informed by incom-
Committee Policy Action ing data. In particular, they reaffirmed that they would
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period carefully monitor actual and expected inflation develop-
ahead, members judged that information received since ments relative to the Committee’s symmetric inflation
the Committee met in June indicated that the labor mar- goal. Some members stressed the importance of under-
ket had continued to strengthen and that economic ac- scoring the Committee’s commitment to its inflation ob-
tivity had been rising moderately so far this year. Job jective. These members emphasized that, in considering
gains had been solid, on average, since the beginning of the timing of further adjustments in the federal funds
the year, and the unemployment rate had declined. rate, they would be evaluating incoming information to
Household spending and business fixed investment had assess the likelihood that recent low readings on inflation
continued to expand. were transitory and that inflation was again on a trajec-
tory consistent with achieving the Committee’s 2 per-
On a 12-month basis, overall inflation and the measure
cent objective over the medium term.
excluding food and energy prices had declined and were
running below 2 percent. Market-based measures of in- Members agreed that, at this meeting, the Committee
flation compensation remained low; survey-based should further clarify the time at which it expected to
measures of longer-term inflation expectations were lit- begin its program for reducing its securities holdings in
tle changed on balance. a gradual and predictable manner. They updated the
postmeeting statement to indicate that while the Com-
With respect to the economic outlook and its implica-
mittee was, for the time being, maintaining its existing
tions for monetary policy, members continued to expect
reinvestment policy, it intended to begin implementing
that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary
the balance sheet normalization program relatively soon,
policy, economic activity would expand at a moderate
provided that the economy evolved broadly as antici-
pace, and labor market conditions would strengthen
pated. Several members observed that, in part because
somewhat further. Inflation on a 12-month basis was
of the Committee’s various communications regarding
expected to remain somewhat below 2 percent in the
the change, any reaction in financial markets to such a
near term but to stabilize around the Committee’s 2 per-
change would likely be limited.
cent objective over the medium term. Members saw the
near-term risks to the economic outlook as roughly bal- At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
anced, but, in light of their concern about the recent voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
slowing in inflation, they agreed to continue to monitor of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
inflation developments closely. cute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the
following domestic policy directive, to be released at
After assessing current conditions and the outlook for
2:00 p.m.:
economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, mem-
bers decided to maintain the target range for the federal “Effective July 27, 2017, the Federal Open Mar-
funds rate at 1 to 1¼ percent. They noted that the ket Committee directs the Desk to undertake
stance of monetary policy remained accommodative, open market operations as necessary to main-
thereby supporting some further strengthening in labor tain the federal funds rate in a target range of

--- Page 10 ---

_P _ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
1 to 1¼ percent, including overnight reverse re- Near-term risks to the economic outlook ap-
purchase operations (and reverse repurchase pear roughly balanced, but the Committee is
operations with maturities of more than one day monitoring inflation developments closely.
when necessary to accommodate weekend, hol-
In view of realized and expected labor market
iday, or similar trading conventions) at an offer-
conditions and inflation, the Committee de-
ing rate of 1.00 percent, in amounts limited only
cided to maintain the target range for the federal
by the value of Treasury securities held outright
funds rate at 1 to 1¼ percent. The stance of
in the System Open Market Account that are
monetary policy remains accommodative,
available for such operations and by a per-
thereby supporting some further strengthening
counterparty limit of $30 billion per day.
in labor market conditions and a sustained re-
The Committee directs the Desk to continue turn to 2 percent inflation.
rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auc-
In determining the timing and size of future ad-
tion and to continue reinvesting principal pay-
justments to the target range for the federal
ments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-
funds rate, the Committee will assess realized
backed securities in agency mortgage-backed se-
and expected economic conditions relative to its
curities. The Committee also directs the Desk
objectives of maximum employment and 2 per-
to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap trans-
cent inflation. This assessment will take into ac-
actions as necessary to facilitate settlement of
count a wide range of information, including
the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed
measures of labor market conditions, indicators
securities transactions.”
of inflation pressures and inflation expectations,
The vote also encompassed approval of the statement and readings on financial and international de-
below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: velopments. The Committee will carefully
monitor actual and expected inflation develop-
“Information received since the Federal Open
ments relative to its symmetric inflation goal.
Market Committee met in June indicates that
The Committee expects that economic condi-
the labor market has continued to strengthen
tions will evolve in a manner that will warrant
and that economic activity has been rising mod-
gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the
erately so far this year. Job gains have been
federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some
solid, on average, since the beginning of the
time, below levels that are expected to prevail in
year, and the unemployment rate has declined.
the longer run. However, the actual path of the
Household spending and business fixed invest-
federal funds rate will depend on the economic
ment have continued to expand. On a
outlook as informed by incoming data.
12-month basis, overall inflation and the meas-
ure excluding food and energy prices have de- For the time being, the Committee is maintain-
clined and are running below 2 percent. ing its existing policy of reinvesting principal
Market-based measures of inflation compensa- payments from its holdings of agency debt and
tion remain low; survey-based measures of agency mortgage-backed securities in agency
longer-term inflation expectations are little mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over
changed, on balance. maturing Treasury securities at auction. The
Committee expects to begin implementing its
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
balance sheet normalization program relatively
mittee seeks to foster maximum employment
soon, provided that the economy evolves
and price stability. The Committee continues to
broadly as anticipated; this program is described
expect that, with gradual adjustments in the
in the June 2017 Addendum to the Committee’s
stance of monetary policy, economic activity
Policy Normalization Principles and Plans.”
will expand at a moderate pace, and labor mar-
ket conditions will strengthen somewhat fur- Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C.
ther. Inflation on a 12-month basis is expected Dudley, Lael Brainard, Charles L. Evans, Stanley
to remain somewhat below 2 percent in the near Fischer, Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kash-
term but to stabilize around the Committee’s kari, and Jerome H. Powell.
2 percent objective over the medium term.
Voting against this action: None.

--- Page 11 ---

_ _____________________________M__in_u_t_e_s _o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_et_in_g_ _o_f _J_u_ly_ 2_5_–_2_6_,_ 2_0_1_7________________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the Notation Vote
target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the By notation vote completed on July 3, 2017, the Com-
Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in- mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com-
terest rates on required and excess reserve balances un- mittee meeting held on June 13–14, 2017.
changed at 1¼ percent and voted unanimously to ap-
prove establishment of the primary credit rate (discount
rate) at the existing level of 1¾ percent.4
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee _____________________________
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, September Brian F. Madigan
19–20, 2017. The meeting adjourned at 10:00 a.m. on Secretary
July 26, 2017.
4 The second vote of the Board also encompassed approval of
the establishment of the interest rates for secondary and sea-
sonal credit under the existing formulas for computing such
rates.