# 20170614_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:38:50*
*Pages: 30, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
June 13–14, 2017
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of Board of Governors
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, June 13, 2017, at Matthew J. Eichner,2 Director, Division of Reserve
1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, June 14, 2017, Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board of
at 9:00 a.m.1 Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director, Division
of Supervision and Regulation, Board of
PRESENT: Governors
Janet L. Yellen, Chair
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Michael T. Kiley, Deputy Director, Division of
Lael Brainard Financial Stability, Board of Governors; Stephen
Charles L. Evans A. Meyer, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary
Stanley Fischer Affairs, Board of Governors
Patrick Harker
Robert S. Kaplan William B. English, Senior Special Adviser to the
Neel Kashkari Board, Office of Board Members, Board of
Jerome H. Powell Governors
Raphael W. Bostic, Loretta J. Mester, Mark L. Mullinix, Trevor A. Reeve, Senior Special Adviser to the Chair,
Michael Strine, and John C. Williams, Alternate Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
David Bowman, Joseph W. Gruber, David
James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric Rosengren, Reifschneider, and John M. Roberts, Special
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Advisers to the Board, Office of Board Members,
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively Board of Governors
Brian F. Madigan, Secretary Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Board Members, Board of Governors
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary Christopher J. Erceg, Senior Associate Director,
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Division of International Finance, Board of
Michael Held, Deputy General Counsel Governors; Joshua Gallin, Senior Associate
Steven B. Kamin, Economist Director, Division of Research and Statistics,
Thomas Laubach, Economist Board of Governors; Gretchen C. Weinbach,2
David W. Wilcox, Economist Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Beth Anne Wilson, James A. Clouse, Thomas A.
Connors, Eric M. Engen, Evan F. Koenig, Antulio N. Bomfim, Ellen E. Meade, and Edward
Jonathan P. McCarthy, William Wascher, and Mark Nelson, Senior Advisers, Division of Monetary
L.J. Wright, Associate Economists Affairs, Board of Governors; Jeremy B. Rudd,
Senior Adviser, Division of Research and Statistics,
Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market Account Board of Governors
Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open Rochelle M. Edge, Associate Director, Division of
Market Account Financial Stability, Board of Governors;
1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the 2 Attended through the discussion of System Open Market
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. Account reinvestment policy.

--- Page 2 ---

_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Jane E. Ihrig, Associate Director, Division of Spencer Krane and Ellis W. Tallman, Senior Vice
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Stacey Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and
Tevlin, Associate Director, Division of Research Cleveland, respectively
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Roc Armenter and Kathryn B. Chen,3 Vice Presidents,
Min Wei, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and New
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors York, respectively
Christopher J. Gust, Assistant Director, Division of Andrew T. Foerster, Senior Economist, Federal
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors; Norman J. Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Morin and Karen M. Pence, Assistant Directors,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Selection of Committee Officer
Governors By unanimous vote, the Committee selected Mark L.J.
Wright to serve as Associate Economist, effective
Don Kim, Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, June 13, 2017, until the selection of his successor at the
Board of Governors first regularly scheduled meeting of the Committee in
2018.
Penelope A. Beattie, Assistant to the Secretary, Office
Developments in Financial Markets and Open Mar-
of the Secretary, Board of Governors
ket Operations
The manager of the System Open Market Account
Giovanni Favara and Rebecca Zarutskie, Section
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and for-
Chiefs, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
eign financial markets over the period since the May
Governors
FOMC meeting. Yields on Treasury securities and the
foreign exchange value of the dollar had declined mod-
David H. Small, Project Manager, Division of
estly, while equity prices had continued to rise, contrib-
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
uting to a further easing of financial conditions accord-
ing to some measures. Moreover, realized and implied
Kimberly Bayard, Group Manager, Division of
volatility in financial markets remained low. Meanwhile,
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
inflation compensation edged lower. Survey results and
market pricing suggested that market participants saw a
Stephen Lin, Principal Economist, Division of
high probability of an increase in the FOMC’s target
International Finance, Board of Governors;
range for the federal funds rate at this meeting.
Lubomir Petrasek, Principal Economist, Division
of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors The deputy manager reviewed survey results on market
expectations for SOMA reinvestment policy and for the
Achilles Sangster II, Information Management Analyst, evolution of the System’s balance sheet over coming
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors years. The deputy manager also commented on money
market developments. Over the intermeeting period,
Marie Gooding, First Vice President, Federal Reserve the federal funds rate remained well within the FOMC’s
Bank of Atlanta target range, and take-up at the System’s overnight re-
verse repurchase agreement facility was little changed
David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Mary Daly, Jeff Fuhrer, from the previous period. The spread between the
and Christopher J. Waller, Executive Vice three-month London interbank offered rate and the
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, overnight index swap (OIS) rate had narrowed markedly
Richmond, San Francisco, Boston, and St. Louis, in recent months after rising noticeably in advance of the
respectively implementation of money market fund reform in the fall
of 2016. The deputy manager also summarized details
of the operational approach that the Open Market Desk
3 Attended through the staff report on the economic and fi-
nancial situation.

--- Page 3 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_ g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_3_–_1_4,_ 2_0_1_7_________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
planned to follow if the Committee adopted the pro- the Committee anticipates that the cap will be $6 bil-
posal for SOMA reinvestment policy to be considered at lion per month initially and will increase in steps of
this meeting. $6 billion at three-month intervals over 12 months
until it reaches $30 billion per month.
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
○ For payments of principal that the Federal Re-
domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.
serve receives from its holdings of agency debt and
There were no intervention operations in foreign curren-
mortgage-backed securities, the Committee antici-
cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe-
pates that the cap will be $4 billion per month ini-
riod.
tially and will increase in steps of $4 billion at three-
System Open Market Account Reinvestment Policy month intervals over 12 months until it reaches
The Chair observed that, starting with the March 2017 $20 billion per month.
FOMC meeting, Committee participants had been dis- ○ The Committee also anticipates that the caps
cussing approaches to reducing the Federal Reserve’s se- will remain in place once they reach their respective
curities holdings in a gradual and predictable manner. maximums so that the Federal Reserve’s securities
She noted that participants appeared to have reached a holdings will continue to decline in a gradual and
consensus on an approach that involved specifying caps predictable manner until the Committee judges that
on the monthly amount of principal payments from se- the Federal Reserve is holding no more securities
curities holdings that would not be reinvested; these caps than necessary to implement monetary policy effi-
would rise over the period of a year, after which they ciently and effectively.
would remain constant. Given this consensus, the Chair • Gradually reducing the Federal Reserve’s securi-
proposed that participants approve the plan and that it ties holdings will result in a declining supply of reserve
be published as an addendum to the Committee’s Policy balances. The Committee currently anticipates reduc-
Normalization Principles and Plans; the addendum ing the quantity of reserve balances, over time, to a
would be released at the conclusion of this meeting so as level appreciably below that seen in recent years but
to inform the public well in advance of implementing the larger than before the financial crisis; the level will re-
reinvestment policy. It was anticipated that when the flect the banking system’s demand for reserve balances
Committee determined that economic conditions war- and the Committee’s decisions about how to imple-
ranted implementation of the program, that step would ment monetary policy most efficiently and effectively
be communicated through the Committee’s postmeeting in the future. The Committee expects to learn more
statement. Participants unanimously supported the pro- about the underlying demand for reserves during the
posal. process of balance sheet normalization.
• The Committee affirms that changing the target
POLICY NORMALIZATION PRINCIPLES AND
range for the federal funds rate is its primary means of
PLANS
adjusting the stance of monetary policy. However, the
(Addendum adopted June 13, 2017)
Committee would be prepared to resume reinvest-
All participants agreed to augment the Committee’s Pol- ment of principal payments received on securities held
icy Normalization Principles and Plans by providing the by the Federal Reserve if a material deterioration in the
following additional details regarding the approach the economic outlook were to warrant a sizable reduction
FOMC intends to use to reduce the Federal Reserve’s in the Committee’s target for the federal funds rate.
holdings of Treasury and agency securities once normal- Moreover, the Committee would be prepared to use
ization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under its full range of tools, including altering the size and
way.1 composition of its balance sheet, if future economic
• The Committee intends to gradually reduce the conditions were to warrant a more accommodative
Federal Reserve’s securities holdings by decreasing its monetary policy than can be achieved solely by reduc-
reinvestment of the principal payments it receives ing the federal funds rate.
from securities held in the System Open Market Ac-
________________________
count. Specifically, such payments will be reinvested
only to the extent that they exceed gradually rising 1 The Committee’s Policy Normalization Principles and
caps. Plans were adopted on September 16, 2014, and are
○ For payments of principal that the Federal Re- available at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypol-
serve receives from maturing Treasury securities, icy/files/FOMC_PolicyNormalization.pdf. On March
18, 2015, the Committee adopted an addendum to the

--- Page 4 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, which is Real PCE rose solidly in April after increasing only mod-
available at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypol- estly in the first quarter. Light motor vehicle sales picked
icy/files/FOMC_PolicyNormalization.20150318.pdf. up in April but then moved down somewhat in May.
The components of the nominal retail sales data used by
the Bureau of Economic Analysis to construct its esti-
Staff Review of the Economic Situation mate of PCE were flat in May, but estimated increases in
The information reviewed for the June 13–14 meeting these components of sales for the previous two months
showed that labor market conditions continued to were revised up. In addition, recent readings on key fac-
strengthen in recent months and suggested that real tors that influence consumer spending pointed to fur-
gross domestic product (GDP) was expanding at a faster ther solid growth in total real PCE in the near term, in-
pace in the second quarter than in the first quarter. The cluding continued gains in employment, real disposable
12-month change in overall consumer prices, as meas- personal income, and households’ net worth. Moreover,
ured by the price index for personal consumption ex- consumer sentiment, as measured by the University of
penditures (PCE), slowed a bit further in April; total Michigan Surveys of Consumers, remained upbeat in
consumer price inflation and core inflation, which ex- May.
cludes consumer food and energy prices, were both run-
Residential investment appeared to be slowing after in-
ning somewhat below 2 percent. Survey-based measures
creasing briskly in the first quarter. The first-quarter
of longer-run inflation expectations were little changed
strength may have reflected housing activity shifting ear-
on balance.
lier in response to unseasonably warm weather last quar-
Total nonfarm payroll employment expanded further in ter, to an anticipation of higher future interest rates, or
April and May, and the average pace of job gains over to both. Starts of new single-family homes edged up in
the first five months of the year was solid. The unem- April, but the issuance of building permits for these
ployment rate moved down to 4.3 percent in May; the homes declined somewhat. Meanwhile, starts of multi-
unemployment rates for African Americans and for His- family units fell. Moreover, sales of both new and exist-
panics stepped down but remained above the unemploy- ing homes decreased in April.
ment rates for Asians and for whites. The overall labor
Real private expenditures for business equipment and in-
force participation rate declined somewhat, and the
tellectual property seemed to be increasing further after
share of workers employed part time for economic rea-
rising at a solid pace in the first quarter. Both nominal
sons decreased a little. The rate of private-sector job
shipments and new orders of nondefense capital goods
openings increased in March and April, while the quits
excluding aircraft rose in April, and new orders contin-
rate was little changed and the hiring rate moved down.
ued to exceed shipments, pointing to further gains in
The four-week moving average of initial claims for un-
shipments in the near term. In addition, indicators of
employment insurance benefits remained at a very low
business sentiment were upbeat in recent months. Al-
level through early June. Measures of labor compensa-
though firms’ nominal spending for nonresidential
tion continued to rise at moderate rates. Compensation
structures excluding drilling and mining declined in
per hour in the nonfarm business sector increased
April, the number of oil and gas rigs in operation, an in-
2¼ percent over the four quarters ending in the first
dicator of spending for structures in the drilling and min-
quarter, a bit slower than over the same period a year
ing sector, continued to rise through early June.
earlier. Average hourly earnings for all employees in-
creased 2½ percent over the 12 months ending in May, Nominal federal government spending data for April
about the same as over the comparable period a year ear- and May pointed to essentially flat real federal purchases
lier. in the second quarter. Real state and local government
purchases appeared to be moving down, as state and lo-
Total industrial production rose considerably in April,
cal government payrolls declined, on net, in April and
reflecting gains in manufacturing, mining, and utilities
May, and nominal construction expenditures by these
output. Automakers’ assembly schedules suggested that
governments decreased in April.
motor vehicle production would slow in subsequent
months, but broader indicators of manufacturing pro- The nominal U.S. international trade deficit widened
duction, such as the new orders indexes from national slightly in March, with a small decline in exports and a
and regional manufacturing surveys, pointed to modest small increase in imports. The March data, together with
gains in factory output over the near term. revised estimates for earlier months, indicated that real
exports grew briskly in the first quarter and at a faster

--- Page 5 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_ g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_3_–_1_4,_ 2_0_1_7_________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
pace than in the second half of 2016. Real imports also appeared to provide some support to prices of risk as-
increased in the first quarter but at a slower pace than in sets.
the second half of 2016. In April, the nominal trade def-
FOMC communications over the intermeeting period
icit widened, as imports picked up while exports de-
were viewed as broadly in line with investors’ expecta-
clined slightly. Net exports were estimated to have made
tions that the Committee would continue to remove pol-
a small positive contribution to real GDP growth in the
icy accommodation at a gradual pace. Market partici-
first quarter. However, the April trade data suggested
pants interpreted the May FOMC statement and the
that net exports might be a slight drag on real GDP
meeting minutes as indicating that the Committee had
growth in the second quarter.
not materially changed its economic outlook. In re-
Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE sponse to the discussion of SOMA reinvestment policy
price index, increased 1¾ percent over the 12 months in the minutes, a number of market participants report-
ending in April. Core PCE price inflation was 1½ per- edly pulled forward their expectations for the most likely
cent over those same 12 months. Over the 12 months timing of a change to the Committee’s reinvestment pol-
ending in May, the consumer price index (CPI) rose a icy, a shift that was evident in the responses to the
little less than 2 percent, while core CPI inflation was Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of Market
1¾ percent. The median of inflation expectations over Participants. However, investors also reportedly viewed
the next 5 to 10 years from the Michigan survey was un- the Committee’s planning as mitigating the risk that the
changed in May, and the median expectation for PCE process of reducing the size of the Federal Reserve’s bal-
price inflation over the next 10 years from the Survey of ance sheet would lead to outsized movements in interest
Professional Forecasters also held steady in the second rates or have adverse effects on market functioning.
quarter. Likewise, the medians of longer-run inflation
The probability of an increase in the target range for the
expectations from the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers
federal funds rate occurring at the June meeting, as im-
and Survey of Market Participants were essentially un-
plied by quotes on federal funds futures contracts, rose
changed in June.
to a high level. However, the expected federal funds rate
The economic expansions in Canada and the euro area from late 2018 to the end of 2020 implied by OIS quotes
as well as in China and many other emerging market declined slightly. Immediately following the May
economies (EMEs) continued to firm in the first quarter. FOMC meeting, nominal Treasury yields rose at short
In contrast, economic growth in the United Kingdom and intermediate maturities, reportedly reflecting the re-
slowed sharply. Recent indicators suggested that real sponse of investors to a passage in the postmeeting
GDP growth in most foreign economies remained solid statement indicating the Committee’s view that the slow-
in the second quarter. Headline inflation across the ad- ing in real GDP growth during the first quarter was likely
vanced foreign economies (AFEs) generally appeared to to be transitory. Later in the intermeeting period, yields
moderate from the pace registered over the first quarter, declined in reaction to the release of weaker-than-
as the effects of earlier increases in energy prices started expected April CPI data and the somewhat disappoint-
to fade; core inflation continued to be subdued in many ing May employment report. On balance, the Treasury
AFEs. Among the EMEs, inflation in China rose while yield curve flattened, with short-term yields rising mod-
inflation in Latin America fell. In Mexico, the effects of estly and the 10-year yield declining. Both 5-year and
fuel price hikes in January and the pass-through from 5-to-10-year-forward TIPS-based inflation compensa-
earlier currency depreciation to prices started to wane, tion declined, in part reflecting the below-expectations
but inflation remained above the central bank’s target. inflation data.
Staff Review of the Financial Situation Broad U.S. equity price indexes increased. One-month-
Domestic financial market conditions remained gener- ahead option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index—
ally accommodative over the intermeeting period. U.S. the VIX—was little changed, on net, and remained near
equity prices increased over the period, longer-term the lower end of its historical range.
Treasury yields declined, and the dollar depreciated. A
Conditions in short-term funding markets were stable
decline in the perceived likelihood of a significant fiscal
over the intermeeting period. Yields on a broad set of
expansion and the below-expectations reading on the
money market instruments remained in the ranges ob-
April CPI reportedly contributed to lower yields on
served since the FOMC increased the target range for
longer-tenor Treasury securities. Market participants’
the federal funds rate in March. Term OIS rates rose as
perceptions of an improved global economic outlook

--- Page 6 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
expectations firmed for an increase in the federal funds Growth in auto loans remained solid through the first
rate target at this meeting. quarter. Overall delinquency rates on auto loans contin-
ued to be relatively low, but the delinquency rate among
Financing conditions for nonfinancial businesses contin-
subprime borrowers remained elevated, reflecting easier
ued to be accommodative. Commercial and industrial
lending standards in 2015 and 2016. Recent evidence
loans outstanding increased in April and May after being
suggested that these lending standards had tightened; the
weak in the first quarter, although the growth of these
credit rating of the average borrower had trended higher,
loans remained well below the pace seen a year ago. Is-
and new extensions of subprime auto loans had de-
suance of both corporate debt and equity was strong.
clined.
Gross issuance of institutional leveraged loans was solid
in April and May, although it receded from the near-rec- Over the period since the May FOMC meeting, foreign
ord levels seen over the previous two months. financial markets were influenced by incoming eco-
nomic data and by political developments both abroad
Commercial real estate (CRE) loans on banks’ books
and in the United States. Most AFE and EME equity
grew robustly in April and May, with nonfarm nonresi-
indexes edged higher, supported by robust first-quarter
dential loans leading the expansion. However, recent
earnings reports and generally positive data releases
CRE loan growth was a bit slower than that during the
overseas. The broad U.S. dollar depreciated about
first quarter, in part reflecting a slowdown in lending for
1¾ percent over the intermeeting period, weakening
both construction and multifamily units. Issuance of
against both AFE and EME currencies. In particular,
commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS)
the dollar depreciated against the Canadian dollar fol-
through the first five months of this year was similar to
lowing communications by the Bank of Canada suggest-
the issuance over the same period a year earlier. While
ing that the removal of policy accommodation could oc-
delinquency rates on CRE loans held by banks edged
cur sooner than previously expected by market partici-
down further in the first quarter, the delinquency rates
pants. The dollar also depreciated against the euro,
on loans in CMBS pools continued to increase. The rise
which was supported by the results of the French presi-
in CMBS delinquency rates was mostly confined to loans
dential election and by stronger-than-expected macro-
that were originated during the period of weak under-
economic releases. Those data releases prompted the
writing before the financial crisis. The increase in those
European Central Bank at its June 8 meeting to change
delinquencies had generally been expected by market
its assessment of risks to the economic outlook from
participants and was not anticipated to have a material
“tilted to the downside” to “balanced.” U.S. develop-
effect on credit availability or market conditions.
ments, including mixed economic data reports, also
Residential mortgage rates declined slightly, in line with weighed on the dollar. In contrast, the dollar strength-
yields on longer-term Treasury and mortgage-backed se- ened against sterling following the U.K. parliamentary
curities, but remained elevated relative to the third quar- election. Changes in longer-dated AFE sovereign bond
ter of 2016. Despite the higher level of mortgage rates, yields were mixed, while shorter-dated yields moved
growth in mortgage lending for home purchases re- slightly higher. EME sovereign spreads were little
mained near the upper end of its recent range during the changed, while flows into EME mutual funds remained
first quarter. Delinquency rates on residential mortgage robust. However, Brazilian sovereign spreads widened
loans continued to edge down amid robust house price and the Brazilian real depreciated notably amid increased
growth and still-tight lending standards for households political uncertainty.
with low credit scores and hard-to-document incomes.
Staff Economic Outlook
Financing conditions in consumer credit markets re- In the U.S. economic projection prepared by the staff
mained generally accommodative, although some indi- for the June FOMC meeting, real GDP growth was fore-
cators pointed to modest reductions in credit availability cast to step up to a solid pace in the second quarter fol-
in recent months. Tighter conditions for credit card bor- lowing its weak reading in the first quarter, primarily re-
rowing were especially apparent within the subprime flecting faster real PCE growth. On balance, the incom-
segment, where there had been some further deteriora- ing data on aggregate spending were a little stronger than
tion of credit performance. On a year-over-year basis, the staff had expected, and the forecast of real GDP
overall credit card balances continued to grow in April growth for the current year was a bit higher than in the
at a robust rate, although the pace had moderated a bit previous projection. Beyond this year, the projection for
from that of 2016. real GDP growth was essentially unchanged. The staff
continued to project that real GDP would expand at a

--- Page 7 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_ g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_3_–_1_4,_ 2_0_1_7_________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
modestly faster pace than potential output in 2017 idents submitted their projections of the most likely out-
through 2019, supported in part by the staff’s main- comes for real output growth, the unemployment rate,
tained assumption that fiscal policy would become more and inflation for each year from 2017 through 2019 and
expansionary in the coming years. The unemployment over the longer run, based on their individual assess-
rate was projected to decline gradually over the next cou- ments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate.4
ple of years and to continue running below the staff’s The longer-run projections represented each partici-
estimate of its longer-run natural rate over this period. pant’s assessment of the rate to which each variable
would be expected to converge, over time, under appro-
The staff’s forecast for consumer price inflation, as
priate monetary policy and in the absence of further
measured by the change in the PCE price index, was re-
shocks to the economy.5 These projections and policy
vised down slightly for 2017 because of the weaker-than-
assessments are described in the Summary of Economic
expected incoming data for inflation. However, the pro-
Projections (SEP), which is an addendum to these
jection was little changed thereafter, as the recent weak-
minutes.
ness in inflation was viewed as transitory. Inflation was
still expected to be somewhat higher this year than last In their discussion of the economic situation and the
year, largely reflecting an upturn in the prices for food outlook, meeting participants agreed that the infor-
and non-energy imports. The staff projected that infla- mation received over the intermeeting period indicated
tion would increase further in the next couple of years, that the labor market had continued to strengthen and
and that it would be close to the Committee’s longer-run that economic activity had been rising moderately, on
objective in 2018 and at 2 percent in 2019. average, so far this year. Job gains had moderated since
the beginning of the year but had remained solid, on av-
The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections
erage, and the unemployment rate had declined. House-
for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla-
hold spending had picked up in recent months, and busi-
tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years. Many
ness fixed investment had continued to expand. Infla-
financial market indicators of uncertainty were subdued,
tion measured on a 12-month basis had declined recently
and the uncertainty associated with the foreign outlook
and, like the measure excluding food and energy prices,
appeared to have subsided further, on balance, since late
had been running somewhat below 2 percent. Market-
last year; these developments were judged as counter-
based measures of inflation compensation remained
weights to elevated measures of economic policy uncer-
low; survey-based measures of longer-term inflation ex-
tainty. The staff saw the risks to the forecasts for real
pectations were little changed on balance.
GDP and the unemployment rate as balanced; the staff’s
assessment was that the downside risks associated with Participants generally saw the incoming information on
monetary policy not being well positioned to respond to spending and labor market indicators as consistent,
adverse shocks had diminished since its previous fore- overall, with their expectations and indicated that their
cast. The risks to the projection for inflation also were views of the outlook for economic growth and the labor
seen as roughly balanced. The downside risks from the market had changed only slightly since the May FOMC
possibility that longer-term inflation expectations may meeting. As anticipated, growth in consumer spending
have edged down or that the dollar could appreciate sub- seemed to have bounced back from a weak first quarter,
stantially were seen as essentially counterbalanced by the and participants continued to expect that, with further
upside risk that inflation could increase more than ex- gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy,
pected in an economy that was projected to continue op- economic activity would expand at a moderate pace and
erating above its longer-run potential. labor market conditions would strengthen somewhat
further. In light of surprisingly low recent readings on
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the
inflation, participants expected that inflation on a
Economic Outlook
12-month basis would remain somewhat below 2 per-
In conjunction with this FOMC meeting, members of
cent in the near term. However, participants judged that
the Board of Governors and Federal Reserve Bank pres-
4 Four members of the Board of Governors, one fewer than vacant at the time of this FOMC meeting; First Vice President
in March 2017, were in office at the time of the June 2017 Mark L. Mullinix submitted economic projections.
meeting and submitted economic projections. The office of 5 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for
the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond was real output growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal
funds rate.

--- Page 8 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
inflation would stabilize around the Committee’s 2 per- tight labor market. Other labor market indicators, such
cent objective over the medium term. as the number of job openings and broader measures of
unemployment, were also seen as consistent with labor
Growth in consumer spending appeared to be rebound-
market conditions having strengthened in recent
ing after slowing in the first quarter of this year. Partic-
months. Moreover, contacts in several Districts re-
ipants generally continued to expect that ongoing job
ported shortages of workers in selected occupations and
gains, rising household income and wealth, and im-
in some cases indicated that firms were significantly in-
proved household balance sheets would support moder-
creasing salaries and benefits in order to attract or keep
ate growth in household spending over the medium
workers. However, other contacts reported only modest
term. However, District contacts reported that automo-
wage gains, and participants observed that measures of
bile sales had slowed recently; some contacts expected
labor compensation for the overall economy continued
sales to slow further, while others believed that sales
to rise only moderately despite strengthening labor mar-
were leveling out.
ket conditions. A couple of participants saw the re-
Participants generally agreed that business fixed invest- strained increases in labor compensation as consistent
ment had continued to expand in recent months, sup- with the low productivity growth and moderate inflation
ported in particular by a rebound in the energy sector. experienced in recent years. In light of the recent behav-
District contacts suggested that an expansion in oil pro- ior of labor compensation and consumer prices as well
duction capacity was likely to continue in the near term, as demographic trends, a number of participants low-
though the longer-term outlook was more uncertain. ered their estimate of the longer-run normal level of the
Conditions in the manufacturing sector in several Dis- unemployment rate.
tricts were reportedly strong, but activity in a couple of
Recent readings on headline and core PCE price infla-
them had slowed in recent months from a high level, and
tion had come in lower than participants had expected.
some contacts in the automobile industry reported de-
On a 12-month basis, headline PCE price inflation was
clines in production that they expected to continue in
running somewhat below the Committee’s 2 percent ob-
the near term. District reports regarding the service sec-
jective in April, partly because of factors that appeared
tor were generally positive. In contrast, contacts in a
to be transitory. Core PCE price inflation—which his-
couple of Districts indicated that conditions in the agri-
torically has been a more useful predictor of future in-
cultural sector remained weak. Contacts in many Dis-
flation, although it, too, can be affected by transitory fac-
tricts remained optimistic about business prospects,
tors—moved down from 1.8 percent in March to
which were supported in part by improving global con-
1.5 percent in April. In addition, CPI inflation in May
ditions. However, this optimism appeared to have re-
came in lower than expected. Most participants viewed
cently abated somewhat, partly because contacts viewed
the recent softness in these price data as largely reflecting
the likelihood of significant fiscal stimulus as having di-
idiosyncratic factors, including sharp declines in prices
minished. Contacts at some large firms indicated that
of wireless telephone services and prescription drugs,
they had curtailed their capital spending, in part because
and expected these developments to have little bearing
of uncertainty about changes in fiscal and other govern-
on inflation over the medium run. Participants contin-
ment policies; some contacts at smaller firms, however,
ued to expect that, as the effects of transitory factors
indicated that their capital spending plans had not been
waned and labor market conditions strengthened fur-
appreciably affected by news about government policy.
ther, inflation would stabilize around the Committee’s
Reports regarding housing construction from District
2 percent objective over the medium term. Several par-
contacts were mixed.
ticipants suggested that recent increases in import prices
Labor market conditions continued to strengthen in re- were consistent with this expectation. However, several
cent months. The unemployment rate fell from 4.5 per- participants expressed concern that progress toward the
cent in March to 4.3 percent in May and was below levels Committee’s 2 percent longer-run inflation objective
that participants judged likely to be normal over the might have slowed and that the recent softness in infla-
longer run. Monthly increases in nonfarm payrolls aver- tion might persist. Such persistence might occur in part
aged 160,000 since the beginning of the year, down from because upward pressure on inflation from resource uti-
187,000 per month in 2016 but still well above estimates lization may be limited, as the relationship between these
of the pace necessary to absorb new entrants in the labor two variables appeared to be weaker than in previous
force. A few participants interpreted this slowing in pay- decades. However, a couple of other participants raised
roll growth as an expected development that reflected a the concern that a tighter relationship between inflation

--- Page 9 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_ g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_3_–_1_4,_ 2_0_1_7_________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
and resource utilization could reemerge if the unemploy- with a low equity premium, could lead to a buildup of
ment rate ran significantly below its longer-run normal risks to financial stability.
level, which could result in inflation running persistently
In their discussion of monetary policy, participants gen-
above the Committee’s 2 percent objective.
erally saw the outlook for economic activity and the
Overall, participants continued to see the near-term risks medium-term outlook for inflation as little changed and
to the economic outlook as roughly balanced. Partici- viewed a continued gradual removal of monetary policy
pants again noted the uncertainty regarding the possible accommodation as being appropriate. Based on this as-
enactment, timing, and nature of changes to fiscal and sessment, almost all participants expressed the view that
other government policies and saw both upside and it would be appropriate for the Committee to raise the
downside risks to the economic outlook associated with target range for the federal funds rate 25 basis points at
such changes. A number of participants, pointing to im- this meeting. These participants agreed that, even after
proved prospects for foreign economic growth, viewed an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate
the downside risks to the U.S. economic outlook stem- at this meeting, the stance of monetary policy would re-
ming from international developments as having re- main accommodative, supporting additional strengthen-
ceded further over the intermeeting period. With regard ing in labor market conditions and a sustained return to
to the outlook for inflation, some participants empha- 2 percent inflation. A few participants also judged that
sized downside risks, particularly in light of the recent the case for a policy rate increase at this meeting was
low readings on inflation along with measures of infla- strengthened by the easing, by some measures, in overall
tion compensation and some survey measures of infla- financial conditions over the previous six months. One
tion expectations that were still low. However, a couple participant did not believe it was appropriate to raise the
of participants expressed concern that a substantial un- federal funds rate target range at this meeting; this par-
dershooting of the longer-run normal rate of unemploy- ticipant suggested that the Committee should maintain
ment could pose an appreciable upside risk to inflation the target range for the federal funds rate at ¾ to 1 per-
or give rise to macroeconomic or financial imbalances cent until the inflation rate was actually moving toward
that eventually could lead to a significant economic the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective.
downturn. Participants agreed that the Committee
Participants noted that, with the process of normaliza-
should continue to monitor inflation developments
tion of the level of the federal funds rate continuing, it
closely.
would likely become appropriate this year for the Com-
In their discussion of recent developments in financial mittee to announce and implement a specific timetable
markets, participants observed that, over the intermeet- for its program of reducing reinvestment of the Federal
ing period, equity prices rose, longer-term interest rates Reserve’s securities holdings. It was observed that the
declined, and volatility in financial markets was generally ensuing reduction in securities holdings would be grad-
low. They also noted that, according to some measures, ual and would follow an extended period of Committee
financial conditions had eased even as the Committee communications on balance sheet normalization policy,
reduced policy accommodation and market participants including the information that would be released at the
continued to expect further steps to tighten monetary conclusion of this meeting. Consequently, the effect on
policy. Participants discussed possible reasons why fi- financial market conditions of the eventual announce-
nancial conditions had not tightened. Corporate earn- ment of the beginning of the Federal Reserve’s balance
ings growth had been robust; nevertheless, in the assess- sheet normalization was expected to be limited.
ment of a few participants, equity prices were high when
Participants expressed a range of views about the appro-
judged against standard valuation measures. Longer-
priate timing of a change in reinvestment policy. Several
term Treasury yields had declined since earlier in the year
preferred to announce a start to the process within a
and remained low. Participants offered various explana-
couple of months; in support of this approach, it was
tions for low bond yields, including the prospect of slug-
noted that the Committee’s communications had helped
gish longer-term economic growth as well as the ele-
prepare the public for such a step. However, some oth-
vated level of the Federal Reserve’s longer-term asset
ers emphasized that deferring the decision until later in
holdings. Some participants suggested that increased
the year would permit additional time to assess the out-
risk tolerance among investors might be contributing to
look for economic activity and inflation. A few of these
elevated asset prices more broadly; a few participants ex-
participants also suggested that a near-term change to
pressed concern that subdued market volatility, coupled

--- Page 10 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
reinvestment policy could be misinterpreted as signify- well as a stimulus to labor market participation and busi-
ing that the Committee had shifted toward a less gradual ness fixed investment. It was also suggested that the
approach to overall policy normalization. symmetry of the Committee’s inflation goal might be un-
derscored if inflation modestly exceeded 2 percent for a
Several participants indicated that the reduction in policy
time, as such an outcome would follow a long period in
accommodation arising from the commencement of bal-
which inflation had undershot the 2 percent longer-term
ance sheet normalization was one basis for believing
objective. Several participants expressed concern that a
that, if economic conditions evolved broadly as antici-
substantial and sustained unemployment undershooting
pated, the target range for the federal funds rate would
might make the economy more likely to experience fi-
follow a less steep path than it otherwise would. How-
nancial instability or could lead to a sharp rise in inflation
ever, some other participants suggested that they did not
that would require a rapid policy tightening that, in turn,
see the balance sheet normalization program as a factor
could raise the risk of an economic downturn. However,
likely to figure heavily in decisions about the target range
other participants noted that if a sharp rise in inflation
for the federal funds rate. A few of these participants
or inflation expectations did occur, the Committee could
judged that the degree of additional policy firming that
readily respond using conventional monetary policy
would result from the balance sheet normalization pro-
tools. With regard to financial stability, one participant
gram was modest.
emphasized the importance of remaining vigilant about
Participants generally reiterated their support for contin- financial developments but observed that previous epi-
uing a gradual approach to raising the federal funds rate. sodes of elevated financial imbalances and low unem-
Several participants expressed confidence that a series of ployment had limited relevance for the present situation,
further increases in the federal funds rate in coming as the current system of financial regulation was likely
years, along the lines implied by the medians of the pro- more robust than that prevailing before the financial cri-
jections for the federal funds rate in the June SEP, would sis.
contribute to a stabilization, over the medium term, of
Committee Policy Action
the inflation rate around the Committee’s 2 percent ob-
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period
jective, especially as this tightening of monetary policy
ahead, members judged that information received since
would affect the economy only with a lag and would start
the Federal Open Market Committee met in May indi-
from a point at which policy was still accommodative.
cated that the labor market had continued to strengthen
However, a few participants who supported an increase
and that economic activity had been rising moderately so
in the target range at the present meeting indicated that
far this year. Job gains had moderated but had been
they were less comfortable with the degree of additional
solid, on average, since the beginning of the year, and
policy tightening through the end of 2018 implied by the
the unemployment rate had declined. Household spend-
June SEP median federal funds rate projections. These
ing had picked up in recent months, and business fixed
participants expressed concern that such a path of in-
investment had continued to expand.
creases in the policy rate, while gradual, might prove in-
consistent with a sustained return of inflation to 2 per- Inflation on a 12-month basis had declined recently and
cent. was running somewhat below 2 percent. The measure
of inflation excluding food and energy prices was like-
Several participants endorsed a policy approach, such as
wise running somewhat below 2 percent. Market-based
that embedded in many participants’ projections, in
measures of inflation compensation remained low;
which the unemployment rate would undershoot their
survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expecta-
current estimates of the longer-term normal rate for a
tions had changed little on balance.
sustained period. They noted that the longer-run normal
rate of unemployment is difficult to measure and that With respect to the economic outlook and its implica-
recent evidence suggested resource pressures generated tions for monetary policy, members continued to expect
only modest responses of nominal wage growth and in- that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary
flation. Against this backdrop, possible benefits cited by policy, economic activity would expand at a moderate
policymakers of a period of tight labor markets included pace, and labor market conditions would strengthen
a further rise in nominal wage growth that would bolster somewhat further. Inflation on a 12-month basis was
inflation expectations and help push the inflation rate expected to remain somewhat below 2 percent in the
closer to the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, as near term, but almost all members expected it to stabilize
around 2 percent over the medium term, although they

--- Page 11 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_ g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_3_–_1_4,_ 2_0_1_7________________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
were monitoring inflation developments closely. Mem- of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
bers continued to judge that there was significant uncer- cute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the
tainty about the effects of possible changes in fiscal and following domestic policy directive, to be released at
other government policies but that near-term risks to the 2:00 p.m.:
economic outlook appeared roughly balanced, especially
“Effective June 15, 2017, the Federal Open
as risks related to foreign economic and financial devel-
Market Committee directs the Desk to under-
opments had diminished.
take open market operations as necessary to
After assessing current conditions and the outlook for maintain the federal funds rate in a target range
economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, all but of 1 to 1¼ percent, including overnight reverse
one member agreed to raise the target range for the fed- repurchase operations (and reverse repurchase
eral funds rate to 1 to 1¼ percent. They noted that the operations with maturities of more than one day
stance of monetary policy remained accommodative, when necessary to accommodate weekend, hol-
thereby supporting some further strengthening in labor iday, or similar trading conventions) at an offer-
market conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent ing rate of 1.00 percent, in amounts limited only
inflation. by the value of Treasury securities held outright
in the System Open Market Account that are
Members agreed that, in determining the timing and size
available for such operations and by a per-
of future adjustments to the target range for the federal
counterparty limit of $30 billion per day.
funds rate, the Committee would assess realized and ex-
pected economic conditions relative to its objectives of The Committee directs the Desk to continue
maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This as- rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auc-
sessment would take into account a wide range of infor- tion and to continue reinvesting principal pay-
mation, including measures of labor market conditions, ments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-
indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expecta- backed securities in agency mortgage-backed se-
tions, and readings on financial and international devel- curities. The Committee also directs the Desk
opments. Members also agreed that they would carefully to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap trans-
monitor actual and expected developments in inflation actions as necessary to facilitate settlement of
in relation to the Committee’s symmetric inflation goal. the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed
They expected that economic conditions would evolve securities transactions.”
in a manner that would warrant gradual increases in the
The vote also encompassed approval of the statement
federal funds rate, and they agreed that the federal funds
below to be released at 2:00 p.m.:
rate was likely to remain, for some time, below levels that
are expected to prevail in the longer run. However, the “Information received since the Federal Open
actual path of the federal funds rate would depend on Market Committee met in May indicates that
the economic outlook as informed by incoming data. the labor market has continued to strengthen
and that economic activity has been rising mod-
The Committee also decided to maintain its existing pol-
erately so far this year. Job gains have moder-
icy of reinvesting principal payments from its holdings
ated but have been solid, on average, since the
of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities in
beginning of the year, and the unemployment
agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling over
rate has declined. Household spending has
maturing Treasury securities at auction. The Committee
picked up in recent months, and business fixed
expected to begin implementing a balance sheet normal-
investment has continued to expand. On a
ization program in 2017, provided that the economy
12-month basis, inflation has declined recently
evolves broadly as anticipated. This program, which
and, like the measure excluding food and energy
would gradually reduce the Federal Reserve’s securities
prices, is running somewhat below 2 percent.
holdings by decreasing reinvestment of principal pay-
Market-based measures of inflation compensa-
ments from those securities, was described in an adden-
tion remain low; survey-based measures of
dum to the Committee’s Policy Normalization Princi-
longer-term inflation expectations are little
ples and Plans to be released after this meeting.
changed, on balance.
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
mittee seeks to foster maximum employment

--- Page 12 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a _rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
and price stability. The Committee continues to The Committee is maintaining its existing policy
expect that, with gradual adjustments in the of reinvesting principal payments from its hold-
stance of monetary policy, economic activity ings of agency debt and agency mortgage-
will expand at a moderate pace, and labor mar- backed securities in agency mortgage-backed se-
ket conditions will strengthen somewhat fur- curities and of rolling over maturing Treasury
ther. Inflation on a 12-month basis is expected securities at auction. The Committee currently
to remain somewhat below 2 percent in the near expects to begin implementing a balance sheet
term but to stabilize around the Committee’s normalization program this year, provided that
2 percent objective over the medium term. the economy evolves broadly as anticipated.
Near-term risks to the economic outlook ap- This program, which would gradually reduce
pear roughly balanced, but the Committee is the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings by de-
monitoring inflation developments closely. creasing reinvestment of principal payments
from those securities, is described in the accom-
In view of realized and expected labor market
panying addendum to the Committee’s Policy
conditions and inflation, the Committee de-
Normalization Principles and Plans.”
cided to raise the target range for the federal
funds rate to 1 to 1¼ percent. The stance of Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C.
monetary policy remains accommodative, Dudley, Lael Brainard, Charles L. Evans, Stanley
thereby supporting some further strengthening Fischer, Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, and Jerome
in labor market conditions and a sustained re- H. Powell.
turn to 2 percent inflation.
Voting against this action: Neel Kashkari.
In determining the timing and size of future ad-
Mr. Kashkari dissented because he preferred to maintain
justments to the target range for the federal
the existing target range for the federal funds rate at this
funds rate, the Committee will assess realized
meeting. In his view, recent data, while suggesting that
and expected economic conditions relative to its
the labor market had improved further, had increased
objectives of maximum employment and 2 per-
doubts about achievement of the Committee’s 2 percent
cent inflation. This assessment will take into ac-
longer-run inflation objective and thus had not provided
count a wide range of information, including
a compelling basis on which to firm monetary policy at
measures of labor market conditions, indicators
this meeting. He preferred to await additional evidence
of inflation pressures and inflation expectations,
that the recent decline in inflation was temporary and
and readings on financial and international de-
that inflation was moving toward the Committee’s sym-
velopments. The Committee will carefully
metric 2 percent inflation objective. He was concerned
monitor actual and expected inflation develop-
that raising the federal funds rate target range too soon
ments relative to its symmetric inflation goal.
increased the likelihood that inflation expectations
The Committee expects that economic condi-
would decline and that inflation would continue to run
tions will evolve in a manner that will warrant
below 2 percent.
gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the
federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some To support the Committee’s decision to raise the target
time, below levels that are expected to prevail in range for the federal funds rate, the Board of Governors
the longer run. However, the actual path of the voted unanimously to raise the interest rates on required
federal funds rate will depend on the economic and excess reserve balances ¼ percentage point, to
outlook as informed by incoming data. 1¼ percent, effective June 15, 2017. The Board of Gov-
ernors also voted unanimously to approve a ¼ percent-
age point increase in the primary credit rate (discount
rate) to 1¾ percent, effective June 15, 2017.6
6 In taking this action, the Board approved requests submitted Federal Reserve Banks, effective on the later of June 15, 2017,
by the boards of directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of and the date such Reserve Banks informed the Secretary of
Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, the Board of such a request. (Secretary’s note: Subsequently,
Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco. This vote also en- the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, St. Louis, and Min-
compassed approval by the Board of Governors of the estab- neapolis were informed by the Secretary of the Board of the
lishment of a 1¾ percent primary credit rate by the remaining

--- Page 13 ---

______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_ g_ _o_f _Ju_n_e_ _1_3_–_1_4,_ 2_0_1_7________________________P__ag_e_ _1_3
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, July 25–26,
2017. The meeting adjourned at 10:35 a.m. on June 14,
2017.
Notation Vote
By notation vote completed on May 23, 2017, the Com-
mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com-
mittee meeting held on May 2–3, 2017.
_____________________________
Brian F. Madigan
Secretary
Board’s approval of their establishment of a primary credit of the interest rates for secondary and seasonal credit under
rate of 1¾ percent, effective June 15, 2017.) The second vote the existing formulas for computing such rates.
of the Board also encompassed approval of the establishment

--- Page 14 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the Federal Open Market Commit- in 2019, and all judged that inflation would be within a
tee (FOMC) meeting held on June 13–14, 2017, meeting couple of tenths of a percentage point of the objective
participants submitted their projections of the most in that year. Table 1 and figure 1 provide summary sta-
likely outcomes for real output growth, the unemploy- tistics for the projections.
ment rate, and inflation for each year from 2017 to 2019
As shown in figure 2, participants generally expected
and over the longer run.1 Each participant’s projection
that evolving economic conditions would likely warrant
was based on information available at the time of the
further gradual increases in the federal funds rate to
meeting, together with his or her assessment of appro-
achieve and sustain maximum employment and 2 per-
priate monetary policy, including a path for the federal
cent inflation. Although some participants raised or
funds rate and its longer-run value, and assumptions
lowered their federal funds rate projections since March,
about other factors likely to affect economic outcomes.2
the median projections for the federal funds rate in 2017
The longer-run projections represent each participant’s
and 2018 were essentially unchanged, and the median
assessment of the value to which each variable would be
projection in 2019 was slightly lower; the median projec-
expected to converge, over time, under appropriate
tion for the longer-run federal funds rate was un-
monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to
changed. However, the economic outlook is uncertain,
the economy.3 “Appropriate monetary policy” is de-
and participants noted that their economic projections
fined as the future path of policy that each participant
and assessments of appropriate monetary policy could
deems most likely to foster outcomes for economic ac-
change in response to incoming information.
tivity and inflation that best satisfy his or her individual
interpretation of the Federal Reserve’s objectives of In general, participants viewed the uncertainty attached
maximum employment and stable prices. to their projections as broadly similar to the average of
the past 20 years, although a couple of participants saw
All participants who submitted longer-run projections
the uncertainty associated with their real GDP growth
expected that, under appropriate monetary policy,
forecasts as higher than average. Most participants
growth in real gross domestic product (GDP) this year
judged the risks around their projections for economic
would run somewhat above their individual estimates of
growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation as broadly
its longer-run rate. Over half of these participants ex-
balanced.
pected that economic growth would slow a bit in 2018,
and almost all of them expected that in 2019 economic Figures 4.A through 4.C for real GDP growth, the un-
growth would run at or near its longer-run level. All par- employment rate, and inflation, respectively, present
ticipants who submitted longer-run projections expected “fan charts” as well as charts of participants’ current as-
that the unemployment rate would run below their esti- sessments of the uncertainty and risks surrounding the
mates of its longer-run normal level in 2017 and remain economic projections. The fan charts (the panels at the
below that level through 2019. The majority of partici- top of these three figures) show the median projections
pants also lowered their estimates of the longer-run nor- surrounded by confidence intervals that are computed
mal rate of unemployment by 0.1 to 0.2 percentage from the forecast errors of various private and govern-
point. All participants projected that inflation, as meas- ment projections made over the past 20 years. The
ured by the four-quarter percentage change in the price width of the confidence interval for each variable at a
index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), given point is a measure of forecast uncertainty at that
would run below 2 percent in 2017 and then step up in horizon. For all three macroeconomic variables, these
the next two years; over half of them projected that in- charts illustrate that forecast uncertainty is substantial
flation would be at the Committee’s 2 percent objective and generally increases as the forecast horizon lengthens.
1 Four members of the Board of Governors, one fewer than 2 All participants submitted their projections in advance of the
in March 2017, were in office at the time of the June 2017 FOMC meeting; no projections were revised following the re-
meeting and submitted economic projections. The office of lease of economic data on the morning of June 14.
the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond was 3 One participant did not submit longer-run projections for
vacant at the time of this FOMC meeting; First Vice President real output growth, the unemployment rate, or the federal
Mark L. Mullinix submitted economic projections. funds rate.

--- Page 15 ---

,stnediserp
knaB
evreseR
laredeF
dna
srebmem
draoB
evreseR
laredeF
fo
snoitcejorp
cimonocE
.1
elbaT
7102
enuJ
,ycilop
yratenom
etairporppa
detcejorp
fo
stnemssessa
laudividni
rieht
rednu
tnecreP
3egnaR
2ycnednetlartneC
1naideM
regnoL
9102
8102
7102
regnoL
9102
8102
7102
regnoL
9102
8102
7102
elbairaV
nur
nur
nur
2.2–5.1
3.2–4.1
3.2–7.1
5.2–0.2
0.2–8.1
0.2–8.1
2.2–8.1
2.2–1.2
8.1
9.1
1.2
2.2
PDGlaerniegnahC
2.2–6.1
2.2–5.1
4.2–7.1
3.2–7.1
0.2–8.1
0.2–8.1
3.2–8.1
2.2–0.2
8.1
9.1
1.2
1.2
noitcejorphcraM
0.5–5.4
5.4–8.3
5.4–9.3
5.4–1.4
8.4–5.4
4.4–1.4
3.4–0.4
3.4–2.4
6.4
2.4
2.4
3.4
etartnemyolpmenU
0.5–5.4
8.4–1.4
7.4–2.4
7.4–4.4
0.5–7.4
7.4–3.4
6.4–3.4
6.4–5.4
7.4
5.4
5.4
5.4
noitcejorphcraM
0.2
2.2–8.1
1.2–7.1
8.1–5.1
0.2
1.2–0.2
0.2–8.1
7.1–6.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
6.1
noitaflniECP
0.2
2.2–8.1
1.2–8.1
1.2–7.1
0.2
1.2–0.2
0.2–9.1
0.2–8.1
0.2
0.2
0.2
9.1
noitcejorphcraM
2.2–8.1
1.2–7.1
8.1–6.1
1.2–0.2
0.2–8.1
7.1–6.1
0.2
0.2
7.1
4noitaflniECPeroC
2.2–8.1
1.2–8.1
0.2–7.1
1.2–0.2
0.2–9.1
9.1–8.1
0.2
0.2
9.1
noitcejorphcraM
detcejorP:omeM
htapycilopetairporppa
5.3–5.2
1.4–1.1
1.3–1.1
6.1–1.1
0.3–8.2
1.3–6.2
6.2–9.1
6.1–1.1
0.3
9.2
1.2
4.1
etarsdnuflaredeF
8.3–5.2
9.3–9.0
4.3–9.0
1.2–9.0
0.3–8.2
3.3–6.2
9.2–1.2
6.1–4.1
0.3
0.3
1.2
4.1
noitcejorphcraM
eht
morf
segnahc
tnecrep
era
noitaflni
fo
serusaem
htob
rof
snoitcejorp
dna
)PDG(
tcudorp
citsemod
ssorg
laer
ni
egnahc
fo
snoitcejorP
:etoN
egnahcfosetaregatnecrepehteranoitaflniECPerocdnanoitaflniECP
.detacidniraeyehtforetrauqhtruofehtotraeysuoiverpehtforetrauqhtruof
rofsnoitcejorP
.ygrenednadoofgnidulcxeECProfxedniecirpehtdna)ECP(serutidnepxenoitpmusnoclanosreprofxedniecirpeht,ylevitcepser,ni
era
snoitcejorp
s’tnapicitrap
hcaE
.detacidni
raey
eht
fo
retrauq
htruof
eht
ni
etar
tnemyolpmenu
nailivic
egareva
eht
rof
era
etar
tnemyolpmenu
eht
hcaehcihwotetarehtfotnemssessas’tnapicitraphcaetneserpersnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.ycilopyratenometairporppafotnemssessarehrosihnodesab
ehtrofsnoitcejorpehT
.ymonoceehtotskcohsrehtruffoecnesbaehtnidnaycilopyratenometairporpparednuegrevnocotdetcepxeebdluowelbairav
tegratetairporppadetcejorpehtroetarsdnuflaredefehtrofegnartegratetairporppadetcejorpehtfotniopdimehtfoeulavehteraetarsdnuflaredef htiwnoitcnujnocniedamerewsnoitcejorphcraMehT
.nurregnolehtrevororaeyradnelacdefiicepsehtfodneehttaetarsdnuflaredefehtroflevel
laerniegnahcehtrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoltimbustondidtnapicitrapenO
.7102,51–41hcraMnoeettimmoCtekraMnepOlaredeFehtfogniteemeht
hcustimbustondidtnapicitrapenodna,gniteem
,7102
,51–41hcraMehthtiwnoitcnujnocnietarsdnuflaredefehtro
,etartnemyolpmenueht,PDG
.gniteem,7102,41–31enuJehthtiwnoitcnujnocnisnoitcejorp
snoitcejorpforebmunehtnehW
.tsehgihottsewolmorfdegnarraerasnoitcejorpehtnehwnoitcejorpelddimehtsinaidemeht,doirephcaeroF
.1
.snoitcejorpelddimowtehtfoegarevaehtsinaidemeht,nevesi
.raeyhcaenielbairavhcaerofsnoitcejorptsewoleerhtdnatsehgiheerhtehtsedulcxeycnednetlartnecehT
.2
.raeytahtnielbairavtahtrof,tsehgihottsewolmorf,snoitcejorp’stnapicitrapllasedulcniraeyneviganielbairavarofegnarehT
.3
.detcelloctoneranoitaflniECPerocrofsnoitcejorpnur-regnoL
.4
_P_ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________

--- Page 16 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_3_–_1_4_, _2_0_1_7______________P_a_g_e_ _3
Figure1. Medians,centraltendencies,andrangesofeconomicprojections,2017–19andoverthelongerrun
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections
Central tendency of projections
Range of projections 3
2
Actual 1
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Longer
run
Percent
Unemployment rate
8
7
6
5
4
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Longer
run
Percent
PCE inflation
3
2
1
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Longer
run
Percent
Core PCE inflation
3
2
1
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Longer
run
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1. Thedatafortheactualvaluesof
thevariablesareannual.

--- Page 17 ---

_P_ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure2. FOMCparticipants’assessmentsofappropriatemonetarypolicy: Midpointoftargetrangeortargetlevelfor
thefederalfundsrate
Percent
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
2017 2018 2019 Longer run
Note: Each shaded circle indicates the value (rounded to the nearest 1/8 percentage point) of an individual par-
ticipant’sjudgmentofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfundsrateortheappropriatetarget
levelforthefederalfundsrateattheendofthespecifiedcalendaryearoroverthelongerrun. Oneparticipantdidnot
submitlonger-runprojectionsforthefederalfundsrate.

--- Page 18 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_3_–_1_4_, _2_0_1_7______________P_a_g_e_ _5
Reflecting, in part, the uncertainty about the future evo- 2.5 percent and none seeing it below 2 percent. The dis-
lution of GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and in- tributions of projected real GDP growth in 2018, 2019,
flation, participants’ assessments of appropriate mone- and in the longer run were broadly similar to the distri-
tary policy are also subject to considerable uncertainty. butions of the March projections. The distributions of
To illustrate the uncertainty regarding the appropriate individual projections for the unemployment rate shifted
path for monetary policy, figure 5 shows a comparable down noticeably for 2017 and 2018. Most participants
fan chart around the median projections for the federal projected an unemployment rate of 4.2 or 4.3 percent at
funds rate.4 As with the macroeconomic variables, fore- the end of this year, and the majority anticipated an un-
cast uncertainty for the federal funds rate is substantial employment rate between 4.0 and 4.3 percent at the end
and increases at longer horizons. of 2018. Participants’ projections also shifted down in
2019 but were more dispersed than the distributions of
The Outlook for Economic Activity
their projected unemployment rates in the two earlier
The median of participants’ projections for the growth
years. The distribution of projections for the longer-run
rate of real GDP, conditional on their individual as-
normal unemployment rate shifted down modestly.
sumptions about appropriate monetary policy, was
2.2 percent in 2017, 2.1 percent in 2018, and 1.9 percent The Outlook for Inflation
in 2019; the median of projections for the longer-run The median of projections for headline PCE price infla-
normal rate of real GDP growth was 1.8 percent. Com- tion this year was 1.6 percent, down 0.3 percentage point
pared with the March Summary of Economic Projec- from March. As in March, median projected inflation
tions (SEP), the medians of the forecasts for real GDP was 2.0 percent in 2018 and 2019. About half of the
growth over the period from 2017 to 2019, as well as the participants anticipated that inflation would continue to
median assessment of the longer-run growth rate, were run a bit below 2 percent in 2018, while only one partic-
mostly unchanged. Fewer than half of the participants ipant expected inflation above 2 percent in that year—
incorporated expectations of fiscal stimulus into their and, in that case, just modestly so. More than half pro-
projections, and a couple indicated that they had marked jected that inflation would be equal to the Committee’s
down the magnitude of expected fiscal stimulus relative objective in 2019. A few participants projected that in-
to March. flation would run slightly below 2 percent in that year,
while several projected that it would run a little above
All participants revised down their projections for the
2 percent. The median of projections for core PCE
unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2017 and of
price inflation was 1.7 percent in 2017, a decline of
2018, and almost all also revised down their projections
0.2 percentage point from March; the median projection
for the unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of 2019.
for 2018 and 2019 was 2.0 percent, as in the March pro-
Many who did so cited recent lower-than-expected read-
jections.
ings on unemployment. The median of the projections
for the unemployment rate was 4.3 percent in 2017 and Figures 3.C and 3.D provide information on the distri-
4.2 percent in each of 2018 and 2019, 0.2 percentage butions of participants’ views about the outlook for in-
point and 0.3 percentage point lower than in the March flation. The distributions of projections for headline
projections, respectively. The majority of participants PCE price inflation and for core PCE price inflation in
also revised down their estimates of the longer-run nor- 2017 shifted down noticeably from March, while the dis-
mal rate of unemployment by 0.1 or 0.2 percentage tributions for both measures of inflation in 2018 shifted
point, and the median longer-run level was 4.6 percent, down slightly. Many participants cited recent surpris-
down 0.1 percentage point from March. ingly low readings on inflation as a factor contributing
to the revisions in their inflation forecasts.
Figures 3.A and 3.B show the distributions of partici-
pants’ projections for real GDP growth and the unem- Appropriate Monetary Policy
ployment rate from 2017 to 2019 and in the longer run. Figure 3.E provides the distribution of participants’
The distribution of individual projections for real GDP judgments regarding the appropriate target or midpoint
growth for this year shifted up, with some participants of the target range for the federal funds rate at the end
now expecting real GDP growth between 2.4 and
4 The fan chart for the federal funds rate depicts the uncer- in figure 2 displays the dispersion of views across individual
tainty about the future path of appropriate monetary policy participants about the appropriate level of the federal funds
and is closely connected with the uncertainty about the future rate.
value of economic variables. In contrast, the dot plot shown

--- Page 19 ---

_P_ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.A.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforthechangeinrealGDP,2017–19andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2017
June projections 18
March projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4
1.3 1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 20 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_3_–_1_4_, _2_0_1_7______________P_a_g_e_ _7
Figure3.B.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsfortheunemploymentrate,2017–19andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2017
June projections 18
March projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2 4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0
3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2 4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0
3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2 4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0
3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
3. 6 3. 8 4. 0 4. 2 4. 4 4. 6 4. 8 5. 0
3.7 3.9 4.1 4.3 4.5 4.7 4.9 5.1
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 21 ---

_P_ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.C.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforPCEinflation,2017–19andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2017
June projections 18
March projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 22 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_3_–_1_4_, _2_0_1_7______________P_a_g_e_ _9
Figure3.D.Distributionofparticipants’projectionsforcorePCEinflation,2017–19
Number of participants
2017
June projections
18
March projections
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1. 5 1. 7 1. 9 2. 1
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 23 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure3.E.Distributionofparticipants’judgmentsofthemidpointoftheappropriatetargetrangeforthefederalfunds
rateortheappropriatetargetlevelforthefederalfundsrate,2017–19andoverthelongerrun
Number of participants
2017
June projections 18
March projections 16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
2018
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
2019
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Number of participants
Longer run
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0.8 8 1.1 3 1.3 8 1.6 3 1.8 8 2.1 3 2.3 8 2.6 3 2.8 8 3.1 3 3.3 8 3.6 3 3.8 8 4.1 3
1.12 1.37 1.62 1.87 2.12 2.37 2.62 2.87 3.12 3.37 3.62 3.87 4.12 4.37
Percent range
Note: Definitionsofvariablesandotherexplanationsareinthenotestotable1.

--- Page 24 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_3_–_1_4_, _2_0_1_7_____________P__ag_e_ _1_1
Table 2. Average historical projection error ranges slowly as well as a gradual return of inflation to the Com-
Percentage points mittee’s 2 percent objective. Several participants judged
Variable 2017 2018 2019
that a slightly more accommodative path of monetary
Change in real GDP1 . . . . . . . ±1.4 ±2.0 ±2.2
policy than in their previous projections would likely be
Unemployment rate1 . . . . . . . ±0.4 ±1.2 ±1.8 appropriate, citing an apparently slower rate of progress
toward the Committee’s 2 percent inflation objective. In
Total consumer prices2 . . . . . ±0.8 ±1.0 ±1.0
their discussions of appropriate monetary policy, half of
Short-term interest rates3 . . . . ±0.7 ±2.0 ±2.2
the participants commented on the Committee’s rein-
NOTE: Error ranges shown are measured as plus or minus the root
vestment policy; all of those who did so expected a
mean squared error of projections for 1997 through 2016 that were re-
leased in the summer by various private and government forecasters. As change in reinvestment policy before the end of this
described in the box “Forecast Uncertainty,” under certain assumptions, year.
there is about a 70 percent probability that actual outcomes for real
GDP, unemployment, consumer prices, and the federal funds rate will Uncertainty and Risks
be in ranges implied by the average size of projection errors made in the
Projections of economic variables are subject to consid-
past. For more information, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip
(2017), “Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using His- erable uncertainty. In assessing the path of monetary
torical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve’s Approach,” Finance
policy that, in their view, is likely to be most appropriate,
and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020 (Washington: Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), available FOMC participants take account of the range of possible
at www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2017/files/2017020pap. outcomes, the likelihood of those outcomes, and the po-
pdf.
tential benefits and costs to the economy should they
1. Definitions of variables are in the general note to table 1.
2. Measure is the overall consumer price index, the price measure occur. Table 2 provides one measure of forecast uncer-
that has been most widely used in government and private economic tainty for the change in real GDP, the unemployment
forecasts. Projection is percent change, fourth quarter of the previous
rate, and total consumer price inflation—the root mean
year to the fourth quarter of the year indicated.
3. For Federal Reserve staff forecasts, measure is the federal funds squared error (RMSE) for forecasts made over the past
rate. For other forecasts, measure is the rate on 3-month Treasury bills.
20 years. This measure of forecast uncertainty is incor-
Historical projections are the average level, in percent, in the fourth
quarter of the year indicated. porated graphically in the top panels of figures 4.A, 4.B,
and 4.C, which display fan charts plotting the median
SEP projections for the three variables surrounded by
of each year from 2017 to 2019 and over the longer run.5
symmetric confidence intervals derived from the
The distribution for 2017 was less dispersed than that in
RMSEs presented in table 2. If the degree of uncertainty
March, while the distribution for 2018 was slightly less
attending these projections is similar to the typical mag-
dispersed. The distributions in 2019 and in the longer
nitude of past forecast errors and if the risks around the
run were broadly similar to those in March. The median
projections are broadly balanced, future outcomes of
projections of the federal funds rate continued to show
these variables would have about a 70 percent probabil-
gradual increases, with the median assessment for 2017
ity of occurring within these confidence intervals. For
standing at 1.38 percent, consistent with three 25 basis
all three variables, this measure of forecast uncertainty is
point increases this year. Thereafter, the medians of the
substantial and generally increases as the forecast hori-
projections were 2.13 percent at the end of 2018 and
zon lengthens.
2.94 percent at the end of 2019; the median of the
longer-run projections of the federal funds rate was FOMC participants may judge that the width of the his-
3.00 percent. torical fan charts shown in figures 4.A through 4.C does
not adequately capture their current assessments of the
In discussing their June projections, many participants
degree of uncertainty that surrounds their economic
continued to express the view that the appropriate up-
projections. Participants’ assessments of the current
ward trajectory of the federal funds rate over the next
level of uncertainty surrounding their economic projec-
few years would likely be gradual. That anticipated pace
tions are shown in the bottom-left panels of figures 4.A,
reflected a few factors, such as a neutral real interest rate
4.B, and 4.C. All or nearly all participants viewed the
that was currently low and was expected to move up only
5 One participant’s projections for the federal funds rate, real that cannot be forecast. Under this view, the economy cur-
GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation were in- rently is in a regime characterized by expansion of economic
formed by the view that there are multiple possible medium- activity with low productivity growth and a low short-term real
term regimes for the U.S. economy, that these regimes are per- interest rate, but longer-term outcomes for variables other
sistent, and that the economy shifts between regimes in a way than inflation cannot be usefully projected.

--- Page 25 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4.A.UncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsofGDPgrowth
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Change in real GDP
Median of projections
70% confidence interval 4
3
2
Actual 1
0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about GDP growth Risks to GDP growth
June projections June projections
18 18
March projections March projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Theblueandredlinesinthetoppanelshowactualvaluesandmedianprojectedvalues,respectively,ofthe
percentchangeinrealgrossdomesticproduct(GDP)fromthefourthquarterofthepreviousyeartothefourthquarter
of the year indicated. The confidence interval around the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is
basedonrootmeansquarederrorsofvariousprivateandgovernmentforecastsmadeovertheprevious20years;more
information about these data is available in table 2. Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed,
on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the
historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around
theirprojections;thesecurrentassessmentsaresummarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,participantswho
judgetheuncertaintyabouttheirprojectionsas“broadlysimilar”totheaveragelevelsofthepast20yearswouldview
the width of the confidence interval shown in the historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of
the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise, participants who judge the risks to their projections as“broadly
balanced”would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For definitions of
uncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 26 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_3_–_1_4_, _2_0_1_7_____________P__ag_e_ _1_3
Figure4.B.Uncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsoftheunemploymentrate
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Unemployment rate
Median of projections 10
70% confidence interval
9
8
7
6
Actual
5
4
3
2
1
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about the unemployment rate Risks to the unemployment rate
June projections June projections
18 18
March projections March projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: The blue and red lines in the top panel show actual values and median projected values, respectively, of
the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of the year indicated. The confidence interval around
the median projected values is assumed to be symmetric and is based on root mean squared errors of various private
and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years; more information about these data is available in table 2.
Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width
and shape of the confidence interval estimated on the basis of the historical forecast errors may not reflect FOMC
participants’ current assessments of the uncertainty and risks around their projections; these current assessments are
summarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,participantswhojudgetheuncertaintyabouttheirprojectionsas
“broadlysimilar”totheaveragelevelsofthepast20yearswouldviewthewidthoftheconfidenceintervalshowninthe
historical fan chart as largely consistent with their assessments of the uncertainty about their projections. Likewise,
participants who judge the risks to their projections as“broadly balanced”would view the confidence interval around
theirprojectionsasapproximatelysymmetric. Fordefinitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethe
box“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 27 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_4____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure4.C.UncertaintyandrisksinprojectionsofPCEinflation
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
PCE inflation
Median of projections
70% confidence interval
3
2
1
Actual
0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
FOMC participants’ assessments of uncertainty and risks around their economic projections
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about PCE inflation Risks to PCE inflation
June projections June projections
18 18
March projections March projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Number of participants Number of participants
Uncertainty about core PCE inflation Risks to core PCE inflation
June projections June projections
18 18
March projections March projections
16 16
14 14
12 12
10 10
8 8
6 6
4 4
2 2
Lower Broadly Higher Weighted to Broadly Weighted to
similar downside balanced upside
Note: Theblueandredlinesinthetoppanelshowactualvaluesandmedianprojectedvalues,respectively,ofthe
percentchangeinthepriceindexforpersonalconsumptionexpenditures(PCE)fromthefourthquarteroftheprevious
yeartothefourthquarteroftheyearindicated. Theconfidenceintervalaroundthemedianprojectedvaluesisassumed
to be symmetricand is based on root mean squarederrorsof variousprivateand governmentforecastsmade over the
previous20years;moreinformationaboutthesedataisavailableintable2. Becausecurrentconditionsmaydifferfrom
those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the confidence interval estimated
onthebasisofthehistoricalforecasterrorsmaynotreflectFOMCparticipants’currentassessmentsoftheuncertainty
andrisksaroundtheirprojections;thesecurrentassessmentsaresummarizedinthelowerpanels. Generallyspeaking,
participants who judge the uncertainty about their projections as“broadly similar”to the average levels of the past
20yearswouldviewthewidthoftheconfidenceintervalshowninthehistoricalfanchartaslargelyconsistentwiththeir
assessments of the uncertaintyabout their projections. Likewise, participantswho judgethe risks to their projections
as“broadly balanced”would view the confidence interval around their projections as approximately symmetric. For
definitionsofuncertaintyandrisksineconomicprojections,seethebox“ForecastUncertainty.”

--- Page 28 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_3_–_1_4_, _2_0_1_7_____________P__ag_e_ _1_5
uncertainty attached to their economic projections as down slightly from March (shown in the lower-right
broadly similar to the average of the past 20 years, with panels of figure 4.C), as two fewer participants judged
three fewer participants than in March seeing uncertainty the risks to inflation to be weighted to the upside and
about GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla- two more viewed the risks as weighted to the downside.
tion as higher than its historical average.6 In their dis-
Participants’ assessments of the future path of the fed-
cussion of the uncertainty attached to their current pro-
eral funds rate consistent with appropriate policy are also
jections, most participants again expressed the view that,
subject to considerable uncertainty, reflecting in part un-
at this point, uncertainty surrounding prospective
certainty about the evolution of GDP growth, the un-
changes in fiscal and other government policies is very
employment rate, and inflation over time. The final line
large or that there is not yet enough information to make
in table 2 shows the RMSEs for forecasts of short-term
reasonable assumptions about the timing, nature, and
interest rates. These RMSEs are not strictly consistent
magnitude of the changes.
with the SEP projections for the federal funds rate, in
The fan charts—which are constructed so as to be sym- part because the SEP projections are not forecasts of the
metric around the median projections—also may not likeliest outcomes but rather reflect each participant’s in-
fully reflect participants’ current assessments of the bal- dividual assessment of appropriate monetary policy.
ance of risks to their economic projections. Participants’ However, the associated confidence intervals provide a
assessments of the balance of risks to their economic sense of the likely uncertainty around the future path of
projections are shown in the bottom-right panels of fig- the federal funds rate generated by the uncertainty about
ures 4.A, 4.B, and 4.C. As in March, most participants the macroeconomic variables and additional adjust-
judged the risks to their projections of real GDP growth, ments to monetary policy that may be appropriate to off-
the unemployment rate, headline inflation, and core in- set the effects of shocks to the economy.
flation as broadly balanced—in other words, as broadly
Figure 5 shows a fan chart plotting the median SEP pro-
consistent with a symmetric fan chart. Three partici-
jections for the appropriate path of the federal funds rate
pants judged the risks to the unemployment rate as
surrounded by confidence intervals derived from the re-
weighted to the downside, and one participant judged
sults presented in table 2. As with the macroeconomic
the risks as weighted to the upside (as shown in the
variables, forecast uncertainty is substantial and in-
lower-right panel of figure 4.B). In addition, the balance
creases at longer horizons.7
of risks to participants’ inflation projections shifted
6 At the end of this summary, the box “Forecast Uncertainty” zero is the bottom of the lowest target range for the federal
discusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in the funds rate that has been adopted by the Committee in the past.
economic forecasts and explains the approach used to assess This approach to the construction of the federal funds rate fan
the uncertainty and risks attending the participants’ projec- chart would be merely a convention and would not have any
tions. implication for possible future policy decisions regarding the
7 If at some point in the future the confidence interval around use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary
the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it would be policy accommodation if doing so were appropriate.
truncated at zero for purposes of the chart shown in figure 5;

--- Page 29 ---

_P_ag_e_ _1_6____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Figure5. Uncertaintyinprojectionsofthefederalfundsrate
Median projection and confidence interval based on historical forecast errors
Percent
Federal funds rate
Midpoint of target range
6
Median of projections
70% confidence interval*
5
4
3
2
Actual 1
0
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Note: The blue and red lines are based on actual values and median projected values, respectively, of the Com-
mittee’s target for the federal funds rate at the end of the year indicated. The actual values are the midpoint of the
target range; the median projected values are based on either the midpoint of the target range or the target level.
The confidence interval around the median projected values is based on root mean squared errors of various private
and government forecasts made over the previous 20 years. The confidence interval is not strictly consistent with the
projectionsforthefederalfundsrate,primarilybecausetheseprojectionsarenotforecastsofthelikeliestoutcomesfor
the federal funds rate, but rather projections of participants’ individual assessments of appropriate monetary policy.
Still,historicalforecasterrorsprovideabroadsenseoftheuncertaintyaroundthefuturepathofthefederalfundsrate
generatedbytheuncertaintyaboutthemacroeconomicvariablesaswellasadditionaladjustmentstomonetarypolicy
thatmaybeappropriatetooffsettheeffectsofshockstotheeconomy.
Theconfidenceintervalisassumedtobesymmetricexceptwhenitistruncatedatzero—thebottomofthelowest
target range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted in the past by the Committee. This truncation would
not be intended to indicate the likelihood of the use of negative interest rates to provide additional monetary policy
accommodation if doing so was judged appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could also employ other tools,
including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, to provide additional accommodation. Because current
conditions may differ from those that prevailed, on average, over the previous 20 years, the width and shape of the
confidenceintervalestimatedonthebasisofthehistoricalforecasterrorsmaynotreflectFOMCparticipants’current
assessmentsoftheuncertaintyandrisksaroundtheirprojections.
* The confidence interval is derived from forecasts of the average level of short-term interest rates in the fourth
quarteroftheyearindicated;moreinformationaboutthesedataisavailableintable2. Theshadedareaencompasses
lessthana70percentconfidenceintervaliftheconfidenceintervalhasbeentruncatedatzero.

--- Page 30 ---

___________________S_u_m__m_a_r_y_ o_f_ E__c_o_n_o_m_i_c _P_r_o_je_c_ti_o_n_s_ o_f_ t_h_e_ M__e_e_ti_n_g_ o_f_ J_u_n_e_ 1_3_–_1_4_, _2_0_1_7_____________P__ag_e_ _1_7
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the members of tions are summarized in the bottom-left panels of those fig-
the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Federal ures. Participants also provide judgments as to whether the
Reserve Banks inform discussions of monetary policy among risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, are
policymakers and can aid public understanding of the basis weighted to the downside, or are broadly balanced. That is,
for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these while the symmetric historical fan charts shown in the top
projections, however. The economic and statistical models panels of figures 4.A through 4.C imply that the risks to par-
and relationships used to help produce economic forecasts ticipants’ projections are balanced, participants may judge that
are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world, and there is a greater risk that a given variable will be above rather
the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad than below their projections. These judgments are summa-
unforeseen developments and events. Thus, in setting the rized in the lower-right panels of figures 4.A through 4.C.
stance of monetary policy, participants consider not only As with real activity and inflation, the outlook for the
what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as em- future path of the federal funds rate is subject to considerable
bodied in their projections, but also the range of alternative uncertainty. This uncertainty arises primarily because each
possibilities, the likelihood of their occurring, and the poten- participant’s assessment of the appropriate stance of mone-
tial costs to the economy should they occur. tary policy depends importantly on the evolution of real ac-
Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a tivity and inflation over time. If economic conditions evolve
range of forecasts, including those reported in past Monetary in an unexpected manner, then assessments of the appropri-
Policy Reports and those prepared by the Federal Reserve ate setting of the federal funds rate would change from that
Board’s staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open point forward. The final line in table 2 shows the error ranges
Market Committee (FOMC). The projection error ranges for forecasts of short-term interest rates. They suggest that
shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty as- the historical confidence intervals associated with projections
sociated with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a of the federal funds rate are quite wide. It should be noted,
participant projects that real gross domestic product (GDP) however, that these confidence intervals are not strictly con-
and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, sistent with the projections for the federal funds rate, as these
respectively, 3 percent and 2 percent. If the uncertainty at- projections are not forecasts of the most likely quarterly out-
tending those projections is similar to that experienced in the comes but rather are projections of participants’ individual as-
past and the risks around the projections are broadly bal- sessments of appropriate monetary policy and are on an end-
anced, the numbers reported in table 2 would imply a prob- of-year basis. However, the forecast errors should provide a
ability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand sense of the uncertainty around the future path of the federal
within a range of 1.6 to 4.4 percent in the current year, 1.0 to funds rate generated by the uncertainty about the macroeco-
5.0 percent in the second year, and 0.8 to 5.2 percent in the nomic variables as well as additional adjustments to monetary
third year. The corresponding 70 percent confidence inter- policy that would be appropriate to offset the effects of
vals for overall inflation would be 1.2 to 2.8 percent in the shocks to the economy.
current year, and 1.0 to 3.0 percent in the second and third If at some point in the future the confidence interval
years. Figures 4.A through 4.C illustrate these confidence around the federal funds rate were to extend below zero, it
bounds in “fan charts” that are symmetric and centered on would be truncated at zero for purposes of the fan chart
the medians of FOMC participants’ projections for GDP shown in figure 5; zero is the bottom of the lowest target
growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation. However, in range for the federal funds rate that has been adopted by the
some instances, the risks around the projections may not be Committee in the past. This approach to the construction of
symmetric. In particular, the unemployment rate cannot be the federal funds rate fan chart would be merely a convention;
negative; furthermore, the risks around a particular projec- it would not have any implications for possible future policy
tion might be tilted to either the upside or the downside, in decisions regarding the use of negative interest rates to pro-
which case the corresponding fan chart would be asymmet- vide additional monetary policy accommodation if doing so
rically positioned around the median projection. were appropriate. In such situations, the Committee could
Because current conditions may differ from those that also employ other tools, including forward guidance and asset
prevailed, on average, over history, participants provide purchases, to provide additional accommodation.
judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their While figures 4.A through 4.C provide information on
projections of each economic variable is greater than, smaller the uncertainty around the economic projections, figure 1
than, or broadly similar to typical levels of forecast uncer- provides information on the range of views across FOMC
tainty seen in the past 20 years, as presented in table 2 and participants. A comparison of figure 1 with figures 4.A
reflected in the widths of the confidence intervals shown in through 4.C shows that the dispersion of the projections
the top panels of figures 4.A through 4.C. Participants’ cur- across participants is much smaller than the average forecast
rent assessments of the uncertainty surrounding their projec- errors over the past 20 years.

# Tables

## Page_15_Table_1


|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|------------------|------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
| 2ycnednetlartneC | regnoL
nur | 0.2–8.1 0.2–8.1 8.4–5.4 0.5–7.4
0.2 0.2
0.2–8.1 0.2–8.1 4.4–1.4 7.4–3.4 1.2–0.2 1.2–0.2 1.2–0.2 1.2–0.2
2.2–8.1 3.2–8.1 3.4–0.4 6.4–3.4 0.2–8.1 0.2–9.1 0.2–8.1 0.2–9.1
2.2–1.2 2.2–0.2 3.4–2.4 6.4–5.4 7.1–6.1 0.2–8.1 7.1–6.1 9.1–8.1 | 0.3–8.2 0.3–8.2
1.3–6.2 3.3–6.2
6.2–9.1 9.2–1.2
6.1–1.1 6.1–4.1 |
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
| 1naideM          | regnoL
nur | 8.1 8.1 6.4 7.4 0.2 0.2
9.1 9.1 2.4 5.4 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
1.2 1.2 2.4 5.4 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
2.2 1.2 3.4 5.4 6.1 9.1 7.1 9.1                                                                                                                 | 0.3 0.3
9.2 0.3
1.2 1.2
4.1 4.1                                 |
|                  | 9102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 8102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |
|                  | 7102       |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |                                                                 |