# 20170503_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:38:21*
*Pages: 12, Tables: 0*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

_______________________________________________ _________________________________________P_a_g_e_ _1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
May 2–3, 2017
A joint meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Simon Potter, Manager, System Open Market
and the Board of Governors was held in the offices of Account
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 2, 2017, at Lorie K. Logan, Deputy Manager, System Open
1:00 p.m. and continued on Wednesday, May 3, 2017, at Market Account
9:00 a.m.1
Ann E. Misback, Secretary, Office of the Secretary,
PRESENT:
Board of Governors
Janet L. Yellen, Chair
William C. Dudley, Vice Chairman Matthew J. Eichner,3 Director, Division of Reserve
Lael Brainard Bank Operations and Payment Systems, Board
Charles L. Evans of Governors; Michael S. Gibson, Director,
Stanley Fischer Division of Supervision and Regulation, Board
Patrick Harker of Governors; Andreas Lehnert, Director,
Robert S. Kaplan Division of Financial Stability, Board of
Neel Kashkari Governors
Jerome H. Powell
Stephen A. Meyer, Deputy Director, Division of
Marie Gooding, Loretta J. Mester, Mark L. Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mullinix, Michael Strine, and John C. Williams,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Trevor A. Reeve, Senior Special Adviser to the
Market Committee Chair, Office of Board Members, Board of
Governors
James Bullard, Esther L. George, and Eric
Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Joseph W. Gruber, David Reifschneider, and John
Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, M. Roberts, Special Advisers to the Board,
respectively Office of Board Members, Board of
Governors
Brian F. Madigan, Secretary
Matthew M. Luecke, Deputy Secretary Linda Robertson, Assistant to the Board, Office of
David W. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Board Members, Board of Governors
Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Christopher J. Erceg, Senior Associate Director,
Michael Held,2 Deputy General Counsel Division of International Finance, Board of
Steven B. Kamin, Economist Governors; Diana Hancock and David E.
Thomas Laubach, Economist Lebow, Senior Associate Directors, Division
David W. Wilcox, Economist of Research and Statistics, Board of
Governors; Gretchen C. Weinbach, Senior
James A. Clouse, Thomas A. Connors, Michael Associate Director, Division of Monetary
Dotsey, Evan F. Koenig, Daniel G. Sullivan, Affairs, Board of Governors
William Wascher, and Beth Anne Wilson,
Associate Economists Antulio N. Bomfim, Ellen E. Meade, Edward
Nelson, and Joyce K. Zickler, Senior Advisers,
1 The Federal Open Market Committee is referenced as the 3 Attended the discussions on developments in financial mar-
“FOMC” and the “Committee” in these minutes. kets and System Open Market Account reinvestment policy.
2 Attended Tuesday session only.

--- Page 2 ---

_P _ag_e_ _2_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Rania Perry,5 Assistant Vice President, Federal
Governors Reserve Bank of New York
Rochelle M. Edge, Associate Director, Division of David Lucca, Research Officer, Federal Reserve
Financial Stability, Board of Governors; Jane Bank of New York
E. Ihrig4 and David López-Salido, Associate
Directors, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board
of Governors; John J. Stevens, Associate Developments in Financial Markets and Open
Director, Division of Research and Statistics, Market Operations
Board of Governors The manager of the System Open Market Account
(SOMA) reported on developments in domestic and for-
Glenn Follette, Assistant Director, Division of eign financial markets over the period since the March
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors FOMC meeting. Yields on U.S. Treasury securities de-
clined, and the broad index of the foreign exchange
Patrick E. McCabe, Adviser, Division of Research value of the dollar fell modestly. These changes report-
and Statistics, Board of Governors edly reflected revisions to investors’ expectations for fis-
cal and other economic policies; some increase in geo-
Penelope A. Beattie,2 Assistant to the Secretary, political tensions; economic and inflation indicators that,
Office of the Secretary, Board of Governors on balance, were weaker than anticipated; and monetary
policy communications. In response to political devel-
Dana L. Burnett, Michele Cavallo,5 and Dan Li, opments abroad, spreads on some European sovereign
Section Chiefs, Division of Monetary Affairs, debt securities narrowed noticeably. Measures of im-
Board of Governors plied volatility in equity markets declined, on net, to lev-
els that were historically very low. Market pricing and
Benjamin K. Johannsen, Senior Economist, survey evidence indicated that investors anticipated no
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of change in the target range for the federal funds rate at
Governors this meeting but saw a substantial probability of an in-
crease at the June FOMC meeting; market expectations
Arsenios Skaperdas,5 Economist, Division of for the path of the federal funds rate further ahead fell
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors somewhat. Federal funds continued to trade well within
the FOMC’s target range. Reinvestment of principal
Ellen J. Bromagen, First Vice President, Federal payments from Treasury and mortgage-backed securities
Reserve Bank of Chicago held in the SOMA proceeded smoothly. The manager
updated the Committee on various small-value tests of
David Altig, Kartik B. Athreya, Geoffrey Tootell, System operations.
and Christopher J. Waller, Executive Vice
The manager also briefed the Committee on develop-
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta,
ments regarding certain reference interest rates.
Richmond, Boston, and St. Louis, respectively
Changes in the practices of some domestic and foreign
banks for booking certain types of liabilities, as well as
Troy Davig, Julie Ann Remache,4 and Nathaniel
the effects of recent changes in the regulation of money
Wuerffel,5 Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
market funds, had resulted in a reduction in the volume
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, New York, and
of Eurodollar transactions reported on the Federal Re-
New York, respectively
serve’s Report of Selected Money Market Rates
(FR 2420). The staff was in the process of analyzing
Todd E. Clark, Terry Fitzgerald, and Òscar Jordà,
possible revisions to the report that would guard against
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
a further erosion of reported transactions and support
Cleveland, Minneapolis, and San Francisco,
the robustness of the overnight bank funding rate calcu-
respectively
lated by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Such
4 Attended the discussions on monetary policy and System 5 Attended the discussion on System Open Market Account
Open Market Account reinvestment policy. reinvestment policy.

--- Page 3 ---

_ ______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _M_a_y_ _2–_3_,_ 2_0_1_7__________________________P_a_g_e_ _3
revisions might be implemented in conjunction with the for economic reasons declined. The rates of private-
periodic renewal of authorization for the report, which sector job openings, hiring, and quits were all little
is expected to be completed by the third quarter of 2018. changed in January and February. The four-week mov-
The manager also noted that aspects of plans to publish ing average of initial claims for unemployment insurance
reference interest rates for market repurchase agree- benefits remained at a very low level through mid-April.
ments (repos) were being modified to incorporate a Measures of labor compensation accelerated modestly.
newly available source of data on cleared bilateral repo The employment cost index for private workers in-
transactions; the modifications were expected to extend creased 2¼ percent over the 12 months ending in
the time frame for publication of the new rates by several March, and average hourly earnings for all employees in-
months. creased 2¾ percent over the same period; both increases
were somewhat larger than those over the 12 months
The Committee voted unanimously to renew the recip-
ending in March 2016.
rocal currency arrangements with the Bank of Canada
and the Bank of Mexico; these arrangements are associ- The average unemployment rate for whites in the first
ated with the Federal Reserve’s participation in the quarter of this year was ½ percentage point lower than
North American Framework Agreement of 1994. In ad- its annual average for 2015, while the unemployment
dition, the Committee voted unanimously to renew the rates for Hispanics and for African Americans were
dollar and foreign currency liquidity swap arrangements about 1 percentage point and 1¾ percentage points
with the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Bank lower, respectively. The larger improvements in the
of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss Na- rates for Hispanics and for African Americans mirrored
tional Bank. The votes to renew the Federal Reserve’s the larger increases in those rates during the most recent
participation in these standing arrangements are taken recession. As of the first quarter, the unemployment
annually at the April or May FOMC meeting. rates for African Americans and for Hispanics remained
above the rate for whites both overall and for people
By unanimous vote, the Committee ratified the Desk’s
with similar educational backgrounds. Unemployment
domestic transactions over the intermeeting period.
rates for Asians remained below those for whites.
There were no intervention operations in foreign curren-
cies for the System’s account during the intermeeting pe- Total industrial production rose in February and March,
riod. primarily reflecting a further expansion of mining output
as well as a net increase in the output of utilities. Manu-
Staff Review of the Economic Situation
facturing production declined in March after advancing
The information reviewed for the May 2–3 meeting in-
in each of the previous six months; about half of the de-
dicated that the labor market strengthened further in
cline in March was due to a decrease in the output of
March but that growth of real gross domestic product
motor vehicles and parts. Automakers’ assembly sched-
(GDP) slowed in the first quarter, with the slowing likely
ules suggested that motor vehicle production would in-
reflecting transitory factors. The 12-month change in
crease in the second quarter despite somewhat elevated
overall consumer prices was close to the Committee’s
levels of vehicle inventories. Broader indicators of man-
longer-run objective of 2 percent in recent months; ex-
ufacturing production, such as the new orders indexes
cluding food and energy, consumer prices declined in
from national and regional manufacturing surveys,
March, and the 12-month change in core consumer
pointed to modest gains in factory output over the near
prices remained somewhat below 2 percent. Survey-
term.
based measures of inflation expectations were little
changed on balance. Real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) rose
only modestly in the first quarter, although monthly data
Total nonfarm payroll employment rose in March, but
indicated some improvement late in the quarter. Indeed,
the gain was smaller than in recent months, likely reflect-
after declining in January and February, real PCE in-
ing both warmer-than-usual temperatures in February
creased in March, partly reflecting a rebound in spending
that probably caused some hiring to be moved forward
on energy services, which had been held down by unsea-
and a major winter storm in the Northeast in March that
sonably warm weather through February, as well as an
probably held down hiring somewhat; nevertheless, the
increase in outlays for a variety of consumer goods. Mo-
increase in employment for the first quarter as a whole
tor vehicle sales picked up in April after declining in
was solid. The unemployment rate decreased to 4.5 per-
March, although sales remained somewhat below their
cent in March, and the labor force participation rate was
average pace in the first quarter and noticeably below the
unchanged. The share of workers employed part time

--- Page 4 ---

_P _ag_e_ _4_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
high levels seen in the fourth quarter. Recent readings Total U.S. consumer prices, as measured by the PCE
on key factors that influence consumer spending pointed price index, increased 1¾ percent over the 12 months
to solid growth in real PCE in coming quarters, includ- ending in March. Core PCE price inflation, which ex-
ing further gains in employment, real disposable per- cludes changes in food and energy prices, was about
sonal income, and households’ net worth. Moreover, 1½ percent over those same 12 months. Over the
consumer sentiment, as measured by the University of 12 months ending in March, total consumer prices as
Michigan Surveys of Consumers, remained upbeat in measured by the consumer price index (CPI) rose
March and April. 2½ percent, while core CPI inflation was 2 percent. On
a month-over-month basis, both the PCE price index
Residential investment increased at a brisk pace in the
and the CPI decreased in March, partly reflecting de-
first quarter. Starts for both new single-family homes
clines in some categories of prices that appeared unlikely
and multifamily units moved up, and issuance of build-
to be repeated. The median of longer-run inflation ex-
ing permits for new single-family homes—which tends
pectations from the Michigan survey edged down a bit,
to be a reliable indicator of the underlying trend in resi-
on balance, in recent months, while the medians from
dential construction—also rose. Sales of both new and
the Desk’s Survey of Primary Dealers and Survey of
existing homes in the first quarter were above their levels
Market Participants were little changed.
in the previous quarter.
Foreign real GDP growth appeared to have strength-
Real private expenditures for business equipment and in-
ened in the first quarter after slowing somewhat in the
tellectual property increased at a solid pace in the first
fourth quarter. In the advanced foreign economies
quarter after a moderate gain in the fourth quarter.
(AFEs), indicators for the first quarter pointed to faster
Nominal shipments and new orders of nondefense cap-
economic growth in Canada and solid growth in the euro
ital goods excluding aircraft both rose over the three
area and Japan. By contrast, real GDP growth in the
months ending in March, and the level of new orders
United Kingdom slowed significantly. More recent in-
remained higher than that of shipments, pointing to fur-
dicators were consistent with moderate economic
ther near-term gains in shipments. In addition, indica-
growth in most AFEs. In the emerging market econo-
tors of business sentiment were upbeat in recent
mies (EMEs), growth picked up in China and some
months. Real business expenditures for nonresidential
Asian economies in the first quarter but slowed moder-
structures increased briskly in the first quarter, and the
ately in Mexico. Recent data also suggested that eco-
number of oil and gas rigs in operation, an indicator of
nomic activity improved in parts of South America, most
spending for structures in the drilling and mining sector,
notably in Brazil where positive growth likely resumed
continued to rise through mid-April. Business inventory
in the first quarter. Inflation in the AFEs continued to
investment slowed sharply last quarter and held down
rise, largely because of the pass-through of earlier in-
real GDP growth significantly.
creases in crude oil prices into retail energy prices. In
Real federal purchases declined in the first quarter, as the EMEs, inflation fell in China in the first quarter, re-
defense expenditures decreased and nondefense spend- flecting a sharp drop in food prices, but was pushed up
ing rose at a slower pace than in the final quarter of 2016. in Mexico by fuel price hikes and pass-through from past
Real state and local government purchases also declined currency depreciation.
in the first quarter, with a sharp decrease in real con-
Staff Review of the Financial Situation
struction spending by these governments more than off-
Domestic financial market conditions remained gener-
setting a modest expansion in state and local govern-
ally accommodative over the intermeeting period. Prices
ment payrolls.
of risky assets increased a bit on net, Treasury yields de-
The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in Febru- clined, and the dollar depreciated. The decline in Treas-
ary. Exports rose and imports fell sharply, with imports ury yields reportedly was driven in part by investor ex-
of automotive products and consumer goods declining pectations of a somewhat slower pace of policy rate in-
after robust increases in January. Preliminary data on creases following FOMC communications after the
trade in goods suggested that the trade deficit was about March meeting and some waning of investor optimism
unchanged in March. The Bureau of Economic Analysis about prospects for more expansionary fiscal policies.
estimated that real net exports added slightly to growth
FOMC communications over the intermeeting period
of real GDP in the first quarter.
reportedly were interpreted as indicating a somewhat

--- Page 5 ---

_ ______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _M_a_y_ _2–_3_,_ 2_0_1_7__________________________P_a_g_e_ _5
slower pace of policy rate increases than previously ex- 2017 even as first-quarter earnings, on a seasonally ad-
pected but an earlier change to the Committee’s rein- justed basis, were estimated to be a bit lower than in the
vestment policy. Although the Committee’s decision to fourth quarter.
raise the target range for the federal funds rate at the
Conditions in short-term funding markets were stable
March meeting was widely anticipated, some of the ac-
over the intermeeting period. Reflecting the FOMC’s
companying communications were viewed as more ac-
policy action in March, yields on a broad set of money
commodative than expected. Investors reportedly also
market instruments moved higher. Treasury bills out-
took note of the discussion in the March FOMC minutes
standing, which had declined before the reimposition of
of the Committee’s reinvestment policy as well as state-
the federal debt ceiling on March 15, moved higher
ments from some FOMC participants and appeared to
thereafter, partly in connection with the Treasury’s steps
pull forward their expectations for when the FOMC will
to rebuild its cash balance. Take-up at the System’s over-
either announce or start to implement a change to that
night reverse repurchase agreement facility, which had
policy. Overall, however, the market reaction to news
risen ahead of the debt ceiling date, remained high
related to potential changes in reinvestment policy ap-
through March and then fell to relatively low levels after
peared to be fairly limited. Quotes on overnight index
quarter-end.
swap (OIS) rates pointed to a flattening of the expected
path of the federal funds rate through 2020, but a staff Financing conditions for large nonfinancial firms stayed
model suggested that a reduction in term premiums ac- accommodative. Gross issuance of corporate bonds and
counted for about half the decline in OIS rates. leveraged loans remained strong in March, with a large
share of lower-rated debt issued for refinancing pur-
Yields on intermediate- and longer-term nominal Treas-
poses. Net debt financing by nonfinancial businesses in-
ury securities decreased 20 to 35 basis points over the
creased in the first quarter but remained noticeably be-
intermeeting period. Investors’ interpretations of
low the pace of the same time last year. According to
FOMC communications, market perceptions of a re-
the April Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank
duced likelihood of domestic fiscal and regulatory policy
Lending Practices (SLOOS), a modest share of domestic
changes, weaker-than-expected domestic economic data
banks reported weaker demand for commercial and in-
releases, and geopolitical factors and foreign political de-
dustrial (C&I) loans, on net, in the first quarter, mainly
velopments all reportedly placed downward pressure on
citing several factors that pertained to customers’ re-
yields. A staff term structure model attributed about
duced needs for financing. C&I lending continued to be
one-third of the decline in the 10-year Treasury yield to
soft early in the second quarter.
a decrease in the average expected future short-term rate
and the remaining two-thirds to a lower term premium. Financing conditions for commercial real estate (CRE)
While inflation compensation based on Treasury were broadly unchanged on net. Spreads on commercial
Inflation-Protected Securities decreased at near-term mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) widened slightly
horizons, partly reflecting the lower-than-expected over the period since the March FOMC meeting but re-
March CPI release, far-term inflation compensation was mained near the lower end of the range seen since the
little changed on net. financial crisis. CMBS issuance picked up in March, re-
portedly reflecting a return to a more normal pace after
Broad U.S. equity price indexes increased slightly, on
the adoption of a credit risk retention rule in late De-
net, since the March FOMC meeting. One-month-
cember caused some issuance to be shifted from January
ahead option-implied volatility on the S&P 500 index—
and February into the fourth quarter. Growth of CRE
the VIX—rose appreciably in mid-April, reflecting in
loans on banks’ books slowed in the first quarter but
part increased investor concerns about geopolitical fac-
continued to be robust overall. Domestic respondents
tors and foreign political developments, but ended the
to the April SLOOS generally reported tightening their
period slightly lower, as investor concerns appeared to
lending standards and experiencing weaker loan demand
ease after the first round of the French presidential elec-
across all major CRE loan categories during the first
tion. Over the intermeeting period, spreads of yields on
quarter.
investment- and speculative-grade nonfinancial corpo-
rate bonds over comparable-maturity Treasury securities Financing conditions in the residential mortgage market
narrowed a bit on net. Private-sector analysts continued were little changed over the intermeeting period. Credit
to project robust profit growth for S&P 500 firms over availability continued to be relatively tight for house-
holds with low credit scores or harder-to-document in-

--- Page 6 ---

_P _ag_e_ _6_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
comes but relatively accommodative for other house- The staff provided its latest report on the potential risks
holds. Mortgage rates declined in line with yields on to financial stability; it continued to characterize the fi-
longer-term Treasury securities and mortgage-backed nancial vulnerabilities of the U.S. financial system as
securities, but they remained elevated compared with the moderate on balance. This overall assessment reflected
very low levels of the third quarter of 2016. Consistent the staff’s judgment that leverage as well as vulnerabili-
with these developments, refinance originations slowed ties from maturity and liquidity transformation in the fi-
considerably since the third quarter. In the April nancial sector were low, that leverage in the nonfinancial
SLOOS, banks reported roughly unchanged standards sector was moderate, and that asset valuation pressures
on residential real estate (RRE) loans on average. Banks in some markets were notable. Although these assess-
also reported that demand for some categories of RRE ments were unchanged from January’s assessment, vul-
loans weakened during the first quarter, including those nerabilities appeared to have increased for asset valua-
insured or guaranteed by government agencies. In line tion pressures, though not by enough to warrant raising
with lower reported demand, growth in RRE loans on the assessment of these vulnerabilities to elevated.
banks’ balance sheets declined.
Staff Economic Outlook
Financing conditions in consumer credit markets re- In the U.S. economic forecast prepared by the staff for
mained accommodative, on balance, in early 2017. Con- the May FOMC meeting, real GDP growth was pro-
sumer credit appeared to be broadly available even as in- jected to bounce back in the second quarter from its
terest rates charged on credit card balances and new auto weak first-quarter reading. The staff judged that the
loans drifted up in line with their benchmark shorter- weakness in first-quarter real GDP was probably not at-
term interest rates. Growth in consumer loan balances tributable to residual seasonality and that it instead re-
moderated a bit further from the relatively strong pace flected transitorily soft consumer expenditures and in-
seen during the past few years, although year-over-year ventory investment. Importantly, PCE growth was ex-
growth in credit card balances, student loans, and auto pected to pick up to a stronger pace in the spring, which
loans stayed in the 6 to 7 percent range through Febru- would be more consistent with ongoing gains in employ-
ary. In the April SLOOS, banks reported tightening ment, real disposable personal income, and households’
standards on auto loans and easing standards on credit net worth. In addition, the sharp decrease in the contri-
card loans; banks also reported facing weaker demand bution to GDP growth from the change in inventory in-
for both auto and credit card loans. vestment in the first quarter was not expected to be re-
peated. Beyond the near term, the forecast for real GDP
Over the intermeeting period, movements in foreign fi-
growth was a little stronger, on net, than in the previous
nancial markets were driven by central bank communi-
projection, mostly due to the effect of a somewhat lower
cations in the United States and abroad, geopolitical
assumed path for the exchange value of the dollar. The
risks, and changes in investors’ perceptions about future
staff continued to project that real GDP would expand
U.S. fiscal and other government policies. Concerns
at a modestly faster pace than potential output in
about the outcome of the French presidential election
2017 through 2019, supported in part by the staff’s
and tensions in the Korean peninsula pushed down
maintained assumption that fiscal policy would become
10-year sovereign yields in the advanced economies for
more expansionary in the coming years. The unemploy-
several weeks. Sentiment improved following the out-
ment rate was projected to decline gradually over the
come of the first round of the French presidential elec-
next couple of years and to run somewhat below the
tion on April 23, which led to a partial retracement in
staff’s estimate of its longer-run natural rate over this pe-
yields. At their meetings on April 27, the European Cen-
riod; the staff’s estimate of the natural rate was revised
tral Bank and the Bank of Japan each left their policy
down slightly in this forecast.
stance unchanged. On net, foreign yields declined some-
what less than U.S. yields, contributing to a modest de- The staff’s forecast for consumer price inflation, as
preciation of the dollar against both the AFE and EME measured by changes in the PCE price index, was re-
currencies. Equity indexes in most advanced and emerg- vised down marginally for 2017 as a whole after incor-
ing economies rose. Flows to emerging market mutual porating the soft data on consumer prices for March, but
funds remained strong, and spreads on emerging market it was essentially unrevised thereafter. Inflation was still
debt were little changed. expected to be somewhat higher this year than last year,
reflecting an upturn in the prices for food and
non-energy imports as well as a slightly faster increase in

--- Page 7 ---

_ ______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _M_a_y_ _2–_3_,_ 2_0_1_7__________________________P_a_g_e_ _7
energy prices. The staff continued to project that infla- Although the incoming data showed that aggregate
tion would increase gradually in 2018 and 2019 and that spending in the first quarter had been weaker than par-
it would be marginally below the Committee’s longer- ticipants had expected, they viewed the slowing as likely
run objective of 2 percent in 2019. to be transitory. They continued to expect that, with
further gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary
The staff viewed the uncertainty around its projections
policy, economic activity would expand at a moderate
for real GDP growth, the unemployment rate, and infla-
pace, labor market conditions would strengthen some-
tion as similar to the average of the past 20 years. The
what further, and inflation would stabilize around 2 per-
risks to the forecast for real GDP were seen as tilted to
cent over the medium term.
the downside, primarily reflecting the staff’s assessment
that monetary policy appeared to be better positioned to Participants generally indicated that their assessments of
respond to large positive shocks to the economic out- the medium-term economic outlook had changed little
look than to substantial adverse ones. However, the since the March meeting, and they discussed various rea-
staff viewed the risks to the forecast as less pronounced sons why the softness in consumer spending in the first
than late last year, with both somewhat diminished risks quarter was likely to be transitory. Some participants
to the foreign outlook and an increase in U.S. consumer judged that the low reading on GDP growth also could
and business confidence. Consistent with the downside partly reflect residual seasonality and so would likely be
risks to aggregate demand, the staff viewed the risks to followed by stronger GDP growth in subsequent quar-
its outlook for the unemployment rate as tilted to the ters, repeating a pattern evidenced in recent years. A few
upside. The risks to the projection for inflation were emphasized the uncertainty with regard to the reasons
judged to be roughly balanced. The downside risks from for the unexpected weakness in consumer spending but
the possibility that longer-term inflation expectations considered it too early to judge the implications for the
may have edged down or that the dollar could appreciate outlook. Many pointed to the recent firming of the
substantially were seen as roughly counterbalanced by housing market and business fixed investment as wel-
the upside risk that inflation could increase more than come developments.
expected in an economy that was projected to continue
Overall, participants continued to see the near-term risks
operating above its longer-run potential.
to the economic outlook as roughly balanced. Many par-
Participants’ Views on Current Conditions and the ticipants saw the risks stemming from global economic
Economic Outlook and financial developments as having receded further
In their discussion of the economic situation and the over the intermeeting period. They pointed to the en-
outlook, meeting participants agreed that the infor- couraging tone of recent data on economic growth
mation received over the intermeeting period indicated abroad, which suggested some upside risks to foreign
that the labor market had continued to strengthen even economic activity. However, several noted that down-
as growth in economic activity slowed in the first quar- side risks to the global outlook remained, either because
ter. Job gains remained solid, on average, in recent of geopolitical developments and foreign political fac-
months, and the unemployment rate declined. House- tors or because monetary policy normalization in the
hold spending rose only modestly, but the fundamentals United States could lead to financial strains in EMEs.
underpinning the continued growth of consumption re- Many participants continued to view the possibility of
mained solid. Business fixed investment firmed in the expansionary fiscal policy changes in the United States
first quarter after increasing only slowly over the previ- as posing upside risks to their forecasts for U.S. eco-
ous two years. Inflation measured on a 12-month basis nomic growth, although they also noted that prospects
recently had been running close to the Committee’s for enactment of a more expansionary fiscal program, as
2 percent longer-run objective; consumer prices, both well as its size, composition, and timing, remained highly
including and excluding prices of energy and food items, uncertain. Regarding the outlook for inflation, a couple
declined in March, and core inflation continued to run of participants expressed concern that a substantial un-
somewhat below 2 percent. Market-based measures of dershooting of the longer-run normal rate of unemploy-
inflation compensation remained low; survey-based ment could pose an appreciable upside risk to inflation.
measures of longer-term inflation expectations were lit- However, several others continued to see downside risks
tle changed on balance. to the inflation outlook, particularly given the low read-
ings on inflation over the intermeeting period and the
still-low measures of inflation compensation and infla-

--- Page 8 ---

_P _ag_e_ _8_____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
tion expectations. Participants agreed that the Commit- Conditions in the agricultural sector remained weak,
tee should continue to closely monitor inflation indica- partly as a result of low commodity prices.
tors and global economic and financial developments.
Labor market conditions strengthened further in recent
While recent data suggested a significant slowdown of months. At 4.5 percent, the unemployment rate had
growth in consumption spending early in the year, par- reached or fallen below levels that participants judged
ticipants expected to see a rebound in consumer spend- likely to be normal over the longer run. Increases in
ing in coming months in light of the solid fundamentals nonfarm payroll employment averaged almost
underpinning household spending, including ongoing 180,000 per month during the first quarter, a pace that,
job gains, rising household income and wealth, im- if maintained, would be expected to result in further in-
proved household balance sheets, and buoyant con- creases in labor utilization over time. Labor market con-
sumer sentiment. It was noted that much of the recent ditions in many Districts were reported to have contin-
slowing likely reflected transitory factors, such as low ued to improve. Contacts in several Districts reported a
consumer spending for energy services induced by an pickup in wage increases, shortages of workers in se-
unusually mild winter and a decline in motor vehicle lected occupations, or pressures to train workers for
sales from an unsustainably high fourth-quarter pace. hard-to-fill jobs. Even so, several other participants sug-
Nevertheless, contacts expected that demand for motor gested some margins may remain along which labor mar-
vehicles would be well maintained. District reports on ket utilization could increase further without giving rise
the service sector were generally positive, although one to inflationary pressures. In that regard, they noted that
District’s contacts in the tourism industry reported a the recent rise in the labor force participation rate in the
falloff in international visitors. One participant noted face of a downward trend from demographic factors was
that retail contacts reported upbeat projections for a positive development. However, a couple of partici-
online sales and associated package delivery services, in pants pointed out that uncertainty about both the
part reflecting structural shifts in the retail industry. longer-run normal rate of unemployment and labor
force trends made it difficult to assess the scope for ad-
Several participants discussed the pickup in residential
ditional sustainable increases in labor utilization. Gen-
investment in the first quarter. Starts and permits for
erally, participants continued to expect that if economic
single-family housing continued to post moderate in-
growth stayed moderate, as they projected, the unem-
creases, while sales of new homes rose strongly from
ployment rate would remain, for the next few years, be-
their level in the fourth quarter of 2016. Business con-
low their estimates of its longer-run normal level. A few
tacts in some Districts reported that residential construc-
participants continued to anticipate a substantial under-
tion activity had not kept pace with demand, resulting in
shooting of the longer-run normal level of the unem-
shortages in housing supply and upward pressure on
ployment rate.
prices.
Readings on headline and core PCE price inflation in
Business fixed investment increased at a solid pace in the
March had come in lower than expected. On a
first quarter, led by a rebound in drilling for oil and nat-
12-month basis, headline PCE price inflation had edged
ural gas. Several participants noted that rising orders for
above the Committee’s 2 percent objective in February,
capital goods suggested further gains in business equip-
but this measure dropped back to 1.8 percent in March,
ment investment over coming quarters. Business con-
in part reflecting the effects of lower energy prices on
tacts reported increases in activity in the manufacturing
the headline index. Core PCE price inflation, which his-
and energy sectors. Contacts in many Districts were said
torically has been a good predictor of future headline in-
to be generally optimistic about business prospects. Sev-
flation, moved down to 1.6 percent over the 12 months
eral participants noted that surveys of business condi-
ending in March. However, it was noted that some of
tions in their Districts continued to indicate expanding
this slowing reflected idiosyncratic factors such as a large
activity. A few participants commented that firms en-
drop in the measure of quality-adjusted prices for wire-
gaged in international trade were benefiting from im-
less telephone services. Several participants emphasized
provements in global demand conditions. Several par-
that inflation measured on a 12-month basis had been
ticipants reported that firms in their Districts planned to
running very close to the Committee’s 2 percent target.
increase capital expenditures, although in another Dis-
Overall, most participants viewed the recent softer infla-
trict, uncertainty about changes in trade and regulatory
tion data as primarily reflecting transitory factors, but a
policies was said to be weighing on capital spending.
few expressed concern that progress toward the Com-
mittee’s objective may have slowed. Market-based

--- Page 9 ---

_ ______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _M_a_y_ _2–_3_,_ 2_0_1_7__________________________P_a_g_e_ _9
measures of longer-term inflation compensation re- In their consideration of monetary policy, participants
mained low, with five-year, five-year-forward CPI infla- judged that it was appropriate to leave the target range
tion compensation a bit below 2 percent—unchanged for the federal funds rate unchanged at this meeting. Al-
from the time of the March FOMC meeting but some- though the data on aggregate spending and inflation re-
what above levels registered last year. In addition, the ceived over the intermeeting period were, on balance,
median measure of inflation expectations over the next weaker than participants expected, they generally saw the
5 to 10 years in the Michigan survey edged down from outlook for the economy and inflation as little changed
2.5 percent in February to 2.4 percent in March and and judged that a continued gradual removal of mone-
April. The three-year-ahead measure of inflation expec- tary policy accommodation remained appropriate. A
tations from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s couple of participants indicated that increasing the target
Survey of Consumer Expectations decreased from range for the federal funds rate at the current meeting
3.0 percent to 2.7 percent in March and rose to 2.9 per- would be warranted by their economic outlook, but they
cent in April. also noted that maintaining the current stance of policy
for now would be consistent with the Committee’s grad-
In light of these developments, participants generally
ual approach or that the Committee’s recent communi-
continued to expect that inflation would stabilize around
cations had not pointed to an increase at this meeting.
the Committee’s 2 percent objective over the medium
Most participants judged that if economic information
run as the effects of transitory factors waned and condi-
came in about in line with their expectations, it would
tions in the labor market and the overall economy im-
soon be appropriate for the Committee to take another
proved further. Participants noted that import prices
step in removing some policy accommodation. A num-
had begun to increase, supporting their expectation that
ber of participants pointed out that clarification of pro-
inflation would gradually rise. A few participants, how-
spective fiscal and other policy changes would remove
ever, expressed uncertainty about the reasons for the re-
one source of uncertainty for the economic outlook.
cent unexpected weakness in inflation measures and
Participants generally agreed that the current stance of
about its implications for the inflation outlook.
monetary policy remained accommodative, supporting
In their discussion of recent developments in financial some additional strengthening in labor market condi-
markets, some participants commented on changes in fi- tions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation.
nancial conditions in the wake of the Committee’s deci-
Participants generally reiterated their support for a con-
sion to increase the target range for the federal funds rate
tinued gradual approach to raising the federal funds rate.
in March. They noted variously that the decline in
Some participants noted that core PCE price inflation
longer-term interest rates and the modest depreciation
had been running below the Committee’s objective for
of the dollar over the intermeeting period would provide
overall inflation for the past eight years and that it was
some stimulus to aggregate demand, that the Commit-
important to return inflation to 2 percent, or that the
tee’s recent policy actions had not resulted in a tighten-
public’s longer-term inflation expectations may have
ing of financial conditions, or that some of the decline
fallen somewhat, and that a gradual approach to tighten-
in longer-term yields reflected investors’ perceptions of
ing could help return expectations and inflation to 2 per-
diminished odds of significant fiscal stimulus and an in-
cent. One participant cited results of a District survey
crease in some geopolitical and foreign political risks.
of businesses indicating that more than one-third of re-
With regard to financial stability, several participants em- spondents saw the Federal Reserve as more likely to ac-
phasized that higher requirements for capital and liquid- cept inflation below its 2 percent objective than above;
ity in the banking system and other prudential standards that participant interpreted the survey results as suggest-
had contributed to increased resilience in the financial ing that the Committee’s communications about the
system since the financial crisis. However, they ex- symmetry of its inflation objective had not completely
pressed concerns that a possible easing of regulatory taken hold, a concern also mentioned by a couple of
standards could increase risks to financial stability. In other participants. Another participant observed that a
addition, it was noted that real estate values were ele- gradual approach was appropriate because the neutral
vated in some sectors of the CRE market, that a sharp rate of interest had declined and considerable uncer-
decline in such valuations could pose risks to financial tainty prevailed about its longer-run level. Several par-
stability, and that potential reforms in the housing fi- ticipants, however, pointed to conditions under which
nance sector could have implications for such valua- the Committee might need to consider a somewhat
tions. more rapid removal of monetary accommodation—for

--- Page 10 ---

_P _ag_e_ _1_0____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
instance, if the unemployment rate fell appreciably fur- After assessing current conditions and the outlook for
ther than currently projected, if wages increased more economic activity, the labor market, and inflation, mem-
rapidly than expected, or if highly stimulative fiscal pol- bers agreed to maintain the target range for the federal
icy changes were to be enacted. In contrast, a couple of funds rate at ¾ to 1 percent. They noted that the stance
others judged that the Committee could withdraw mon- of monetary policy remained accommodative, thereby
etary accommodation even more gradually than re- supporting some further strengthening in labor market
flected in the medians of forecasts in the March Sum- conditions and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation.
mary of Economic Projections, noting that slack might
Members generally judged that it would be prudent to
remain in the labor market or that inflation was not very
await additional evidence indicating that the recent slow-
sensitive to declines in the unemployment rate below its
ing in the pace of economic activity had been transitory
estimated longer-run normal level.
before taking another step in removing accommodation.
Committee Policy Action Members agreed that, in determining the timing and size
In their discussion of monetary policy for the period of future adjustments to the target range for the federal
ahead, members judged that information received since funds rate, the Committee would assess realized and ex-
the Committee met in March indicated that the labor pected economic conditions relative to its objectives of
market had continued to strengthen even as growth in maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. This as-
economic activity had slowed. Job gains had remained sessment would take into account a wide range of infor-
solid, on average, in recent months, and the unemploy- mation, including measures of labor market conditions,
ment rate had declined. Household spending had risen indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expecta-
only modestly, but the fundamentals underpinning the tions, and readings on financial and international devel-
continued growth of consumption remained solid, while opments. Members also agreed to continue to carefully
business fixed investment had firmed. monitor actual and expected inflation developments rel-
ative to the Committee’s symmetric inflation goal, with
Inflation, measured as the 12-month change in the head-
one member viewing further progress of inflation to-
line PCE price index, had been running close to the
ward the 2 percent objective as necessary before taking
Committee’s 2 percent longer-run objective. Core infla-
another step to remove policy accommodation. Mem-
tion continued to run somewhat below 2 percent. Both
bers expected that economic conditions would evolve in
headline and core consumer price indexes fell in March.
a manner that would warrant gradual increases in the
Market-based measures of inflation compensation had
federal funds rate. Members agreed that the federal
remained low, while survey-based measures of longer-
funds rate was likely to remain, for some time, below
term inflation expectations had changed little on bal-
levels that they expected to prevail in the longer run.
ance.
However, they noted that the actual path of the federal
With respect to the economic outlook and its implica- funds rate would depend on the economic outlook as
tions for monetary policy, members agreed that the informed by incoming data.
slowing in growth during the first quarter was likely to
The Committee also decided to maintain its existing pol-
be transitory and continued to expect that, with gradual
icy of reinvesting all principal payments from its hold-
adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, economic
ings of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securi-
activity would expand at a moderate pace, labor market
ties in agency mortgage-backed securities and of rolling
conditions would strengthen somewhat further, and in-
over maturing Treasury securities at auction. Members
flation would stabilize around 2 percent over the me-
anticipated doing so until normalization of the level of
dium term. Members continued to judge that there was
the federal funds rate was well under way, and they noted
significant uncertainty about the effects of possible
that this policy, by keeping the Committee’s holdings of
changes in fiscal and other government policies but that
longer-term securities at sizable levels, should help main-
near-term risks to the economic outlook appeared
tain accommodative financial conditions.
roughly balanced. A couple of members noted that the
outlook for global growth appeared to have brightened At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
and that downside risks from abroad had waned. Mem- voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
bers agreed that they would continue to closely monitor of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
inflation indicators and global economic and financial cute transactions in the SOMA in accordance with the
developments. following domestic policy directive, to be released at
2:00 p.m.:

--- Page 11 ---

_ ______________________________M__in_u_t_es_ _o_f _th_e_ _M_e_e_t_in_g_ _o_f _M_a_y_ _2–_3_,_ 2_0_1_7_________________________P__ag_e_ _1_1
“Effective May 4, 2017, the Federal Open Mar- that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of
ket Committee directs the Desk to undertake monetary policy, economic activity will expand
open market operations as necessary to main- at a moderate pace, labor market conditions will
tain the federal funds rate in a target range of strengthen somewhat further, and inflation will
¾ to 1 percent, including overnight reverse re- stabilize around 2 percent over the medium
purchase operations (and reverse repurchase term. Near-term risks to the economic outlook
operations with maturities of more than one day appear roughly balanced. The Committee con-
when necessary to accommodate weekend, hol- tinues to closely monitor inflation indicators
iday, or similar trading conventions) at an offer- and global economic and financial develop-
ing rate of 0.75 percent, in amounts limited only ments.
by the value of Treasury securities held outright
In view of realized and expected labor market
in the System Open Market Account that are
conditions and inflation, the Committee de-
available for such operations and by a per-
cided to maintain the target range for the federal
counterparty limit of $30 billion per day.
funds rate at ¾ to 1 percent. The stance of
The Committee directs the Desk to continue monetary policy remains accommodative,
rolling over maturing Treasury securities at auc- thereby supporting some further strengthening
tion and to continue reinvesting principal pay- in labor market conditions and a sustained re-
ments on all agency debt and agency mortgage- turn to 2 percent inflation.
backed securities in agency mortgage-backed se-
In determining the timing and size of future ad-
curities. The Committee also directs the Desk
justments to the target range for the federal
to engage in dollar roll and coupon swap trans-
funds rate, the Committee will assess realized
actions as necessary to facilitate settlement of
and expected economic conditions relative to its
the Federal Reserve’s agency mortgage-backed
objectives of maximum employment and 2 per-
securities transactions.”
cent inflation. This assessment will take into ac-
The vote also encompassed approval of the statement count a wide range of information, including
below to be released at 2:00 p.m.: measures of labor market conditions, indicators
of inflation pressures and inflation expectations,
“Information received since the Federal Open
and readings on financial and international de-
Market Committee met in March indicates that
velopments. The Committee will carefully
the labor market has continued to strengthen
monitor actual and expected inflation develop-
even as growth in economic activity slowed.
ments relative to its symmetric inflation goal.
Job gains were solid, on average, in recent
The Committee expects that economic condi-
months, and the unemployment rate declined.
tions will evolve in a manner that will warrant
Household spending rose only modestly, but
gradual increases in the federal funds rate; the
the fundamentals underpinning the continued
federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some
growth of consumption remained solid. Busi-
time, below levels that are expected to prevail in
ness fixed investment firmed. Inflation meas-
the longer run. However, the actual path of the
ured on a 12-month basis recently has been run-
federal funds rate will depend on the economic
ning close to the Committee’s 2 percent longer-
outlook as informed by incoming data.
run objective. Excluding energy and food, con-
sumer prices declined in March and inflation The Committee is maintaining its existing policy
continued to run somewhat below 2 percent. of reinvesting principal payments from its hold-
Market-based measures of inflation compensa- ings of agency debt and agency mortgage-
tion remain low; survey-based measures of backed securities in agency mortgage-backed se-
longer-term inflation expectations are little curities and of rolling over maturing Treasury
changed, on balance. securities at auction, and it anticipates doing so
until normalization of the level of the federal
Consistent with its statutory mandate, the Com-
funds rate is well under way. This policy, by
mittee seeks to foster maximum employment
keeping the Committee’s holdings of longer-
and price stability. The Committee views the
term securities at sizable levels, should help
slowing in growth during the first quarter as
maintain accommodative financial conditions.”
likely to be transitory and continues to expect

--- Page 12 ---

_P _ag_e_ _1_2____________________________F_e_d_e_r_al_ O__p_e_n_ M__a_rk_e_t_ C__o_m_m__it_te_e__________________________________
Voting for this action: Janet L. Yellen, William C. gradual and predictable manner as stated in the Commit-
Dudley, Lael Brainard, Charles L. Evans, Stanley tee’s Policy Normalization Principles and Plans. Limit-
Fischer, Patrick Harker, Robert S. Kaplan, Neel Kash- ing the magnitude of the monthly reductions in the Fed-
kari, and Jerome H. Powell. eral Reserve’s securities holdings on an ongoing basis
could help mitigate the risk of adverse effects on market
Voting against this action: None.
functioning or outsized effects on interest rates. The ap-
Consistent with the Committee’s decision to leave the proach would also likely be fairly straightforward to
target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, the communicate. Moreover, under this approach, the pro-
Board of Governors voted unanimously to leave the in- cess of reducing the Federal Reserve’s securities hold-
terest rates on required and excess reserve balances un- ings, once begun, could likely proceed without a need for
changed at 1 percent and voted unanimously to approve the Committee to make adjustments as long as there was
establishment of the primary credit rate (discount rate) no material deterioration in the economic outlook.
at the existing level of 1½ percent.6
Policymakers agreed that the Committee’s Policy Nor-
System Open Market Account Reinvestment Policy malization Principles and Plans should be augmented
Participants continued their discussion of issues related soon to provide additional details about the operational
to potential changes to the Committee’s policy of rein- plan to reduce the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings
vesting principal payments from securities held in the over time. Nearly all policymakers indicated that as long
SOMA. The staff provided a briefing that summarized as the economy and the path of the federal funds rate
a possible operational approach to reducing the System’s evolved as currently expected, it likely would be appro-
securities holdings in a gradual and predictable manner. priate to begin reducing the Federal Reserve’s securities
Under the proposed approach, the Committee would holdings this year. Policymakers agreed to continue in
announce a set of gradually increasing caps, or limits, on June their discussion of plans for a change to the Com-
the dollar amounts of Treasury and agency securities that mittee’s reinvestment policy.
would be allowed to run off each month, and only the
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
amounts of securities repayments that exceeded the caps
would be held on Tuesday–Wednesday, June 13–14,
would be reinvested each month. As the caps increased,
2017. The meeting adjourned at 11:45 a.m. on May 3,
reinvestments would decline, and the monthly reduc-
2017.
tions in the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings would
become larger. The caps would initially be set at low Notation Vote
levels and then be raised every three months, over a set By notation vote completed on April 4, 2017, the Com-
period of time, to their fully phased-in levels. The final mittee unanimously approved the minutes of the Com-
values of the caps would then be maintained until the mittee meeting held on March 14–15, 2017.
size of the balance sheet was normalized.
Nearly all policymakers expressed a favorable view of
this general approach. Policymakers noted that prean-
nouncing a schedule of gradually increasing caps to limit _____________________________
the amounts of securities that could run off in any given Brian F. Madigan
month was consistent with the Committee’s intention to Secretary
reduce the Federal Reserve’s securities holdings in a
6 The second vote of the Board also encompassed approval of
the establishment of the interest rates for secondary and sea-
sonal credit under the existing formulas for computing such
rates.