# 20071031_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:35:49*
*Pages: 16, Tables: 1*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Page 1
Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
October 30-31, 2007
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Messrs. Reifschneider 1/ and Wascher, Associate
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the Directors, Division of Research and Statistics,
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tues- Board of Governors
day, October 30, 2007 at 2:00 p.m. and continued on
Wednesday, October 31, 2007 at 9:00 a.m. Mr. Wright, Deputy Associate Director, Division
of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
PRESENT:
Mr. Bernanke, Chairman Mr. Zakrajšek, Assistant Director, Division of
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Evans
Mr. Hoenig Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of
Mr. Kohn Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Kroszner
Mr. Mishkin Ms. K. Johnson, Senior Adviser, Division of Inter-
Mr. Poole national Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Rosengren
Mr. Warsh Mr. Oliner, Senior Adviser, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Cumming, Mr. Fisher, Ms. Pianalto, and
Messrs. Plosser and Stern, Alternate Members Mr. Dale, 1/ Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary
of the Federal Open Market Committee Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Lacker and Lockhart, and Ms. Yellen, Mr. Gross,1/ Special Assistant to the Board, Office
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of of Board Members, Board of Governors
Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respec-
tively Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary Messrs. Kumasaka 2/ and Luecke, 3/ Senior Fi-
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary nancial Analysts, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Board of Governors
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel Ms. Judson, Economist, Division of Monetary Af-
Mr. Sheets, Economist fairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Economist
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi-
Messrs. Clouse, Connors, Fuhrer, Kamin, Rasche, sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Slifman, Sullivan, and Wilcox, Associate
Economists Mr. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis
Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Ac-
count
____________________
Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of 1/ Attended portion of meeting relating to the
Staff Director for Management discussion of communication issues.
2/ Attended Tuesday session.
Mr. English, Senior Associate Director, Division of 3/ Attended Wednesday session.
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors

--- Page 2 ---

Page 2 Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Judd and Sniderman, Executive Vice the third quarter, reflecting a decline in energy prices;
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San core inflation continued to be moderate.
Francisco and Cleveland, respectively
Employment increased more slowly in the third quarter
Mr. Altig and Ms. Mester, Senior Vice Presidents, than in the first half of the year. Private payroll em-
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and Phila- ployment registered a considerably smaller average
delphia, respectively monthly gain; employment in residential construction,
manufacturing, and industries related to mortgage lend-
Mr. Hakkio, Special Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank ing continued to decline, but most service-producing
of Kansas City industries added jobs at a moderate pace. With gains in
employment smaller and the workweek flat, the growth
Messrs. Hilton, Koenig, and Potter, Vice Presi- of aggregate hours of private production or nonsuper-
dents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York, visory workers stepped down from its second-quarter
Dallas, and New York, respectively pace. The labor force participation rate was un-
changed, on average, in the third quarter, and the un-
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Re- employment rate ticked up to 4.7 percent in September.
serve Bank of Minneapolis
Industrial production changed little in August and Sep-
Mr. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve tember after having posted solid advances in June and
Bank of Richmond July. Manufacturing output expanded in the third quar-
ter overall at about the same pace as in the second
By unanimous vote, the Federal Open Market Commit- quarter but declined modestly on net in August and
tee selected D. Nathan Sheets to serve as Economist September. During those two months, production was
until the selection of his successor at the first regularly damped by declines in the output of motor vehicles
scheduled meeting of the Committee in 2008. and parts. In addition, output of construction supplies
and products fell, likely reflecting the ongoing decline
The Manager of the System Open Market Account in residential investment. Meanwhile, production in the
reported on recent developments in foreign exchange high-tech sector rose at a moderate rate.
markets. There were no open market operations in
foreign currencies for the System’s account in the pe- Consumer spending was well maintained in August and
riod since the previous meeting. The Manager also September. Motor vehicle sales improved, and real
reported on developments in domestic financial mar- spending on other goods posted solid gains in both
kets and on System open market operations in gov- months. Real outlays on consumer services were
ernment securities and federal agency obligations dur- strong in August because of a weather-induced jump in
ing the period since the previous meeting. By unani- energy services. Solid increases in nominal wages and
mous vote, the Committee ratified these transactions. salaries and lower headline inflation led to robust gains
in real income over the summer. However, other fac-
The information provided to the Committee on the tors affecting consumer spending were mixed. Short-
first day of the meeting, prior to the release of the ad- term interest rates dropped and stock prices rose, on
vance estimates of the third-quarter national income balance, after August. By contrast, house prices con-
and product accounts, indicated that economic activity tinued to decelerate, standards on consumer and mort-
expanded at a solid pace in the third quarter. Con- gage credit tightened after mid-summer, and the tur-
sumer spending rose more strongly after a tepid in- moil in financial markets that started in the summer
crease in the second quarter, and the pace of expansion likely exerted some restraint on consumer spending.
of business outlays for equipment and structures re- Moreover, measures of consumer confidence had de-
mained reasonably solid. Manufacturing posted a siz- clined in recent months.
able gain for the third quarter as a whole. In contrast,
the slump in residential investment intensified during The housing downturn deepened as sales of new and
the third quarter, at least partly because of ongoing dis- existing single-family homes continued to fall. Deterio-
ruptions in the markets for nonconforming mortgages. ration in nonprime mortgage markets as well as higher
The average monthly gain in private employment also mortgage interest rates and tighter lending conditions
slowed significantly. Headline inflation eased during for prime jumbo loans since earlier in the year appeared

--- Page 3 ---

Minutes of the Meeting of October 30-31, 2007 Page 3
to be restraining housing demand. Forward-looking exports were boosted by a jump in exports of agricul-
indicators, including an index of pending home sales tural products and of gold, which more than offset a
and adjusted single-family permit issuance, continued decline in exports of other goods. Exports of automo-
to point to a further slowing in housing activity over tive products fell back sharply after a surge in July.
the near term. Single-family housing starts declined Exports of capital goods contracted slightly, led by a
significantly over August and September. Nonetheless, drop in aircraft exports. Exports of semiconductors
with single-family home sales continuing to sag, inven- declined, while exports of computers were about flat.
tories of unsold homes remained quite elevated. In the On the import side, the decline was concentrated in
multifamily sector, starts declined sharply in September; goods; service imports were flat. Higher imports of oil
however, the third-quarter reading remained within the and of capital goods, particularly computers and semi-
fairly narrow range observed over the past decade. conductors, were more than offset by lower imports of
automotive products, consumer goods, and industrial
Orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods supplies excluding oil.
excluding aircraft rose on average over August and
September. In the high-tech category, orders and Indicators of economic activity in the third quarter for
shipments of computers and peripherals posted robust advanced foreign economies were solid on balance. In
gains over the same period. Shipments of communica- the euro area, production and sales picked up in the
tion equipment also rose in August and September, but third quarter from their second-quarter levels. How-
orders were little changed on balance over the same ever, recent survey data, including the purchasing man-
period. Outside the technology sector, shipments of agers’ index for the service sector in the euro area,
nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft increased at pointed to a possible slowing in the pace of growth.
a solid rate over August and September but orders de- Likewise, notwithstanding a strong preliminary estimate
clined in August and were flat in September. Sales of of third-quarter GDP growth in the United Kingdom,
medium and heavy trucks leveled off in the third quar- more recent surveys pointed to some softening. Re-
ter after a sharp drop in the first half of the year. Do- cent Canadian data were mixed, with relatively strong
mestic outlays for aircraft likely stepped down some- employment growth and some weakness in retail sales.
what in the third quarter. Nonresidential building ac- In contrast, Japan’s retail sales and exports rebounded
tivity remained vigorous through August after having in August, and the October Tankan survey seemed to
posted very strong gains in the second quarter; anecdo- suggest that the second quarter’s sharp contraction in
tal evidence through early October indicated that the investment was temporary.
recent turbulence in commercial credit markets had
done little to slow the pace of commercial construction. In emerging-market economies, recent information,
More generally, surveys of business conditions contin- mostly through August, gave no signs that the turmoil
ued to point to further near-term gains in spending, in financial markets was having a significant negative
although reports from business contacts indicated that effect on real economic activity. In emerging Asia, ac-
some firms had marked down their capital spending tivity appeared to have remained robust, although
plans. growth slowed from its elevated second-quarter pace.
Economic indicators for Mexico pointed to moderate
Data on the book value of business inventories through growth in the third quarter. In South America, activity
August suggested that real nonfarm inventory invest- was strong, boosted by high prices for commodities
ment excluding motor vehicles moved down in the and, in Argentina and Venezuela, by expansionary mac-
third quarter after having risen at a moderate pace in roeconomic policies. Food prices continued to be a
the second quarter. The ratio of book-value invento- major source of inflationary pressures in emerging-
ries to sales in the manufacturing and trade sector ex- market economies, and Chinese authorities took several
cluding motor vehicles, which was available through steps aimed at quelling rising prices.
August, remained well below the elevated values seen
around the turn of the year. Purchasing managers, on After having risen rapidly in the first half of the year,
average, viewed the level of their customers’ invento- headline consumer prices decelerated considerably over
ries as about right in September. the summer, largely because of a fall in energy prices.
Over September and October, gasoline prices appeared
The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed in August to have risen only moderately despite a jump in crude
as exports increased and imports decreased. Goods oil costs. Consumer food prices posted further sizable

--- Page 4 ---

Page 4 Federal Open Market Committee
increases in August and September and continued to The expected path for monetary policy as inferred from
run well above the change in core prices. Core con- futures markets declined in the wake of the September
sumer price inflation remained moderate in August and policy action, as many investors were surprised by the
September and, on a twelve-month change basis, was magnitude of the reduction in the target rate. Over the
down noticeably from a year earlier. Core goods prices intermeeting period, many investors came to expect
fell over the year ending in September after having that the Committee would reduce the target federal
risen little over the preceding year; noticeable decelera- funds rate at its October meeting; in addition, the an-
tions occurred in the prices of apparel, prescription ticipated policy path further ahead moved down a bit
drugs, and motor vehicles. In addition, increases in more, on net, over the remainder of the intermeeting
owners’ equivalent rent slowed noticeably, while rent period, apparently in response to heightened concerns
inflation remained about the same as a year earlier. The among investors about economic growth.
producer price index for core intermediate materials
edged up in September. The twelve-month change in Early in the intermeeting period, the functioning of
that index stepped down considerably from last year, in short-term funding markets improved somewhat, but
part because of softer prices for a variety of energy- conditions in these markets remained strained. The
intensive and construction-related items. Household effective federal funds rate was very close to the target,
surveys indicated that median year-ahead inflation ex- on average, but the average absolute daily deviation of
pectations inched down in September and October to the effective rate from the target and the intraday stan-
about the level observed in the first quarter, and dard deviation remained elevated. Credit spreads de-
longer-term inflation expectations slipped to their low- clined in the commercial paper and term interbank
est level in two years. Average hourly earnings posted a funding markets but stayed well above longer-term
moderate increase over the twelve months ending in norms. Liquidity in the Treasury bill market was poor
September. at times. Corporate bond spreads narrowed somewhat,
leaving private yields a little lower. Nonfinancial bond
At its September meeting, the FOMC lowered its target issuance was robust; speculative-grade offerings in-
for the federal funds rate 50 basis points, to 4¾ per- creased markedly. The credit quality of most house-
cent. The Board of Governors also approved a 50 ba- holds remained strong, but delinquency rates on sub-
sis point decrease in the discount rate, to 5¼ percent, prime mortgages climbed further. Securitization of
leaving the gap between the federal funds rate target nonconforming mortgages remained limited, and
and the discount rate at 50 basis points. The Commit- spreads on jumbo mortgages relative to conforming
tee’s statement noted that, while economic growth had mortgages stayed high. Two-year Treasury yields de-
been moderate during the first half of the year, the clined roughly in line with the lower expected policy
tightening of credit conditions had the potential to in- path, while yields on ten-year Treasuries were little
tensify the housing correction and to restrain economic changed, on net. TIPS-based inflation compensation
growth more generally. The Committee indicated that was about unchanged on balance over the intermeeting
its action was intended to help forestall some of the period despite a sharp rise in spot oil prices. Stock
adverse effects on the broader economy that could prices jumped early in the intermeeting period in re-
otherwise arise from the disruptions in financial mar- sponse to the cut in the target federal funds rate and
kets and to promote moderate growth over time. some favorable economic news but later dropped back,
Readings on core inflation had improved modestly dur- leaving broad indexes up only a bit on net. The foreign
ing the year, but the Committee judged that some infla- exchange value of the dollar against other major cur-
tion risks remained, and the Committee planned to rencies declined notably.
continue to monitor inflation developments carefully.
The Committee further noted that developments in Debt of the domestic nonfinancial sectors was esti-
financial markets since the last regular FOMC meeting mated to have expanded slightly more quickly in the
had increased the uncertainty surrounding the eco- third quarter than in the previous quarter. Despite evi-
nomic outlook. Accordingly, the Committee would dence that bank lending standards and terms had tight-
continue to assess the effects of these and other devel- ened over the previous three months, business debt
opments on economic prospects and remained ready to was still rising strongly, reflecting a continued surge in
act as needed to foster price stability and sustainable commercial and industrial (C&I) lending by banks and
economic growth. robust issuance of investment-grade bonds. The ex-
pansion of business loans was apparently due in part to

--- Page 5 ---

Minutes of the Meeting of October 30-31, 2007 Page 5
financings for leveraged buyouts that underwriters The advance data on the national income and product
could not syndicate to institutional investors. House- accounts for the third quarter, which were released on
hold mortgage borrowing was estimated to have decel- the morning of the second day of the FOMC meeting,
erated again in the third quarter. M2 increased signifi- indicated a stronger increase in real GDP than the staff
cantly more slowly in September and October than the had forecast, mostly because inventory investment was
rapid pace observed in August, when the financial mar- estimated to be higher than projected by the staff. The
ket turmoil apparently drove investors to the safety of staff interpreted this information as suggesting some
M2 assets. Inflows to retail money market funds and upward revision to its estimate of output growth in the
small time deposits were especially strong in September third quarter, a small downward revision to its forecast
and October; small time deposits were apparently of growth in the current quarter, and no significant
boosted by the attractive rates that banks were offering change to its forecast for coming quarters.
in order to help fund their expanding loan portfolios.
In conjunction with the FOMC meeting in October, all
In the forecast prepared for this meeting, which was meeting participants (Federal Reserve Board members
formulated prior to the release of the advance estimates and Reserve Bank presidents) provided annual projec-
of the third-quarter national income and product ac- tions for economic growth, unemployment, and infla-
counts, the staff revised up its estimate of aggregate tion for the period 2007 through 2010. The projec-
economic activity in the third quarter from its forecast tions are described in the Summary of Economic Projections,
presented at the September meeting in light of available which is attached as an addendum to these minutes.
indicators that suggested that consumer spending,
business investment, and exports were stronger than In their discussion of the economic outlook and situa-
previously expected. Nonetheless, the staff expected tion, and in the projections that they had submitted for
real GDP growth to be considerably slower in the this meeting, participants noted that economic activity
fourth quarter, reflecting steepening declines in residen- had expanded at a somewhat faster pace in the third
tial construction, reductions in the pace of motor vehi- quarter than previously anticipated and that there was
cle production, and a smaller contribution from net scant evidence of negative spillovers from the ongoing
exports. Looking forward, the staff expected residen- housing correction to other sectors of the economy.
tial investment to remain weak in 2008 with modest Conditions in financial markets had improved since the
declines in house prices. In addition, the staff contin- September FOMC meeting, but functioning in a num-
ued to expect the stress in credit markets and the ap- ber of markets remained strained. Even with some
preciably higher oil prices indicated by futures markets further easing of monetary policy, participants expected
to restrain spending by businesses and consumers, al- economic growth to slow over the next few quarters,
though the lower foreign exchange value of the dollar reflecting continued sharp declines in the housing sec-
suggested some boost to net exports. On balance, real tor and tighter lending standards and terms across a
GDP growth for 2008 was projected to slow to a pace broad range of credit products. The slowing of growth
a bit below that of its potential, and unemployment was was likely to produce a modest increase in the unem-
expected to creep up slightly. For 2009, the forecast ployment rate from its recent levels, leading to the
called for real output growth to step up to a pace emergence of a little slack in labor markets. Looking
slightly above potential as the drags on economic activ- further ahead, participants noted that economic growth
ity exerted by the contraction in residential investment should increase gradually to around its trend rate by
and financial strains were expected to abate. The staff’s 2009 as weakness in the housing sector abated and
forecast for core PCE inflation was little changed from stresses in financial markets subsided. With aggregate
that presented at the September meeting because fa- demand showing somewhat greater than expected
vorable incoming figures on core PCE inflation were strength in the third quarter and little evidence of sig-
offset by expectations for some limited feed-through nificant spillovers from the housing sector to other
into retail prices of recent increases in energy prices components of spending, participants viewed the
and for slightly less easing in resource utilization. The downside risks to growth as somewhat smaller than at
forecast for headline inflation was in the same range as the time of the September meeting, but those risks
that for core inflation in 2008 and 2009, reflecting ex- were still seen as significant. Participants generally ex-
pectations that energy prices would level off and then pected that inflation would edge down over the next
turn down and that increases in food prices would slow few years, a projection consistent with the recent string
to a pace more in line with core inflation. of encouraging releases on core consumer prices, fu-

--- Page 6 ---

Page 6 Federal Open Market Committee
tures prices pointing to a flattening of energy costs, and mortgage credit and depress the demand for housing.
the anticipated easing of pressures on resources. Some participants also pointed to downside risks to the
Nonetheless, some upside risks to inflation remained, housing market stemming from the large volume of
reflecting in part the potential feed-through to inflation substantial upward interest-rate resets that were likely
expectations of increases in energy and import prices. on subprime mortgages in coming quarters, which
could lead to a faster pace of foreclosures in the near
Financial market functioning was judged to have im- term, thereby intensifying the downward pressure on
proved somewhat since the previous FOMC meeting, house prices.
but the situation in a number of markets remained
strained, and credit market conditions were thought Participants generally agreed that the available data
likely to weigh on economic growth over coming quar- suggested that consumer spending had been well main-
ters. In light of some improvement in the commercial tained over the past several months and that spillovers
paper and leveraged loan markets over the intermeeting from the strains in the housing market had apparently
period, participants were somewhat less concerned that been quite limited to date. Nevertheless, a number of
banks would not have sufficient balance-sheet capacity participants cited notable declines in survey measures
to absorb large volumes of assets. Conditions in cor- of consumer confidence since the onset of financial
porate credit markets also had improved in recent turbulence in mid-summer, along with sharply higher
weeks, and most businesses were apparently having oil prices, declines in house prices, and tighter under-
little difficulty raising external funds, as evidenced by writing standards for home equity loans and some types
strong issuance of investment-grade corporate bonds, a of consumer loans, as factors likely to restrain con-
pickup in speculative-grade issuance, and surging C&I sumer spending going forward. Moreover, anecdotal
loans. Markets for nonconforming mortgages, by con- reports by business contacts suggested a softening in
trast, remained disrupted. Meeting participants also retail sales in some regions of the country. Participants
mentioned that while financial market conditions had expressed a concern that larger-than-expected declines
improved, the functioning of some markets remained in house prices could further sap consumer confidence
somewhat impaired. Indeed, several participants noted as well as net worth, causing a pullback in consumer
some relapse in financial conditions late in the inter- spending. All told, however, participants envisioned
meeting period. Moreover, unusual pressures in fund- that the most likely scenario was for consumer spend-
ing markets persisted. Participants generally viewed ing to continue to advance at a moderate rate in com-
financial markets as still fragile and were concerned that ing quarters, supported by the generally strong labor
an adverse shock—such as a sharp deterioration in market and further gains in real personal income.
credit quality or disclosure of unusually large and unan-
ticipated losses—could further dent investor confi- Meeting participants noted that capital expenditures
dence and significantly increase the downside risks to had grown at a solid pace in recent months and that the
the economy. Participants were also concerned about a financial turmoil generally appeared to have had a lim-
potential scenario in which unexpected economic ited effect on business capital spending plans to date.
weakness could cause a further tightening of credit Nevertheless, business sentiment appeared to have
conditions that could in turn reinforce weakness in ag- eroded somewhat amid heightened economic and fi-
gregate demand. nancial uncertainty, potentially restraining investment
outlays in some industries. However, participants
In their discussion of individual sectors of the econ- noted that conditions in corporate bond markets had
omy, participants noted that the recent declines in improved since the September FOMC meeting, and
housing activity—while substantial—had largely been that credit availability generally appeared to be ample,
anticipated. Nonetheless, the potential for significant albeit on somewhat tighter terms. Participants judged
further weakening in housing activity and home prices that moderate growth of investment outlays going for-
represented a downside risk to the economic outlook. ward was the most likely outcome. A number of par-
Most participants pointed to the deterioration in non- ticipants saw downside risk to the outlook for nonresi-
prime mortgage markets as well as higher interest rates dential building activity, reflecting elevated spreads on
and tighter credit standards for prime nonconforming commercial-mortgage-backed securities and a further
mortgages as factors that had exacerbated the deterio- tightening of banks’ lending standards for commercial
ration in housing markets, and they noted that these real estate loans.
developments could further limit the availability of

--- Page 7 ---

Minutes of the Meeting of October 30-31, 2007 Page 7
Data on economic growth outside the United States cial markets and thought that an easing of policy would
indicated that the global expansion, though likely to help to support improvements in market functioning,
slow somewhat in coming quarters, was nevertheless thereby mitigating some of the downside risks to eco-
on a firm footing. The continued strength of global nomic growth. With real GDP likely to expand below
growth and the recent decline in the foreign exchange its potential over coming quarters, recent price trends
value of the dollar were seen as likely to support U.S. favorable, and inflation expectations appearing rea-
exports going forward. sonably well anchored, the easing of policy at this meet-
ing seemed unlikely to affect adversely the outlook for
Readings on core inflation received during the inter- inflation. A number of members noted that the recent
meeting period continued to be generally favorable, and policy moves could readily be reversed if circumstances
meeting participants agreed that the recent moderation evolved in a manner that would warrant such action.
in core inflation would likely be sustained. The slower
pace of economic expansion anticipated for the next The Committee agreed that the statement to be re-
few quarters would help ease inflationary pressures. leased at this meeting should indicate that economic
Nonetheless, participants expressed concern about the growth was solid in the third quarter and that strains in
upside risks to the outlook for inflation. The recent financial markets had eased somewhat on balance.
increases in the prices of energy and other commodi- Members also agreed that economic growth seemed
ties, along with the significant decline in the foreign likely to slow over coming quarters, but that the easing
exchange value of the dollar, were cited as factors that action taken at the meeting—combined with the 50
could exert upward pressure on prices of some core basis point cut in the target federal funds rate at the
goods and services in the near term. Increases in unit September meeting—should help to promote moderate
labor costs also could add to inflationary pressures. growth over time, although some downside risks to
Moreover, participants expressed concern that some growth would remain. Members felt that it was appro-
measures of inflation compensation calculated from priate to underscore the upside risks to inflation stem-
TIPS securities had risen this year, although they ming from the recent increases in the prices of energy
viewed inflation expectations generally as remaining and other commodities, even though recent readings
contained. Participants were concerned that if headline on core inflation had been favorable. While the Com-
inflation remained above core measures for a sustained mittee saw uncertainty regarding the economic outlook
period, then longer-term inflation expectations could as still elevated, it judged that, after this action, the up-
move higher, a development that could lead to greater side risks to inflation roughly balanced the downside
inflation pressures over the longer term and be costly risks to growth.
to reverse.
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Committee
In the Committee’s discussion of policy for the inter- voted to authorize and direct the Federal Reserve Bank
meeting period, members discussed the relative merits of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to exe-
of lowering the target federal funds rate 25 basis points, cute transactions in the System Account in accordance
to 4½ percent, at this meeting or awaiting additional with the following domestic policy directive:
information on prospects for economic activity and
inflation before assessing whether a further adjustment “The Federal Open Market Committee seeks mone-
in the stance of monetary policy was necessary. Many tary and financial conditions that will foster price sta-
members noted that this policy decision was a close bility and promote sustainable growth in output. To
further its long-run objectives, the Committee in the
call. However, on balance, nearly all members sup-
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets
ported a 25 basis point reduction in the target federal
consistent with reducing the federal funds rate to an
funds rate. The stance of monetary policy appeared
average of around 4½ percent.”
still to be somewhat restrictive, partly because of the
effects of tighter credit conditions on aggregate de-
The vote encompassed approval of the statement be-
mand. Moreover, most members saw substantial
low to be released at 2:15 p.m.:
downside risks to the economic outlook and judged
that a rate reduction at this meeting would provide
“The Federal Open Market Committee decided today
valuable additional insurance against an unexpectedly to lower its target for the Federal funds rate 25 basis
severe weakening in economic activity. Many members points to 4½ percent.
were concerned about the still-sensitive state of finan-

--- Page 8 ---

Page 8 Federal Open Market Committee
Economic growth was solid in the third quarter, and The Committee then resumed its discussion of an en-
strains in financial markets have eased somewhat on hanced role for the economic projections that are made
balance. However, the pace of economic expansion periodically by the members of the Board of Gover-
will likely slow in the near term, partly reflecting the
nors and the Reserve Bank presidents. At this meeting,
intensification of the housing correction. Today’s ac-
participants reached a consensus on increasing the fre-
tion, combined with the policy action taken in Sep-
quency and expanding the content of the projections
tember, should help forestall some of the adverse ef-
that in the past have been released to the public in
fects on the broader economy that might otherwise
summary form twice a year. They agreed to publish
arise from the disruptions in financial markets and
promote moderate growth over time. with the minutes a summary of participants’ economic
projections made for this meeting and to release a press
Readings on core inflation have improved modestly statement describing the plan for the future. The re-
this year, but recent increases in energy and commod- lease of more frequent forecasts covering longer time
ity prices, among other factors, may put renewed up- spans and accompanied by explanations of those fore-
ward pressure on inflation. In this context, the casts was seen as providing the public with more con-
Committee judges that some inflation risks remain, text for understanding the Committee’s monetary pol-
and it will continue to monitor inflation develop-
icy decisions.
ments carefully.
It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
The Committee judges that, after this action, the up-
would be held on Tuesday, December 11, 2007.
side risks to inflation roughly balance the downside
risks to growth. The Committee will continue to as-
The meeting adjourned at 12:00 noon.
sess the effects of financial and other developments
on economic prospects and will act as needed to fos-
ter price stability and sustainable economic growth.” Notation Vote
By notation vote completed on October 5, 2007, the
Committee unanimously approved the minutes of the
Votes for this action: Messrs. Bernanke, Geith- FOMC meeting held on September 18, 2007 and of the
ner, Evans, Kohn, Kroszner, Mishkin, Poole, conference calls on August 10, 2007 and August 16,
Rosengren, and Warsh. 2007.
Votes against this action: Mr. Hoenig.
Mr. Hoenig dissented because he believed that policy
should remain unchanged at this meeting. Projections _____________________________
for the U.S. and global economies suggested that
Brian F. Madigan
growth was likely to proceed at a reasonable pace over
Secretary
the outlook period. To better assure that outcome, the
FOMC had moved rates down significantly at its Sep-
tember meeting. At this meeting, inflation risks ap-
peared elevated and Mr. Hoenig felt that the target fed-
eral funds rate was currently close to neutral. In these
circumstances, he judged that policy needed to be
slightly firm to better hold inflation in check. Going
forward, if the data suggested the Committee needed to
ease further, it could do so. He also recognized that
liquidity remains a near-term challenge and that the
Federal Reserve would be prepared to act if needed.
Mr. Hoenig saw the risks to both economic growth and
inflation to be elevated and preferred to wait, watch,
and be ready to act depending on how events devel-
oped.

--- Page 9 ---

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of October 30-31, 2007 Page 9
Summary of Economic Projections
In conjunction with the October 2007 FOMC meeting, declining housing wealth, the personal saving rate was
the members of the Board of Governors and the presi- expected to rise over the next few years, contributing to
dents of the Federal Reserve Banks, all of whom par- restraint on the growth of personal consumption ex-
ticipate in the deliberations of the FOMC, provided penditures. However, net exports were expected to
projections for economic growth, unemployment, and provide some support to growth. The subpar eco-
inflation in 2007, 2008, 2009, and 2010. Projections nomic growth projected in the near term was not an-
were based on information available through the con- ticipated to persist. Growth was expected to pick up as
clusion of the October meeting, on each participant’s the adjustment in housing markets ran its course, fi-
assumptions regarding a range of factors likely to affect nancial markets gradually resumed more-normal func-
economic outcomes, and his or her assessment of ap- tioning, and as the monetary policy easing at the Sep-
propriate monetary policy. “Appropriate monetary tember and October FOMC meetings provided sup-
policy” is defined as the future policy most likely to port to aggregate demand. Economic activity was pro-
foster outcomes for economic activity and inflation jected to expand at a pace broadly in line with partici-
that best satisfy the participant’s interpretation of the pants’ estimates of the rate of expansion of the econ-
Federal Reserve’s dual objectives of maximum em- omy’s productive potential in 2009 and to continue at
ployment and price stability. much the same pace in 2010. Participants read last
summer’s benchmark revisions to the national income
The projections, which are summarized in table 1 and and product accounts as suggesting a somewhat slower
chart 1, suggest that FOMC participants expected that, rate of trend growth than previously thought.
in the near term, output will grow at a pace somewhat
below its trend rate and the unemployment rate will Most participants expected that, with output growth
edge higher, owing primarily to weakness in housing running somewhat below trend over the next year or
markets and to the tightening in the availability of so, the unemployment rate would increase modestly.
credit resulting from recent strains in financial markets. The central tendency of participants’ projections for
Further ahead, output was projected to expand at a the average rate of unemployment in the fourth quarter
pace close to its long-run trend. Total inflation was of 2008 was 4.8 to 4.9 percent, slightly above the
expected to be lower in 2008 than in 2007, and then to 4¾ percent unemployment rate forecasted in June;
edge down further in subsequent years. these projections suggested the emergence of a little
slack in labor markets. The central tendency of partici-
The Outlook pants’ projections was for the unemployment rate to
Data available at the time of the October FOMC meet- stabilize in 2009 and to fall back a bit in 2010 as output
ing indicated that economic growth had been solid dur- and employment growth pick up.
ing the second and third quarters, and evidence that the
contraction in the housing sector had begun to spill Overall inflation was expected to edge down over the
over substantially to other sectors of the economy re- next few years, fostered by an assumed flattening of
mained scant. Consequently, despite the recent finan- energy prices about in line with futures markets quotes,
cial market turmoil, the central tendency of partici- a modest easing of pressures on resource utilization,
pants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2007, at 2.4 and fairly well anchored inflation expectations. Partici-
to 2.5 percent, was little changed from the central ten- pants’ projections for core inflation this year and next
dency of the projections provided in conjunction with were marked down from those provided at the time of
the June FOMC meeting and included in the Board’s the June FOMC meeting, partly in light of recent gen-
Monetary Policy Report to the Congress in July. However, erally favorable core inflation data that pointed to some
the central tendency of participants’ projections for real reduction in underlying inflation pressures. The central
GDP growth in 2008 was revised down to 1.8 to 2.5 tendency of projections for core PCE inflation in 2007
percent, notably below the 2½ to 2¾ percent central was 1.8 to 1.9 percent, down from 2 to 2¼ percent in
tendency in June. These revisions to the 2008 outlook June. The central tendency of core inflation projec-
since June stemmed from a number of factors, includ- tions for 2008 was 1.7 to 1.9 percent. Participants’ pro-
ing the tightened terms and reduced availability of sub- jections for PCE inflation in 2009 and 2010 were im-
prime and jumbo mortgages, weaker-than-expected portantly influenced by their judgments about the
housing data, and rising oil prices. Partly in response to measured rates of inflation consistent with the Federal

--- Page 10 ---

Page 10 Federal Open Market Committee
Reserve’s dual mandate to promote maximum em- current economic conditions. The central tendency of
ployment and price stability and about the time frame participants’ projections for both core and total infla-
over which policy should aim to attain those rates given tion in 2010 ranged from 1.6 to 1.9 percent.
Table 1: Economic Projections of Federal Reserve Governors and Reserve
Bank Presidents1
2007 2008 2009 2010
Central Tendencies
Real GDP Growth 2.4 to 2.5 1.8 to 2.5 2.3 to 2.7 2.5 to 2.6
June Projections 2¼ to 2½ 2 ½ to 2¾
Unemployment Rate 4.7 to 4.8 4.8 to 4.9 4.8 to 4.9 4.7 to 4.9
June Projections 4½ to 4¾ about 4¾
PCE Inflation 2.9 to 3.0 1.8 to 2.1 1.7 to 2.0 1.6 to 1.9
Core PCE Inflation 1.8 to 1.9 1.7 to 1.9 1.7 to 1.9 1.6 to 1.9
June Projections 2 to 2¼ 1 ¾ to 2
Ranges
Real GDP Growth 2.2 to 2.7 1.6 to 2.6 2.0 to 2.8 2.2 to 2.7
June Projections 2 to 2¾ 2 ½ to 3
Unemployment Rate 4.7 to 4.8 4.6 to 5.0 4.6 to 5.0 4.6 to 5.0
June Projections 4½ to 4¾ 4 ½ to 5
PCE Inflation 2.7 to 3.2 1.7 to 2.3 1.5 to 2.2 1.5 to 2.0
Core PCE Inflation 1.8 to 2.1 1.7 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0 1.5 to 2.0
June Projections 2 to 2¼ 1 ¾ to 2
1. Projections of real GDP growth, PCE inflation, and core PCE inflation are fourth-quarter-to-
fourth-quarter growth rates, that is, percentage changes from the fourth quarter of the prior year to
the fourth quarter of the indicated year. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation are the percentage
rates of change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures and the price index for
personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy, respectively. Projections for the un-
employment rate are for the average civilian unemployment rate in the fourth quarter of each year.
Each participant's projections are based on his or her assessment of appropriate monetary policy.
The range for each variable in a given year includes all participants' projections, from lowest to high-
est, for that variable in the given year; the central tendencies exclude the three highest and three
lowest projections for each variable in each year.

--- Page 11 ---

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of October 30-31, 2007 Page 11
Chart 1: Central Tendencies and Ranges of Economic Projections*
Real GDP Growth
Percent
7
Central Tendency of Projections 6
Range of Projections 5
• 4
• • • 3
• 2
1
0
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Unemployment Rate
Percent
8
7
• • 6
•
• 5
•
4
3
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
PCE Inflation
Percent
5
4
• •
3
• • • 2
1
0
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
Core PCE Inflation Percent
5
4
3
• • •
2
•
•
1
0
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
* See notes to Table 1 for variable definitions.

--- Page 12 ---

Page 12 Federal Open Market Committee
Risks to the Outlook attached to participants’ inflation projections was gen-
Most participants viewed the risks to their GDP projec- erally viewed as being broadly in line with past experi-
tions as weighted to the downside and the associated ence, although several participants judged that the de-
risks to their projections of unemployment as tilted to gree of uncertainty about total inflation was higher than
the upside. Financial market conditions had deterio- usual, reflecting the possibility that the recent volatility
rated sharply in August, and although there had been in food and energy prices might persist.
some signs of improvement since then, markets re-
mained strained. The possibilities that markets could
relapse or that current tighter credit conditions could Table 2: Average Historical Projection Error
exert unexpectedly large restraint on household and Ranges1
business spending were viewed as downside risks to
economic activity. Participants were concerned about
2007 2008 2009 2010
the possibility for adverse feedbacks in which economic
weakness could lead to further tightening in credit con- Real GDP2 ±0.6 ±1.3 ±1.4 ±1.4
ditions, which could in turn slow the economy further. Unemployment
±0.2 ±0.6 ±0.9 ±1.1
The potential for a more severe contraction in the rate3
housing sector and a substantial decline in house prices Total consumer
±0.3 ±1.0 ±1.0 ±1.0
was also perceived as a risk to the central outlook for prices2
economic growth. But participants also noted that in
1. “Average historical projection error ranges” for the
recent decades, the U.S. economy had proved quite
years 2007 through 2010 are measured as plus or minus the
resilient to episodes of financial distress, suggesting root mean squared error of projections that were released in
that the adverse effects of financial developments on the autumn from 1986 through 2006 for the current and
economic activity outside of the housing sector could following three years by various private and government
forecasters. As described in the forecast uncertainty box,
prove to be more modest than anticipated.
under certain assumptions, there is about a 70 percent prob-
ability that actual outcomes for real activity, unemployment,
Participants were more persuaded than they had been and inflation will fall in ranges implied by the average size of
in June that the decline in core inflation readings this projection errors made in the past. For further information,
see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip, “Gauging the
year represented a sustained albeit modest step-down
Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical
rather than the effect of transitory influences. None-
Forecast Errors,” Federal Reserve Board Financial and Eco-
theless, participants saw some upside risks to their in- nomics Discussion Series #2007-60 (November 2007).
flation projections. Recent increases in energy and 2. Overall consumer price index, as this is the price meas-
commodity prices and the pass-through of dollar de- ure that has been most widely used in government and pri-
vate economic forecasts. Percent change, fourth quarter of
preciation into import prices would raise inflation over
year relative to fourth quarter of preceding year.
the medium term. That increase could lead to an up-
3. Percent, fourth-quarter average.
ward drift in inflation expectations that would add to
price pressures and could be costly to reverse.
The possibility that financial market turbulence could
have larger-than-anticipated adverse effects on house-
hold and business spending heightened participants’
uncertainty about the outlook for economic activity.
Most participants judged that the uncertainty attending
their October projections for real GDP growth was
above typical levels seen in the past. (Table 2 provides
an estimate of average ranges of forecast uncertainty
for GDP growth, unemployment, and inflation over
the past twenty years.1) In contrast, the uncertainty
1 The box “Forecast Uncertainty” at the end of this summary dis-
cusses the sources and interpretation of uncertainty in economic
forecasts and explains the approach used to assess the uncertainty
and risks attending participants’ projections.

--- Page 13 ---

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of October 30-31, 2007 Page 13
Diversity of Participants’ Views unemployment were more heavily influenced by their
Charts 2(a) and 2(b) provide more detail on the diver- views about, respectively, the economy’s trend growth
sity of participants’ views. The dispersion of partici- rate and the unemployment rate that would be consis-
pants’ projections for real GDP growth in 2008 was tent over time with maximum employment. The dis-
markedly wider than in June. The dispersion of par- persion of the projections for PCE inflation in the near
ticipants’ projections for growth next year seemed term partly reflected different weights attached to the
largely to reflect differing assessments of the likely various factors expected to foster a moderation of in-
depth and duration of the correction in the housing flation. Some participants judged that the anticipated
market, the effect of financial market disruptions on modest easing in resource pressures was unlikely to
real activity outside of the housing sector, and the have a marked effect on inflation. Similarly, views dif-
speed with which financial markets will return to more fered about the influence that inflation expectations
normal functioning. The dispersion of participants’ would exert on inflation over the short and medium
projections for the rate of unemployment over the next run. Participants’ projections further out were also
year or so had changed little. Participants’ longer-term influenced by their views about the rate of inflation
projections for real GDP growth and for the rate of consistent with the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate.

--- Page 14 ---

Page 14 Federal Open Market Committee
Chart 2(a): Distribution of Participants’ Projections (percent)*
Real GDP Unemployment Rate
2007 2007
Number of Participants Number of Participants
16 16
October Projections October Projections
June Projections 12 June Projections 12
8 8
4 4
0 0
1.6-1.7 1.8-1.9 2.0-2.1 2.2-2.3 2.4-2.5 2.6-2.7 2.8-2.9 3.0-3.1 4.4-4.5 4.6-4.7 4.8-4.9 5.0-5.1 5.2-5.3
2008 2008
Number of Participants Number of Participants
16 16
12 12
8 8
4 4
0 0
1.6-1.7 1.8-1.9 2.0-2.1 2.2-2.3 2.4-2.5 2.6-2.7 2.8-2.9 3.0-3.1 4.4-4.5 4.6-4.7 4.8-4.9 5.0-5.1 5.2-5.3
2009 2009
Number of Participants Number of Participants
16 16
12 12
8 8
4 4
0 0
1.6-1.7 1.8-1.9 2.0-2.1 2.2-2.3 2.4-2.5 2.6-2.7 2.8-2.9 3.0-3.1 4.4-4.5 4.6-4.7 4.8-4.9 5.0-5.1 5.2-5.3
2010 2010
Number of Participants Number of Participants
16 16
12 12
8 8
4 4
0 0
1.6-1.7 1.8-1.9 2.0-2.1 2.2-2.3 2.4-2.5 2.6-2.7 2.8-2.9 3.0-3.1 4.4-4.5 4.6-4.7 4.8-4.9 5.0-5.1 5.2-5.3
* See notes to Table 1 for variable definitions. Those participants’ June projections that were provided in quarter points have been rounded to the nearest tenth
for the construction of these histograms.

--- Page 15 ---

Summary of Economic Projections for the Meeting of October 30-31, 2007 Page 15
Chart 2(b): Distribution of Participants’ Projections (percent)*
PCE Inflation Core PCE Inflation
2007 2007
Number of Participants Number of Participants
16 October Projections 16
October Projections June Projections
12 12
8 8
4 4
0 0
1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5- 2.7- 2.9- 3.1- 1.3-1.4 1.5-1.6 1.7-1.8 1.9-2.0 2.1-2.2 2.3-2.4
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2
2008 2008
Number of Participants Number of Participants
16 16
12 12
8 8
4 4
0 0
1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5- 2.7- 2.9- 3.1- 1.3-1.4 1.5-1.6 1.7-1.8 1.9-2.0 2.1-2.2 2.3-2.4
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2
2009 2009
Number of Participants Number of Participants
16 16
12 12
8 8
4 4
0 0
1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5- 2.7- 2.9- 3.1- 1.3-1.4 1.5-1.6 1.7-1.8 1.9-2.0 2.1-2.2 2.3-2.4
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2
2010 2010
Number of Participants Number of Participants
16 16
12 12
8 8
4 4
0 0
1.5- 1.7- 1.9- 2.1- 2.3- 2.5- 2.7- 2.9- 3.1- 1.3-1.4 1.5-1.6 1.7-1.8 1.9-2.0 2.1-2.2 2.3-2.4
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2
* See notes to Table 1 for variable definitions. Those participants’ June projections that were provided in quarter points have been rounded to the nearest tenth
for the construction of these histograms.

--- Page 16 ---

Page 16 Federal Open Market Committee
Forecast Uncertainty
The economic projections provided by the members of the Board of Governors and the
presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks help shape monetary policy and can aid public
understanding of the basis for policy actions. Considerable uncertainty attends these
projections, however. The economic and statistical models and relationships used to
help produce economic forecasts are necessarily imperfect descriptions of the real world.
And the future path of the economy can be affected by myriad unforeseen develop-
ments and events. Thus, in setting the stance of monetary policy, participants consider
not only what appears to be the most likely economic outcome as embodied in their
projections, but also the range of alternative possibilities, the likelihood of their occur-
ring, and the potential costs to the economy should they occur.
Table 2 summarizes the average historical accuracy of a range of forecasts, including
those reported in past Monetary Policy Reports and those prepared by Federal Reserve
Board staff in advance of meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee. The pro-
jection error ranges shown in the table illustrate the considerable uncertainty associated
with economic forecasts. For example, suppose a participant projects that real GDP
and total consumer prices will rise steadily at annual rates of, respectively, 3 percent and
2 percent. If the uncertainty attending those projections is similar to that experienced in
the past and the risks around the projections are broadly balanced, the numbers reported
in table 2 might imply a probability of about 70 percent that actual GDP would expand
2.4 percent to 3.6 percent in the current year, 1.7 percent to 4.3 percent next year, and
1.6 percent to 4.4 percent in the third and fourth years. The corresponding 70 percent
confidence intervals for overall inflation would be 1.7 percent to 2.3 percent in the cur-
rent year and 1.0 percent to 3.0 percent in the second, third, and fourth years.
Because current conditions may differ from those that prevailed on average over history,
participants provide judgments as to whether the uncertainty attached to their projec-
tions of each variable is greater than, smaller than, or broadly similar to typical levels of
forecast uncertainty in the past as shown in table 2. Participants also provide judgments
as to whether the risks to their projections are weighted to the upside, downside, or are
broadly balanced. That is, participants judge whether each variable is more likely to be
above or below their projections of the most likely outcome. These judgments about
the uncertainty and the risks attending each participant’s projections are distinct from
the diversity of participants’ views about the most likely outcomes. Forecast uncertainty
is concerned with the risks associated with a particular projection, rather than with di-
vergences across a number of different projections.

# Tables

## Page_8_Table_1


| Economic growth was solid in the third quarter, and      |
|----------------------------------------------------------|
| strains in financial markets have eased somewhat on      |
| balance. However, the pace of economic expansion         |
| will likely slow in the near term, partly reflecting the |
| intensification of the housing correction. Today’s ac-   |
| tion, combined with the policy action taken in Sep-      |
| tember, should help forestall some of the adverse ef-    |
| fects on the broader economy that might otherwise        |
| arise from the disruptions in financial markets and      |
| promote moderate growth over time.                       |
| Readings on core inflation have improved modestly        |
| this year, but recent increases in energy and commod-    |
| ity prices, among other factors, may put renewed up-     |
| ward pressure on inflation. In this context, the         |
| Committee judges that some inflation risks remain,       |
| and it will continue to monitor inflation develop-       |
| ments carefully.                                         |
| The Committee judges that, after this action, the up-    |
| side risks to inflation roughly balance the downside     |
| risks to growth. The Committee will continue to as-      |
| sess the effects of financial and other developments     |
| on economic prospects and will act as needed to fos-     |
| ter price stability and sustainable economic growth.”    |