# 20071211_minutes.pdf

*Extracted on: 2025-08-20 16:35:38*
*Pages: 9, Tables: 0*

## Document Content

--- Page 1 ---

Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee
December 11, 2007
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was Ms. Liang and Mr. Wascher, Associate Directors,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of
held in the offices of the Board of Governors of the
Governors
Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on
Tuesday, December 11, 2007, at 8:00 a.m.
Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of
PRESENT: Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Bernanke, Chairman
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman Mr. Meyer, Visiting Reserve Bank Officer, Division
Mr. Evans of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Hoenig
Mr. Kohn Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary
Mr. Kroszner Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Mishkin
Mr. Poole Mr. Luecke, Senior Financial Analyst, Division of
Mr. Rosengren Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Warsh
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Divi
Ms. Cumming, Mr. Fisher, Ms. Pianalto, and sion of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Plosser and Stern, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market Committee Mr. Barron, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Atlanta
Messrs. Lacker and Lockhart, and Ms. Yellen,
Mr. Rosenblum, Executive Vice President, Federal
Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Reserve Bank of Dallas
Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Altig, Ms. Perelmuter, Messrs. Rolnick,
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist Weinberg, and Williams, Senior Vice
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta,
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary New York, Minneapolis, Richmond, and San
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary Francisco, respectively
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Messrs. Bryan and Yi, Vice Presidents, Federal
Mr. Sheets, Economist
Reserve Banks of Cleveland and Philadelphia,
Mr. Stockton, Economist
respectively
Messrs. Clouse, Connors, Fuhrer, Kamin, Rasche, Mr. McCarthy, Research Officer, Federal Reserve
Sellon, Slifman, Sullivan, and Wilcox, Associate Bank of New York
Economists
The Manager of the System Open Market Account
Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market reported on recent developments in foreign exchange
Account markets. There were no open market operations in
foreign currencies for the System’s account in the
Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of
period since the previous meeting. The Manager also
Staff Director for Management
reported on developments in domestic financial
markets and on System open market operations in
Mr. English, Senior Associate Director, Division of government securities and federal agency obligations
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors during the period since the previous meeting. By
unanimous vote, the Committee ratified these
transactions.

--- Page 2 ---

The Committee approved a foreign currency swap by weak demand from the construction and motor
arrangement with the Swiss National Bank that vehicle sectors. Production in high-tech industries,
paralleled however, increased modestly, and commercial aircraft
the arrangement with the European Central Bank production registered another solid gain. In November,
approved during the Committee’s conference call on output appeared to have edged up in manufacturing
December 6, 2007. With Mr. Poole dissenting, the sectors (with the exception of the motor vehicles
Committee voted to direct the Federal Reserve Bank sector) for which weekly physical product data were
of available.
New York to establish and maintain a reciprocal
currency (swap) arrangement for the System Open After posting notable gains in the summer, real
Market consumer spending was nearly flat in September and
Account with the Swiss National Bank in an amount October. Spending on goods excluding motor
not to exceed $4 billion. The Committee authorized vehicles was little changed on net over that period.
associated draws of up to the full amount of $4 billion, Spending
and the arrangement itself was authorized for a period on services edged down, reflecting an extraordinarily
of up to 180 days unless extended by the FOMC. Mr. large drop in securities commissions in September.
Poole dissented because he viewed the swap agreement The most recent readings on weekly chain store sales as
as unnecessary in light of the size of the Swiss National well as industry reports and surveys suggested subdued
Bank’s dollar-denominated foreign exchange reserves. gains in November and an uneven start to the holiday
The information reviewed at the December meeting shopping season. Sales of light motor vehicles in
indicated that, after the robust gains of the summer, November remained close to the pace that had
economic activity decelerated significantly in the prevailed since the second quarter. Real disposable
fourth income was
quarter. Consumption growth slowed, and survey about unchanged in September and October. The
measures of sentiment dropped further. Many readings Reuters/University of Michigan index of consumer
from the business sector were also softer: Industrial sentiment ticked down further in early December as
production fell in October, as did orders and shipments respondents took a more pessimistic view of the
of capital goods. Employment gains stepped down outlook for their personal finances and for business
during the four months ending in November from conditions in the year ahead.
their pace earlier in the year. Headline consumer price In the housing market, new home sales were below
inflation moved higher in September and October as their third-quarter pace, and sales of existing homes
energy prices increased significantly; core inflation also were flat in October following sharp declines in August
rose but remained moderate. and September. These declines likely were exacerbated
The slowing in private employment gains was due in by the deterioration in nonprime mortgage markets and
large part to the ongoing weakness in the housing by the higher interest rates and tighter lending
market. Employment in residential construction conditions for jumbo loans. Single-family housing
posted its starts stepped down again in October after substantial
fourth month of sizable declines in November, and declines in the June-September period. Yet, because of
employment in housing-related sectors such as finance, sagging sales, builders made only limited progress in
real estate, and building-material and garden-supply paring down their substantial inventories. Single-family
retailers continued to trend down. Elsewhere, factory permit issuance continued along the steep downward
jobs declined again, while employment in most service trajectory that had begun two years earlier, which
producing industries continued to move up. Aggregate pointed toward further slowing in homebuilding over
hours of production or nonsupervisory workers edged the near term. Multifamily starts rebounded in
up in October and November. Some indicators from October from an unusually low reading in September,
the household survey also suggested softening in the and
labor market, but the unemployment rate held steady at the level of multifamily starts was near the midpoint of
4.7 percent through November. the range in which this series had fluctuated over the
Industrial production fell in October after small past ten years.
increases in the previous two months. The index Real spending on equipment and software posted a
for motor vehicles and parts fell for the third solid increase in the third quarter. In October,
consecutive month, and the index for construction however, orders and shipments of nondefense capital
supplies moved goods excluding aircraft declined, suggesting that some
decelerationd own for the fourth straight month. Materials output
also declined in October, with production likely curbed

--- Page 3 ---

in spending was under way in the fourth a decline in aircraft. The increase in imports primarily
quarter. The October decline in orders and shipments reflected higher imports of capital goods, with imports
was led by weakness in the high-tech sector: Shipments of computers showing particularly strong growth.
of computers and peripheral equipment declined while Imports of automotive products, consumer goods, and
the industrial production index for computers was flat; services also increased. Imports of petroleum,
orders and shipments for communications equipment however, were flat, and imports of industrial supplies
plunged. Some of that weakness may have been fell.
attributable to temporary production disruptions Output growth in the advanced foreign economies
stemming from the wildfires in Southern California; picked up in the third quarter. In Japan, real output
cutbacks in rebounded, led by exports. In the euro area, GDP
demand from large financial institutions affected by growth returned to a solid pace in the third quarter on
market turmoil may have contributed as well. In the the back of a strong recovery in investment. In Canada
transportation equipment category, purchases of and the United Kingdom, output growth moderated
medium and heavy trucks changed little, and orders but remained robust, as vigorous domestic demand was
data suggested that sales would remain near their partly offset by rapid growth of imports. Indicators of
current levels in the coming months. Orders for fourth-quarter activity in the advanced foreign
equipment outside high-tech and transportation rose economies were less robust on net. Confidence
in October, indicators had deteriorated in most major economies in
but shipments were about flat, pointing to a weaker the wake
fourth quarter for business spending after two quarters of the financial turmoil and remained relatively weak.
of brisk increases. Some prominent surveys of In November, the euro-area and U.K. purchasing
business conditions remained consistent with modest managers indexes for services were well below their
gains in spending on equipment and software during level over the first half of the year; nevertheless they
the fourth quarter, but other surveys were less sanguine. pointed to moderate expansion. Labor market conditions
In addition, although the cost of capital was little changed generally remained relatively strong in recent months.
for borrowers in the investment-grade corporate bond Incoming data on emerging-market economies were
market, costs for borrowers in the high-yield corporate positive on balance. Overall, growth in emerging Asia
bond market were up significantly. In the third quarter, moderated somewhat in the third quarter from its
corporate cash flows appeared to have dropped off, double-digit pace in the second quarter, but remained
leaving firms with diminished internally generated strong. Economic growth was also solid in Latin
funds for financing investment. Data available through America, largely reflecting stronger-than-expected
October suggested that nonresidential building activity activity in Mexico.
remained vigorous.
In the United States, headline consumer price inflation
Real nonfarm inventory investment excluding motor
increased in September and October from its low rates
vehicles increased slightly faster in the third quarter
in the summer as the surge in crude oil prices began to
than in the second quarter. Outside of motor vehicles,
be reflected in retail energy prices. In addition, though
the ratio of book-value inventories to sales had ticked
the rise in food prices in October was slower than in
up slightly in September but remained near the low end
August and September, it remained above that of core
of its range in recent years. Book-value estimates of
consumer prices. Excluding food and energy, inflation
the inventory investment of manufacturers--the only
was moderate, although it was up from its low rates in
inventory data available beyond the third quarter--
the spring. The pickup in core consumer inflation over
were up in October at about the third-quarter pace.
this period reflected an acceleration in some prices that
The U.S. international trade deficit narrowed slightly in were unusually soft last spring, such as those for
September as an increase in exports more than offset apparel, prescription drugs, and medical services, as well
higher imports. The September gain in exports as nonmarket prices. On a twelve-month-change basis,
primarily reflected higher exports of goods; services core consumer price inflation was down noticeably
exports recorded moderate growth. Exports of from a year earlier. In October, the producer price
agricultural products exhibited particularly robust index for core intermediate materials moved up only
growth, with slightly for a second month, and the twelve-month
both higher prices and greater volumes. Exports of increase in these prices was considerably below that of
industrial supplies and consumer goods also moved up the year-earlier period. This pattern reflected, in part, a
smartly in September. Automotive products exports, in deceleration in the prices of a wide variety of
constructionc ontrast, were flat, and capital goods exports fell, led by

--- Page 4 ---

materials, such as cement and gypsum, and in the contrast, markets were buffeted by concerns about
prices of some metal products. In response to rising the potential adverse effects on credit availability and
energy prices, household survey measures of economic growth of sizable losses at large financial
expectations for year-ahead inflation picked up in institutions and of financial market strains in general.
November and then edged higher in December. Market participants marked down their expected path
Households’ longer-term inflation expectations also for
dged up in both November and December. Average policy substantially, and by the time of the December
hourly meeting, investors were virtually certain of a rate cut.
earnings increased faster in November than in the Two-year Treasury yields fell on net over the
previous intermeeting period by an amount about in line with
two months. Over the twelve months that ended in revisions to
November, however, this wage measure rose a bit policy expectations. Ten-year Treasury yields also
more declined, but less than shorter-term yields. The
slowly than over the previous twelve months. steepening of the yield curve was due mostly to sharply
At its October meeting, the FOMC lowered its target lower
for the federal funds rate 25 basis points, to 4½ short- and intermediate-term forward rates, consistent
percent. The Board of Governors also approved a 25 with investors’ apparently more pessimistic outlook for
basis point decrease in the discount rate, to 5 percent, economic growth. TIPS yields fell less than their
leaving the gap between the federal funds rate target nominal counterparts, implying modest declines in
and the discount rate at 50 basis points. The inflation compensation both at the five-year and longer
Committee’s statement noted that, while economic horizons.
growth was solid in the third quarter and strains in After showing some signs of improvement in late
financial September and October, conditions in financial
markets had eased somewhat on balance, the pace of markets worsened over the intermeeting period.
economic expansion would likely slow in the near Heightened worries about counterparty credit risk,
term, balance sheet
partly reflecting the intensification of the housing constraints, and liquidity pressures affected interbank
correction. The Committee indicated that its action, funding markets and commercial paper markets, where
combined with the policy action taken in September, spreads over risk-free rates rose to levels that were, in
should some cases, higher than those seen in August. Strains
help forestall some of the adverse effects on the in those markets were exacerbated by concerns related
broader economy that might otherwise arise from the to year-end pressures. In longer-term corporate
disruptions in financial markets and should promote markets, both investment- and speculative-grade credit
moderate growth over time. Readings on core inflation spreads widened considerably; issuance slowed but
had improved modestly during the year, but the remained strong. In housing finance, subprime mortgage
statement noted that recent increases in energy and markets stayed virtually shut, and spreads on jumbo
commodity prices, among other factors, may put loans apparently widened further. Spreads on
renewed conforming mortgage products also widened after
upward pressure on inflation. In this context, the reports of losses and reduced capital ratios at the
Committee judged that some inflation risks remained housing-related government-sponsored enterprises.
and indicated that it would continue to monitor Broad-based equity indexes were volatile and ended the
inflation developments carefully. The Committee also period down noticeably. Financial stocks were especially
judged that, after this action, the upside risks to hard hit, dropping substantially more than the broad
inflation roughly balanced the downside risks to indexes. Similar stresses were evident in the financial
growth. markets of major foreign economies. The
The Committee said that it would continue to assess trade-weighted foreign exchange value of the dollar
the effects of financial and other developments on against major currencies moved up, on balance, over the
economic prospects and would act as needed to foster intermeeting period.
price stability and sustainable economic growth. Debt in the domestic nonfinancial sector was estimated
The Committee’s action at its October meeting was to be increasing somewhat more slowly in the fourth
largely expected by market participants, although the quarter than in the third quarter. Nonfinancial business
assessment that the upside risks to inflation balanced debt continued to expand strongly, supported by solid
the downside risks to growth was not fully anticipated bond issuance and by a small rebound in the issuance
and apparently led investors to revise up slightly the of commercial paper. Bank loans outstanding also
continued expected path for policy. During the intermeeting
period, the release of the FOMC minutes and associated
summary of economic projections, as well as various
data releases, elicited only modest market reaction. In

--- Page 5 ---

to rise rapidly. Household mortgage debt for 2007 was a bit higher than in the preceding
was expected to expand at a reduced rate in the fourth forecast; core inflation was projected to hold steady
quarter, reflecting softer home prices and declining during 2008 as the indirect effects of higher energy
home sales, as well as a tightening in credit conditions prices on prices of core consumer goods and services
for some borrowers. Nonmortgage consumer credit in were offset by the slight easing of resource pressures
the fourth quarter appeared to be expanding at a and the expected deceleration in the prices of nonfuel
moderate pace. In November, M2 growth picked up imported goods. The forecast for headline PCE
slightly from its October rate. While liquid deposits inflation anticipated that retail energy prices would
continued to grow slowly, heightened demand for rise
safety and liquidity appeared to boost holdings of retail sharply in the first quarter of 2008 and that food price
money market mutual funds. Small time deposits inflation would outpace core price inflation in the
continued to expand, likely in part due to high rates beginning of the year. As pressures from these sources
offered by some depository institutions to attract lessened over the remainder of 2008 and in 2009, both
retail depos core and headline price inflation were projected to edge
its. Currency outstanding was about flat in November. down, and headline inflation was expected to moderate
In the forecast prepared for this meeting, the staff to a pace slightly below core inflation.
revised down its estimate of growth in aggregate In their discussion of the economic situation and
economic activity in the fourth quarter. Although third- outlook, participants generally noted that incoming
quarter real GDP was revised up sharply, most information pointed to a somewhat weaker outlook
available indicators of activity in the fourth quarter for spending than at the time of the October meeting.
were The decline in housing had steepened, and consumer
more downbeat than had previously been expected. outlays appeared to be softening more than anticipated,
Faster inventory investment contributed importantly to perhaps indicating some spillover from the housing
the upward revision to third-quarter real GDP, but part correction to other components of spending. These
of that upswing was expected to be unwound in the developments, together with renewed strains in
fourth quarter. The available data for domestic final financial markets, suggested that growth in late 2007
sales also suggested a weaker fourth quarter than had and during 2008 was likely to be somewhat more
been anticipated. In particular, real personal sluggish than participants had indicated in their October
consumption expenditures had been about unchanged projections. Still, looking further ahead, participants
in continued to expect that, aided by an easing in the
September and October, and the contraction in single- stance
family construction had intensified. Providing a bit of of monetary policy, economic growth would gradually
an offset to these factors, however, was further recover as weakness in the housing sector abated and
improvement in the external sector. The staff also financial conditions improved, allowing the economy to
marked down its projection for the rise in real GDP expand at about its trend rate in 2009. Participants
over the remainder of the forecast period. Real GDP thought that recent increases in energy prices likely
was anticipated to increase at a rate noticeably below its would boost headline inflation temporarily, but with
potential in 2008. Conditions in financial markets had futures prices pointing to a gradual decline in oil prices
deteriorated over the intermeeting period and were and with pressures on resource utilization seen as likely
expected to impose more restraint on residential to ease a bit, most participants continued to anticipate
construction as well as consumer and business spending some moderation in core and especially headline
in 2008 than previously expected. In addition, inflation over the next few years.
compared
Participants discussed in detail the resurgence of
with the previous forecast, higher oil prices and lower
stresses in financial markets in November. The
real income were expected to weigh on the pace of real
renewed stresses reflected evidence that the
activity throughout 2008 and 2009. By 2009, however,
performance of mortgage-related assets was deteriorating
the staff projected that the drag from those factors
further, potentially increasing the losses that were being
would lessen and that an improvement in mortgage
borne in part by a number of major financial firms,
credit availability would lead to a gradual recovery in
including money-center banks, housing-related
the housing market. Accordingly, economic activity
government-sponsored enterprises, investment banks,
was expected to increase at its potential rate in 2009.
and financial
The external sector was projected to continue to
guarantors. Moreover, participants recognized that
support domestic economic activity throughout the
some lenders might be exposed to additional losses:
forecast period. Reflecting upward revisions to
previously published data, the forecast for core PCE
price inflation

--- Page 6 ---

Delinquency rates on credit card loans, auto loans, made the outlook for the economy considerably
and other forms of consumer credit, while still more uncertain.
moderate, had increased somewhat, particularly in
areas hard hit Participants noted the marked deceleration in
by house price declines and mortgage defaults. Past consumer spending in the national data. Real
and prospective losses appeared to be spurring lenders personal consumption expenditures had shown
to tighten further the terms on new extensions of essentially
credit, not just in the troubled markets for no growth in September and October, suggesting
nonconforming mortgages but, in some cases, for that tighter credit conditions, higher gasoline prices,
other forms and
of credit as well. In addition, participants noted that the continuing housing correction might be restraining
some intermediaries were facing balance sheet growth in real consumer spending. Retailers reported
pressures and could become constrained by concerns weaker results in many regions of the country, but in
about rating-agency or regulatory capital some, retailers saw solid growth. Job growth
requirements. Among other factors, banks were rebounded somewhat in October and November,
experiencing and participants expected continuing gains in
unanticipated growth in loans as a result of continuing employment and income to support rising consumer
illiquidity in the market for leveraged loans, spending, though they anticipated slower growth of
persisting problems in the commercial paper market jobs, income,
that had and spending than in recent years. However, consumer
sparked draws on back-up lines of credit, and more confidence recently had dropped by a sizable amount,
recently, consolidation of assets of off-balance- leading some participants to voice concerns that
sheet affiliates onto banks’ balance sheets. household spending might increase less than currently
Concerns about credit risk and the pressures on banks’ anticipated.
balance sheet capacity appeared to be contributing to Recent data and anecdotal information indicated
diminished liquidity in interbank markets and to a that the housing sector was weaker than participants
pro nounced widening in term spreads for periods had expected at the time of the Committee’s previous
extending through year-end. A number of participants meeting. In light of elevated inventories of unsold
noted some potential for the Federal Reserve’s new homes and the higher cost and reduced availability of
Term Auction Facility and accompanying actions by nonconforming mortgage loans, participants agreed
other central banks to ameliorate pressures in term that the
funding markets. Participants recognized, however, housing correction was likely to be both deeper and
that more prolonged than they had anticipated in October.
uncertainties about values of mortgage-related assets Moreover, rising foreclosures and the resulting increase
and related losses, and consequently strains in financial in the supply of homes for sale could put additional
markets, could persist for quite some time. downward pressure on prices, leading to a greater
Some participants cited more-positive aspects of recent decline in household wealth and potentially to
financial developments. A number of large financial further disruptions in the financial markets.
intermediaries had been able to raise substantial Indicators of capital investment for the nation as a
amounts of new capital. Moreover, credit losses and whole suggested solid but appreciably less rapid growth
asset write-downs at regional and community banks in business fixed investment during the fourth quarter
had generally been modest; these institutions typically than the third. Participants reported that firms in some
were not facing balance sheet pressures and reportedly regions and industries had indicated they would scale
had not tightened lending standards appreciably, except back capital spending, while contacts in other parts of
for those on real estate loans. And, although spreads the country or industries reported no such change.
on corporate bonds had widened over the intermeeting Similarly, business sentiment had deteriorated in many
period, especially for speculative-grade issues, the cost parts of the country, but in other areas firms remained
of credit to most nonfinancial firms remained relatively cautiously optimistic. Anecdotal evidence generally
low; nonfinancial firms outside of the real estate and suggested that inventories were not out of line with
construction sectors generally reported that credit desired levels. Even so, participants expected that
conditions, while somewhat tighter, were not inventory accumulation would slow from its elevated
restricting third-quarter pace. Several participants remarked that,
planned investment spending; and consumer credit unlike residential real estate, commercial and industrial
remained readily available for most households. real estate activity remained solid in their Districts. But
Nonetheless, participants agreed that heightened
financial stress posed increased downside risks to
growth and

--- Page 7 ---

participants also noted the deterioration in the softening in the outlook for economic growth
secondary market for commercial real estate loans warranted an easing of the stance of policy at this
and the meeting. In
possible effects of that development, should it persist, view of the further tightening of credit and
on building activity. deterioration of financial market conditions, the stance
The available data showed strong growth abroad and of
solid gains in U.S. exports. Participants noted that monetary policy now appeared to be somewhat
rising foreign demand was benefiting U.S. producers restrictive. Moreover, the downside risks to the
of manufactured goods and agricultural products, in expansion,
particular. Exports were unlikely to continue growing resulting particularly from the weakening of the
at the robust rate reported for the third quarter, but housing
participants anticipated that the combination of the sector and the deterioration in credit market conditions,
weaker dollar and still-strong, though perhaps less- had risen. In these circumstances, policy easing would
rapid, growth abroad would mean continued firm help foster maximum sustainable growth and provide
growth in some additional insurance against risks. At the same
U.S. exports. Several participants observed, however, time, members noted that policy had already been
that strong growth in foreign economies and U.S. eased by 75 basis points and that the effects of those
exports might not persist if global financial actions on the real economy would be evident only
conditions were to deteriorate further. with a lag. And some data, including readings on the
Recent readings on inflation generally were seen labor market, suggested that the economy retained
as slightly less favorable than in earlier months, partly forward momentum. Members generally saw overall
due to upward revisions to previously published inflation as likely to be lower next year, and core
data. Moreover, earlier increases in energy and food inflation
prices likely would imply higher headline inflation in the as likely to be stable, even if policy were eased
next few months, and past declines in the dollar would somewhat at this meeting; but they judged that some
put upward pressure on import prices. Some inflation pressures and risks remained, including
participants said that higher input costs and rising prices pressures from
of imports elevated commodity and energy prices and the
were leading more firms to seek price increases for possibility of upward drift in the public’s expectations of
goods and services. However, few business contacts inflation. Weighing these considerations, nearly all
had reported unusually large wage increases. members judged that a 25 basis point reduction in the
Downward revisions to earlier compensation data, Committee’s target for the federal funds rate would be
along with appropriate at this meeting. Although members agreed
the latest readings on compensation and productivity, that the stance of policy should be eased, they also
indicated only moderate pressure on unit labor costs. recognized that the situation was quite fluid and the
With futures prices pointing to a gradual decline in oil economic outlook unusually uncertain. Financial
prices and with an anticipation of some easing of stresses could increase further, intensifying the
pressures on resource utilization, participants generally contraction in
continued to see core PCE inflation as likely to trend housing markets and restraining other forms of
down a bit over the next few years, as in their October spending. Some members noted the risk of an
projections, and headline inflation as likely to slow more unfavorable feedback loop in which credit market
substantially from its currently elevated level. conditions
Nonetheless, participants remained concerned about restrained economic growth further, leading to
upside risks to inflation stemming from elevated prices additional tightening of credit; such an adverse
of development could require a substantial further easing
energy and non-energy commodities; some also cited of policy.
the weaker dollar. Participants agreed that continued Members also recognized that financial market
stable inflation expectations would be essential to conditions might improve more rapidly than members
achieving and sustaining a downward trend to inflation, expected, in which case a reversal of some of the rate
that well- cuts might become appropriate.
anchored expectations couldn’t be taken for granted, The Committee agreed that the statement to be
and that policymakers would need to continue to watch released after this meeting should indicate that
inflation expectations closely. economic growth appeared to be slowing, reflecting the
In the Committee’s discussion of monetary policy for intensification of the housing correction and some
the intermeeting period, members judged that the softening in
business and consumer spending, and that strains in
financial markets had increased. The characterization
of the inflation situation could be largely unchanged
fthhraoadmt it nhthcera rete aossufe rdtgh ueenn pccreee rvotaifo ifnuitnsy am nabceieoatuli nts gtthr.e eMs oseeumst liobnoe rNks. o aGvgeirvmeeebnde trh e

--- Page 8 ---

heightened uncertainty, the Committee decided to for economic growth and inflation. The
refrain from providing an explicit assessment of the Committee will continue to assess the effects of
balance of risks. The Committee agreed on the need financial and other developments on economic
to remain exceptionally alert to economic and prospects and will act as needed to foster price
financial developments and their effects on the stability and sustainable economic growth.
outlook, and
members would be prepared to adjust the stance of
monetary policy if prospects for economic growth or Votes for this action: Messrs. Bernanke,
inflation were to worsen. Geithner, Evans, Hoenig, Kohn, Kroszner,
At the conclusion of the discussion, the Mishkin, Poole, and Warsh.
Committee voted to authorize and direct the Federal
Reserve Bank Votes against this action: Mr. Rosengren.
of New York, until it was instructed otherwise, to
execute transactions in the System Account in Mr. Rosengren dissented because he regarded
accordance with the following domestic policy the weakness in the incoming economic data and in
directive: the outlook for the economy as warranting a more
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks aggressive policy response. In his view, the
monetary and financial conditions that will combination of a
foster price stability and promote sustainable deteriorating housing sector, slowing consumer and
growth in output. To further its long-run business spending, high energy prices, and
objectives, the Committee in the immediate ill-functioning financial markets suggested heightened
future seeks conditions in reserve markets risk of continued economic weakness. In light of that
consistent with reducing the federal funds rate to possibility, a more decisive policy response was
an called
average of around 4¼ percent.” for to minimize that risk. In any case, he felt that
The vote encompassed approval of the statement well-anchored inflation expectations and the
below to be released at 2:15 p.m.: Committee’s ability to reverse course on policy would
“The Federal Open Market Committee decided limit the
today to lower its target for the federal funds inflation risks of a larger easing move, should the
rate 25 basis points to 4¼ percent. economy instead prove significantly stronger than
anticipated.
Incoming information suggests that economic It was agreed that the next meeting of the Committee
growth is slowing, reflecting the intensification would be held on Tuesday-Wednesday, January 29-30,
of the housing correction and some softening in 2008.
business and consumer spending. Moreover, The meeting adjourned at 1:15 p.m.
Notation Vote
strains in financial markets have increased in
By notation vote completed on November 19, 2007,
recent weeks. Today’s action, combined with the
the Committee unanimously approved the minutes of
policy actions taken earlier, should help promote
the FOMC meeting held on October 30-31, 2007.
moderate growth over time.
Conference Call
Readings on core inflation have improved mod On December 6, 2007, in a joint session of the
estly this year, but elevated energy and commod Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of
ity prices, among other factors, may put upward Governors, Board members and Reserve Bank
pressure on inflation. In this context, the presidents reviewed
Committee judges that some inflation risks re conditions in domestic and foreign financial markets
main, and it will continue to monitor inflation and discussed two proposals aimed at improving
developments carefully. market functioning. The first proposal was for the
establishment of a temporary Term Auction Facility
Recent developments, including the deteriora (TAF), which would provide term funding to eligible
tion in financial market conditions, have in depository institutions through an auction mechanism
creased the uncertainty surrounding the outlook beginning in mid-December. Meeting participants
recognized that a TAF would not address all of the
factors giving rise to stresses in money and credit
markets,

--- Page 9 ---

notably the ongoing concerns about credit quality Reserve Bank of New York to establish and maintain
and balance sheet pressures. Nonetheless, most a reciprocal currency (swap) arrangement for the
participants viewed the TAF, which would provide System Open Market Account with the European
liquidity to more counterparties and against a broader Central Bank in an amount not to exceed $20 billion.
range of Within that aggregate limit, draws of up to $10 billion
collateral than used for open market operations, as a were authorized, and the arrangement itself was
potentially useful tool. Some mentioned that a TAF authorized for a period of up to 180 days, unless
could help alleviate year-end pressures in money extended by the
markets. A few participants, however, questioned the FOMC. Mr. Poole dissented because he viewed the
need for and the likely efficacy of the proposal, swap agreement as unnecessary in light of the size of
expressed the European Central Bank’s dollar-denominated
concerns about the longer-run incentive effects of a foreign exchange reserves.
TAF, and felt that the possible drawbacks could well
outweigh any benefits.* Participants generally regarded
the second proposal, to set up a foreign exchange
swap arrangement with the European Central Bank,
as a
positive step in international cooperation to address
elevated pressures in short-term dollar funding Brian F. Madigan
markets. Secretary
At the conclusion of the discussion, with Mr. Poole
dissenting, the Committee voted to direct the Federal
* Secretary’s Note: The Board of Governors approved the
TAF via notation vote on December 10, 2007 after the staff
finalized its proposal for specifications of the TAF.